EDITORIAL
Improving Work–life Balance and Satisfaction to Improve 
Patient Care
Lalita G Mitra1
, Jagdeep Sharma2
, Harsimran S Walia3
Keywords:  Compassion fatigue, ICU health workers, Psychosocial risk, Quality of work life.
Indian Journal of Critical Care Medicine (2024): 10.5005/jp-journals-10071-24689
The competing demands between home and work have assumed 
increased pertinence for healthcare professionals with each 
passing year, due to changes in the demography and workplace 
environment. It includes an increasing proportion of an aging 
population, females in the workforce, prolonged and stressful 
working hours, night and weekend duties, and human resource 
limitations. The stress further increases due to the availability of 
improved communications technology enabling round-the-clock 
contact with the workplace. High turnover among health care 
workers is an increasingly common phenomenon worldwide.1 This 
turnover, as high as 24% in the ICU nursing staff in Europe, has a 
negative impact on the hospital budget, affecting patient care 
as well since it disrupts continuity of care while simultaneously 
reducing the quality and safety. Achieving the balance between 
work and family life has become challenging. Achieving equilibrium 
by paying equal attention to physical, mental, and emotional well-
being can lead to healthy relationships, and overall satisfaction 
and fulfilment. It also helps reduce stress, better productivity, and 
improve physical health, which translates into less fatigue and 
more compassion for error-free patient care, improving outcomes.2
Job dissatisfaction may be due to limited career growth; 
poor time management and task scheduling; workplace conflicts, 
financial stress, and lack of interest or passion in the job. Dealing 
with suffering, grief, and death invariably leads to increased stress 
levels and burnout. 
Various questionnaires have been used for predicting work–
life satisfaction. CVT-GOHISALO is an instrument to measure 
Quality of work life (QWL), consisting of these seven dimensions: 
Institutional support for performing routine work; job-related 
security, integration, satisfaction, and well-being achieved 
through work, personal development, and all-time scheduling and 
management.3 The Walton Model and the Job Satisfaction Index 
by House have also been commonly used for predicting work–life 
balance. Walton’s model is based on appropriate compensation, 
conditions for work, using capacities and available opportunities 
along with social integration and constitutionalism at work, part 
occupancy in life by work, social pertinence, and importance of 
work dimensions.4 Various organizations have been working on 
reducing work–life conflict to improve personal performance and 
result in better patient outcomes. However, there is insufficient 
evidence to support that work–life practices enhance performance 
by reducing work–life conflict. Reducing conflict involves actions 
at both individual and organizational levels. 
The Professional Quality of Life Scale (ProQOL) measures both 
the negative and positive effects of working with those who have 
experienced traumatic stress. It was developed with data from over 3,000 people and includes sub-scales for compassion satisfaction, 
burnout, and compassion fatigue. The current version used is 
ProQOL5, which has been published in 18 languages and has proven 
to be a valid measure of compassion, satisfaction, and fatigue.
At the level of the individual, the collision between job and 
non-job-related responsibilities, poor attitude toward work, 
and higher levels of conflict exhibited more job dissatisfaction 
and poor commitment toward the organization. The behavioral 
outcomes included decreased work effort, below-par performance 
at tasks, and increased absenteeism from job.5 Various studies have 
provided contrasting results regarding work–life conflict playing 
part between the provision of improved practices, practice use and 
enhanced performance outcomes. There is a significant difference 
in practice availability and practice use, which has pertinent impact 
on desired outcomes. Ensuring appropriate use of practices made 
suitable by the support from management and better work–life 
climate of an organization may moderate the between the 
provision and use of available practices.6 The management being 
supportive of the employees’ efforts to balance job and personal 
responsibilities, with no fear of career penalties for the use of 
available practices; better work performance with improved job 
behavior impacting better safety profile and patient outcomes 
can be realized.7
At the levels of the organization, providing flexible working 
hours and childcare facilities have been shown to have a positive 
impact on work–life balance leading to improved levels of focus, 
concentration, motivation, and enhanced productivity. It is useful to 
do organizational research and create models to cater to employee-
specific needs, improve recruitment and have a lucrative retention 
policy. This will help in building need-specific practices, making 
them more cost-effective, and promoting their implementation 
to be more employee-friendly.8
© The Author(s). 2024 Open Access. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License ( https://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ ), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and non-commercial reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to 
the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The Creative Commons Public Domain 
Dedication waiver ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/ ) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated.1–3Department of  Anaesthesia, Critical Care and Pain, Homi Bhabha 
Cancer Hospital and Research Centre, New Chandigarh, Punjab, India
Corresponding Author:  Lalita G Mitra,  Department of  Anaesthesia, 
Critical Care and Pain, Homi Bhabha Cancer Hospital and Research 
Centre, New Chandigarh, Punjab, India, Phone: +91 9971792343, 
e-mail: lgmitra@hotmail.com
How to cite this article:  Mitra LG, Sharma J, Walia HS. Improving Work–
life Balance and Satisfaction to Improve Patient Care. Indian J Crit Care 
Med 2024;28(4):326–328.
Source of support:  Nil
Conflict of interest:  None
Better Work–life Balance for Better Patient CareIndian Journal of Critical Care Medicine, Volume 28 Issue 4 (April 2024)
 327
The study published in this issue by Laura del Pilar et al.9 was 
conducted with stratified two-stage sampling concluded that the 
QWL of healthcare workers in adult intensive care units is predicted 
by emotional demands both at home and workplace, pace at work, 
quantitative demands, predictability at work, double presence, trust 
within a team, and quality of leadership.
Research or study about the QWL of Human Resources for Health 
(HRH) gained more momentum after the COVID-19 pandemic raising 
concerns about migration to a better country (either for work or a 
better quality of life) causing an inadequate distribution of HRH in 
emerging or low-resource countries, along with an increased rates 
of suicides among HRH. Diverse instruments have been created that 
assess QWL, exposure to psychosocial risks (EPR) and compassion 
fatigue (CF-”emotional cost” of caring for the suffering of the patients, 
composed of burnout and secondary traumatic stress), but there is 
insufficient evidence in available databases to know whether QWL 
is a consequence of EPR or CF or vice versa. Identifying errors in 
health care practices, and then implementing improvement plans 
in the health and well-being of staff, will improve productivity and 
performance with patient satisfaction and regulatory compliance. 
Organizations will also be able to retain human resources.
Human resources in health are the organization’s most 
important asset, and so the way an organization manages their 
impacts has a major influence on its performance. Performance 
management is a continuous process that identifies, measures, 
and develops the performance of individuals and teams. It also 
aligns their performance with the organization’s strategic goals. 
Psychosocial risks (PSR) are insecurity related to the job, working 
conditions in an organization, quantitative demands, pace at 
work, justice within a system, conflict of what role one plays, 
predictability of one’s career, and influence within an organization. 
Those who are likely to have health-related issues are more likely to 
experience musculoskeletal pain and work-related fatigue due to 
extra workload, face violence, harassment at their workplace and 
have the intention to leave their position. HRH whose emotional 
demands are met, have vertical trust, and role clarity, know their 
meaning of work with the possibility of development and have 
leadership quality are able to maintain their QWL. 
Copenhagen Psychosocial Questionnaire—COPSOQ is an 
instrument for research for the assessment of psychosocial 
conditions and health promotion at workplaces. Its development 
has been coordinated under the principles of action-oriented 
research by the International COPSOQ Network ( http://www.
copsoqnetwork.org ) who are responsible for regular updating and 
adaptation to labor market changes and scientific progress. The 
COPSOQ questionnaire assesses the most relevant psychosocial 
domains, such as demand–control–social support, effort–rewards, 
job demands–resources, work–family conflict, social capital, 
vitamin, sociotechnical.
There is a divergent relationship between grades. Juniors 
supported by superiors to do their job and their evaluation for the 
work they perform, along with opportunities for promotion and 
autonomy, tend to perform better. However, there may be conflicts 
regarding decision-making and work distribution or promotions. 
This is the basis for a good mentorship program.
Health workers with high satisfaction for compassion are 
better and effective caregivers and are committed. Those who 
get opportunities to attend workshops and courses for skill 
development and hence the opportunity to grow, are more likely 
to be compassionate to their patients, influential within their team 
and are unlikely to feel stagnant at work. On the other hand, those who have chronic sleep deprivation have unfavorable health effects 
and present with increased fatigue, leading to a high burnout rate 
with reduced alertness and work productivity.10
The quality of life in healthcare is influenced by multiple external 
and internal conditions that impact an individual or a group/team of 
workers and can have a determining influence on a patient’s health 
outcomes such as death or failure of therapy or treatment.11 Health 
care professionals are daily exposed to PSR and organizations should 
assess the conditions at the work place that may be negative for 
health. They should identify all forms of stress be it physiological, 
emotional, cognitive, and behavioral related to the job which 
may lead to compassion fatigue, also called as emotional cost of 
caring, composed of burnout and secondary traumatic stress.12 
Adequately addressing stress and suffering can help achieve 
compassion satisfaction; by receiving pleasure and satisfaction 
in helping patients in distress. Self-care and self-compassion are 
essential for providing compassionate care, alongside maintaining 
personal balance by preventing illness, taking psychological care, 
and promoting personal well-being.13,14
So, maintaining an appropriate work–life balance remains a 
fundamental issue in the challenging, human resource-limited, 
psychologically draining, patient-loaded, and stressful working 
environment. Everyone at all levels—individual, organizational, 
community, and governing bodies have to come together; and 
take the best step forward for reducing the work–life conflict. 
The organizations must ensure to research the specific needs of 
the workforce and then recruit, retain, and develop practices for 
human resources precision. It will ensure adequate practice use, 
reduce stress, compliance, satisfaction, and also cost-effectiveness 
in delivering them at the grassroots level. We need to act as a team 
with a holistic multidisciplinary approach and long-term vision to 
gain and achieve our goals ensuring the best patient outcomes.
Orcid
Lalita G Mitra 
  https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0253-6397
Jagdeep Sharma 
  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0849-4610
Harsimran S Walia 
  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5058-5137
references
 1. Beauregard TA, Henry LC. Making the link between work-life balance 
practices and organizational performance. Hum Resource Manage 
Rev 2009;19(1):9–22. DOI: 10.1016/j.hrmr.2008.09.001.
 2. Rony MKK, Nauman MS, Alamgir HM. The association between work-
life imbalance, employees’ unhappiness, work’s impact on family, 
and family impact on work among nurses: A cross-sectional Study. 
Inform Med Unlocked 2023;38:1–11. DOI: 10.1016/j.imu.2023.101226.
 3. Baltazar RG, Santacruz GH, Leon-Cortes SG, Contreras-Estrada MI, 
Aldrete-Rodriguez MG, Hidalgo-Gozalez BJ, et al. Quality of work 
life and mental health in primary care physicians. Procedia Manufact 
2015;3:4935–4940. DOI: 10.1016/j.promfg.2015.07.634.
 4. Fernandes RB, Martins BS, Caixeta RP, Costa Filho CG, Braga GA, 
Antonialli LM. Quality of work-life: An evaluation of the Walton model 
with analysis of structural questions. Revista Espacios 2017;38(03):5. 
ISSN 0798 1015. Available from: https://www.revistaespacios.com/
a17v38n03/a17v38n03p05.pdf .
 5. Anderson S E, Coffey BS, Byerly RT. Formal organizational initiatives 
and informal workplace practices: Links to work-family conflict 
and job-related outcomes.  J Manage 2002;28(6):787–810. DOI: 
10.1177/014920630202800605.
 6. Casper WJ, Fox KE, Sitzmann TM, Landy AL. Supervisor referrals to 
work-family programs. J Occup Health Psychol 2004;9(2):136–151. 
DOI: 10.1037/1076-8998.9.2.136. 
Better Work–life Balance for Better Patient CareIndian Journal of Critical Care Medicine, Volume 28 Issue 4 (April 2024)
 328
 7. Andreassi JK, Thompson CA. Work-family culture: Current research 
and future directions. In Handbook of Work-Family Integration: 
Research, Theory and Best Practices, 1st ed. Korabik K, Lero DS, 
Whitehead DL, Eds. New York, NY, USA: Elsevier: 2008. pp. 331–351.
 8. Ray TK, Pana-Cryan R. Work flexibility and work-related well-being. 
Int J Environ Res Public Health 2021;18(6):3254. DOI: 10.3390/
ijerph18063254.
 9. Quinones-Rozo LP , Canaval-Erazo GE, Sandoval-Moreno LM. 
Predictors of quality of work Life in health care workers at adult 
critical care units: A Cross-sectional study. Indian J Crit Care Med 
2024;28(4):355–363.
 10. Kolthoff KL, Hickman SE. Compassion fatigue among nurses working 
with older adults. Geriatr Nurs 2017;38(2):106–109. DOI: 10.1016/j.
gerinurse.2016.08.003. 11. Tarnow-Mordi WO, Hau C, Warden A, Shearer AJ. Hospital mortality 
in relation to staff workload: A 4-year study in an adult intensive-care 
unit. Lancet 2000;356(9225):185–189. DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(00)  
02478-8. 
 12. Moncada S, Llorens C, Kristensen TS. Manual para la evaluación 
de riesgos psicosociales en el trabajo. In: Manual Método CoPsoQ 
ISTAS21 versión 2 para la evaluación y prevención de riesgos 
psicosociales. ISTAS21 ed. Rev Esp Salud Pública 2008;82:667–675.
 13. Sanchez-Reilly S, Morrison LJ, Carey E, Bernacki R, O’Neill L, Kapo J,  
et al. Caring for oneself to care for others: Physicians and their self-
care. J Support Oncol 2013:75–81. DOI: 10.12788/j.suponc.0003.
 14. Pandey SK, Sharma V. Aggression and violence against doctors: 
How to address this frightening new epidemic? Indian J Ophthalmol 
2019:1903–1905. DOI: 10.4103/ijo.IJO_1322_19.