ADOPTION OF AGROFORESTRY SYSTEMS AND FARM TOURISM POTENTIAL OF CONSERVATION FARMING VILLAGES IN THE PHILIPPINES

VICTOR DE GUZMAN DIZON, JR.

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY in Forestry

JUNE 2021

ABSTRACT

The study was conducted in the pilot communities of the Conservation Farming
Village Program in Quezon Province and Negros Oriental to determine factors that affect
the adoption of agroforestry systems and their influence on farm tourism potential of
upland farming communities. Based on farm household surveys of 460 upland farmers,
focus group discussion with 93 participants, site surveys and direct observations, key
informant interviews, and secondary data gathering, the study revealed that upland
smallholder farmers and farming communities that have continuously adopted a wide-
range of conservation farming practices led to the formation of multifunctional agroforestry
systems with a high potential for farm tourism. Adoption decisions of farm households were modeled using a multivariate probit
technique. Analysis revealed that livestock, farm size and distance, tenure, education,
fertilizer availability, connections, kinship, groups and traders, extension services, soil
fertility, and pests and diseases all influenced farmer investment in agroforestry systems.
Policies and government services that aim to enhance the skill of farmers and extension
agents and the provision of subsidies, such as agricultural inputs, could improve the
adoption of agroforestry systems. The study developed a model for agroforestry adoption
as a gateway to farm tourism and sustainable upland farming communities in the
Philippines.


CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

Background of the Study

In the Philippines, upland systems are composed of a diverse array of small to large
landholdings consisting of primary and secondary forests, timber plantations, agricultural
and agroforestry systems, and government or private sector properties. The country’s
rolling and mountainous upland terrain is part of the 300,000 km? total land area of the
Philippines, of which 52% is officially classified as forestlands by the Forest Management
Bureau (FMB-DENR, 2002). Moreover, the country’s forest cover has been declining from
17 million hectares in 1934 to about 7 million hectares in 2015, representing closed forests
at 28.9% and open forests at 66.8% (FMB-DENR, 2016).

Philippine forest resources consist of forestlands that include public forests,
permanent forests, forest reserves, and reservations (Presidential Decree No. 705, 1975).
These forestlands are now hosting an increasing number of upland dwellers and migrants
from the lowlands. With the accelerating rate of social and economic change in this region,
extensive tracts of forests are converted into agricultural areas with possible critical
environmental consequences, including higher rates of widespread flooding and drought
that can cascade down to the lowlands (Valentin ef al., 2008). Consequently, increased

agricultural activities in the uplands and conversion of forestlands are expected to intensify


such land use’s environmental implications and pose a severe threat to natural resources
(Siebert, 1987). These anthropogenic activities by upland farmers, who are primarily
resource-poor, are linked to low soil fertility, soil erosion, water loss, and increasing
problems on pests and diseases (Fujisaka, 1994).

The increasing demographic pressures observed are caused by natural development
and the migration of neighboring lowland farmers. Poverty and continued migration to the
uplands, as a result of population growth, lack of livelihood opportunities, and the
increasing attractiveness of forestlands, pushed the Philippine government to address the
issues through projects concerning institutional and technical change that aim to achieve
sustainable cultivation/farming (Cruz ef al., 1988). Subsequent deterioration of soil and
overall agricultural productivity, coupled with rapid urbanization in the lowlands, led to
the shift of cultivation to hilly and steeper slopes, resulting in eradicating natural upland
vegetation and widespread activities of unsustainable farming practices (Valentin ef al.,
2008, 2005). The shift in cultivation to the uplands did not eliminate the burgeoning
problems of unsustainable farming practices. As the cultivation of sloping lands remains
to be a challenge, the adverse effects of traditional upland agriculture have paved the way
for the subsequent development and application of agroforestry in upland areas (Roshetko
et al., 2017; Segura-delos Angeles, 1985).

As a land management program, agroforestry is simply the practice of raising crops
interspersed with trees (Udawatta ef al., 2002). Upland agroforestry, through the
incorporation of soil conservation measures, has been proven to positively impact the

livelihood of upland dwellers and the environment (Wallace et al., 2005). These findings


led the Philippine government to collaborate with research and academic institutions in
working towards upland development projects that would encourage sustainable
management and conservation of forestry and natural resources while at the same time
addressing the socio-economic problems of the upland communities (Landicho, 2016).

In 2008, the “National Program for Sustainable Farming through the Establishment
of Barangay Sagip Saka (Conservation Farming Villages or CFV)” was implemented by
the College of Forestry and Natural Resources of the University of the Philippines Los
Bafios (UPLB) through the coordination of the Philippine Council for Agriculture, Aquatic
and Natural Resources Research and Development (PCAARRD), and with funding from
the National Economic Development Authority (Cruz ef al., 2014). The three-year project
initiated the enhanced transfer of conservation farming technologies and practices to
upland farming villages in selected municipalities across the Philippines. CFV, as a
modality, is grounded on participatory planning, monitoring, and evaluation processes at
the community level, wherein researchers, development workers, extension workers, and
farmers learn and work together (Cruz et al., 2014).

Following the years of the CFV’s initial establishment and success, follow-up
programs, like the Department of Agriculture-Bureau of Agricultural Research (DA-BAR)
funded project entitled “R&D Program Towards Upscaling the Barangay Sagip Saka
(CFV) as a Strategy for Climate Change Adaptation and Sustainable Upland Development
in Selected Provinces of the Philippines,” were implemented.

Through the collaboration of state universities and colleges (SUCs), local

government units (LGUs) and farmers, the CFV project hastened the diffusion and


adoption of agroforestry and sustainable farming practices. The collaboration led to the
improvement of over 200 hectares of farms and the participation of more than 400 farmer-
adopters in chosen municipalities across the Philippines (Cruz ef al., 2014). An alternative
value-added component to thriving and productive model farms, known as Farm Tourism
or Agri Tourism, will now be possible in the upland villages.

The Conservation Farming Villages project is a good candidate for farm tourism. It
falls under the guidelines of Republic Act No. 10816, better known as the Farm Tourism
Development Act of 2016. The declaration of policy of the act states that, “... tourism,
coupled with agriculture extension services, can disseminate the value of agriculture in the
economic and cultural development of the country, serve as a catalyst for the development
of agriculture and fishery communities, and provide additional income for farmers,
farmworkers, and fisherfolk.” Agroforestry and farm tourism’s synergy serve as a natural
resources conservation and management model that attains numerous socio-economic and

environmental benefits for its immediate community and region.

Statement of the Problem

In 2015, all states and countries who are members of the United Nations (UN)

adopted the “2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,” which prescribes a collective

strategy for peace and prosperity for the people and the planet for the years to come. At the


center of the strategy are 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) built on decades of
work by the UN and all its members.

The CFV program, as a modality for upland development, was conceptualized and
implemented ahead of the present-day 2030 Philippine Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Similarities between the CFV program and the SDGs show a synergy of
objectives that can help end hunger, achieve food security, improve nutrition, and promote
sustainable agriculture and inclusive economic growth. The CFV program has relied on
agroforestry technology as the primary intervention in all the project’s farming village sites
(Cruz et al., 2012).

In developing countries like the Philippines, agroforestry is seen as an acceptable
compromise between agricultural production and the provision of forest-related benefits
(Garrity, 2012). Such concepts are now being adopted by development agencies, research
instructions, and local government units to handle forested areas in a more sustainable way
and rehabilitate degraded forestlands by planting perennials. As an agroforestry-centered
upland development program, the CFV pilot sites are a good indicator of the sustainability
and adaptability of the set of conservation farming technologies implemented. Different
CFV sites had varying levels of success in terms of farm development and production. To
understand the interplay of various socioeconomic, physical, and environmental factors, a
study on the adoption of agroforestry and its determinants is essential.

Presently, over ten years had passed since the project's implementation in 2008
Several follow-up projects and site-specific changes could affect the adoption rates and

continued use of agroforestry practices in the CFV pilot sites. It is crucial to understand the


determinants of the adoption of agroforestry systems and to analyze how they affect
diffusion and transfer of knowledge in the CFV pilot sites.

Existing CFV pilot sites can further add value to their farms by including farm
tourism or agri-tourism. As mentioned in the Farm Tourism Development Act of 2016, one
of the goals of the Act is: “to maximize the benefits that can be derived from agriculture
and tourism combined, it is, therefore, the declared policy of the State to provide the policy
and enabling environment for the encouragement, development, and promotion of farm
tourism in the country.” Therefore, it is vital to determine the farm tourism potential of the
CFV pilot sites (barangays) and use it as a benchmark to produce a ranking of internal and
external factors that significantly influence the development, success, and sustainability of
such value-added farming ventures.

The study examined the determinants of adoption of agroforestry systems and
assessed the tourism potential of selected CFV pilot site barangays in the Philippines.

Specifically, this study addressed the following research questions:

1. What factors affect the adoption and continued use of agroforestry systems in the
upland farming communities?

2. How do the determinants of adoption of agroforestry systems affect the diffusion
and transfer of technology in the selected CFV pilot sites?

3. Based on the determinants, what model best describes the adoption of agroforestry
systems?

4. How does each CFV site compare with each other in terms of tourism potential?


5. How willing are the CFV farmers/owners to venture into farm tourism?

Objectives of the Study

The study’s general objective was to examine the determinants of the adoption of
agroforestry systems in upland farming villages of the Philippines utilizing the selected
CFV pilot site barangays as cases. Also, the farm tourism potential of selected CFV pilot

sites was assessed and ranked. Specifically, the study aimed to:

1. Determine factors that affect the adoption and continued use of agroforestry
systems in the upland farming communities;

2. Analyze how the determinants of agroforestry system adoption affect the
diffusion and transfer of technology in the selected CFV pilot sites;

3. Develop a model of agroforestry system adoption;

4, Rank and compare each CFV barangay based on their potential for farm tourism
development, and;

5. Assess the willingness of the farmers to venture into farm tourism.


Significance of the Study

Successful transfer of knowledge and innovations in agriculture and forestry relies
heavily on strict planning and development of appropriate extension and rural development
programs that utilize conceptual frameworks and implementation designs shaped by
adoption and diffusion theories (Mercer, 2004; Rogers, 2003). The expansion and
sustainability of CFV pilot sites would depend on how successful the adoption and
diffusion of agroforestry systems after its initial program implementation. Furthermore, a
decade has already passed since the CFV pilot sites were selected as the recipient of the
Pprogram’s interventions. Determining and evaluating the factors that influence the
adoption of agroforestry systems could help researchers better understand how national-
level projects and extension programs could be more successful in transmitting and
disseminating information and technologies across their target populations and regions.

The results of the study would aid present and future agroforestry and agriculture
extension programs, similar to the CFV project, to be more efficient and effective in
implementing strategies and transferring technologies. Moreover, policymakers, extension
workers, researchers, and farmers could learn from the study’s empirical results and
develop and design better interventions to realize their goals and objectives and help
achieve the UN’s SDGs.

The continued existence of successful CFVs in pilot sites offers a new frontier of
development that can open the gateway to enhance further the productivity and value of

farms and suitable agribusiness ventures. This new phase is called farm tourism. The


emerging sector of farm tourism places the CFV sites in a unique position to showcase
agroforestry technologies and integrate sustainable farming and tourism, which can
provide jobs, increase livelihood and business opportunities, and reduce urban migration).
These land-use functions, such as sustainable farming and recreation/tourism, are critical
in farm planning and national and regional policy development.

Assessment of the CFV pilot sites’ potentials for farm tourism will be vital in
planning the farming village’s future and provide standards for future farm tourism projects
in the country. CFV sites or farm tourism sites can become part of each local region’s thrust
on diversifying its core tourism products, thus, paving the way for regional farm tourism
development. The farmers’ willingness to venture into farm tourism will support local and
national program initiatives and show insights on farmers’ perspectives, and will help
decision-makers in crafting the necessary policies and in enabling conditions relating to
tourism.

The study’s primary output was a model based on the determinants of adoption of
agroforestry systems in CFV pilot sites and the accompanying farm tourism potential and
ranking of the selected CFV barangay sites. The results would provide a framework for
similar extension programs like the CFV to be more successful and would present a
benchmark of tourism potential criteria for farm tourism in upland farming villages for

future rural development purposes.

CHAPTER II

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

This literature review section concentrated on conservation farming villages and
upland development in the Philippines, innovation-diffusion theories, technology adoption,
and studies on adoption and diffusion of agroforestry systems. In addition, farm tourism
trends in Asia and the Philippines were discussed together with approaches and methods
in measuring the tourism potential of a specific location or region. Technology adoption
and diffusion dealt with general concepts and strategies of facilitating innovations and the
development process of adoption. Finally, the interconnections between agroforestry
system adoption, upland development, and farm tourism were examined and how these
distinct fields were brought together to establish a path to create sustainable and resilient

communities.

Upland Development in the Philippines

The Philippines is an archipelago in Southeast Asia with rich natural resources that
include large stretches of mountainous tropical forests, a mosaic of mineral deposits across
the country, and a long coastline that provides marine and aquatic resources. Philippine
forests are globally-known for having high floral and faunal diversity, including endemic
species that are now endangered or even extinct because of the rapid pace of deforestation.

The country is one of the few nations listed as a hotspot for biodiversity, indicating that the


Philippines has already lost at least 70% of its original habitat (Pulhin ef al., 2007).

Through the decades, forest decline in the Philippines continued and grew worse (Figure

1).

Forest Cover in% of total land area

1880 1900 192019401960 1980 2000-2020
Year of observation

Figure 1. Forest cover decline in the Philippines (Fortenbacher et al., 2014)

The Philippines is continuously experiencing widespread urban and rural poverty
and many environmental management problems. From an abundant forest ecosystem, the
country’s natural resources began to degrade when the demand for forest resources, the
establishment of wood industries, and the influx of migrants and settlers in the uplands
heightened (Landicho, 2016). The combination of poverty and population pressure has led
to various natural resource exploitation, misuse, and mismanagement in many regions.
These led to implementing punitive approaches aimed at controlling intensive

deforestation.


An average of 19.5 million residents lived in state-owned uplands in the Philippines
(Amacher et al., 1998). The University of the Philippines Population Institute projects that
the upland population will grow at a rate of 2.72 to 2.92 percent during the next 25 years,
increasing by the year 2015 to a density of 371 persons per km? (Garrity er al., 1993).
These upland areas were considered public forests, and much of the population on the
upland had no formal tenancy privileges and were often omitted from government
censuses. Therefore, the uplands’ actual population size was estimated through
approximation (Fortenbacher ef al., 2014). The upland population in the 1980s was
projected to be 14 million, and about 8.5 million people lived on forest land (Amacher ef
al., 1998). In the late 1990s, the upland population in the Philippines was 16 million.
Today, the population growth rate heavily affects the upland population, as it is estimated

to be more than 21 mil

ion (Figure 2).

£ 120
2 100
= + Tota Population
en ‘Rural Population
3 wo Upland Population

1920 1940 19601980 2000 202020402060,
Year of observation

Figure 2. Trends in rural and upland population in the Philippines based on various
data from different studies (Fortenbacher et al., 2014)


While the upland population continues to increase with land conversion and a

decline in forest resources, the Philippine government used a legislative and punitive

strategy until the 1970s to combat forest degradation and human encroachment on forest

uplands (del Castillo, 1999). In the 1970s, the government's forest occupancy policy and

the traditional upland farming scheme, known as slash-and-burn farming, shifted to a more

development-oriented and people-oriented approach, focusing on forest occupants’

Participation in the protection and conservation of forest resources. (del Castillo, 1999;

Fortenbacher ef al., 2014). Over the years following the new strategy’s introduction,

several development-oriented and people-oriented forestry programs were introduced

(Table 1).

Table 1. Timeline of people-oriented forestry programs in the Philippines
(DENR, 1996; Tolentino et al., 2011)

PROGRAM

YEAR

DESCRIPTION

Family Approach
to Reforestation


Designed to help raise the living conditions of upland
farmers and those living near forestlands. It was a 3-year
contract program offered to families to hasten the
government’s reforestation efforts by allowing them to
plant trees in cleared forestlands, intercrop trees with
agricultural crops, and harvest their crops within the
contract period.

Communal Tree
Farm (CTF)


The CTF prioritized the development of degraded
forestlands into productive farmlands to provide
economically viable landholdings to participating
farmers who would rehabilitate open and denuded
forestlands. Participating families were given tax breaks,
technical assistance, and a 25-year renewable CTF
certificate.


Table 1. Continued

PROGRAM YEAR


DESCRIPTION

Integrated Social
Forestry Program 1982
(ISFP)

Launched to maximize upland productivity, enhance
ecological stability, and improve forest occupants and
communities’ socioeconomic conditions.

Upland
Development 1982
Program

Launched hand-in-hand with the ISFP to facilitate the
participatory approach to promoting sustainable upland
development.

National
Forestation 1986
Program

Designed to rehabilitate denuded forestlands and
provide income opportunities to upland communities
through the reforestation of open lands and rehabilitation
of denuded watersheds for sustained production of wood
and other products for wood-based industries.

Community

Forestry Program 1989

This program allowed people’s organizations to extract,
process, and sell forest products for 25 years; the
program is renewable for another 25 years.

Community-Based
Forest
Management
Program (CBFM)


The CBFM integrated and unified all people-oriented
forestry activities. This program entitled forest
communities to use and develop the forestland and
resources for 25 years with the DENR and local
government units’ active participation.

Upland
Agroforestry 2005
Program

The new Upland Agroforestry Program (UA{P) allows
qualified Filipino individuals, organizations,
corporations, cooperatives, associations, NGOs, etc. to
apply forestlands of 50 hectares and above to establish

and develop agroforestry farms and plantations.

Multiple reasons for the rapid decline in Philippine forest cover have been widely

studied and documented. Nonetheless, there was an acknowledged fact that unsustainable

farming practices conducted by poor rural households across the uplands were one of the

reasons for continuing deforestation (Aquino er al., 2018). Agricultural expansion resulting

from rapid population growth and unsuitable farming practices in the Philippine uplands

had led to increased soil erosion and soil degradation (Figure 3) (Garrity, 1992).


(n billion Pesos

“ Teenonk degrechton
BETES bntrest rote

ot
1985 1990 1995 2000 2008 2010 215 2020
Year

Figure 3. Depreciation of soil nutrients found in eroded soil (Francisco et al., 1994)

Unfair land tenure regimes, in which a limited number of families holds a large
proportion of the country’s productive lands, are a particular problem in the Philippines.
This phenomenon is exacerbated by having almost all arable land being held in the
lowlands, resulting in the gradual migration of low-income families into the forested areas
and vulnerable habitats in the uplands (Fortenbacher ef al., 2014). As a result,
environmental campaigns and development programs geared towards the uplands continue
to be proposed, implemented, and upscaled due to the intensifying degradation of natural

resources, the looming threat of disasters and calamities, and the perils of climate change.


The Conservation Farming Village Project

The CFV project was prioritized in the National Action Plan (NAP) as a flagship
program in addressing desertification, land degradation, and poverty to achieve
environmental protection and sustainable development in the Philippines’ upland
communities. The ultimate objective of the CFV was to improve human life through
improved livelihoods, agricultural production, and environmental protection of
communities living in marginal sloping lands. The CFV project aimed to help upland
farmers improve their economic conditions by improving their natural resource
management capabilities to manage and protect their communities from environmental
degradation while preserving their livelihood sources (Cruz ef al., 2012). The CFV served
as a focal point for all municipal and village levels toward sustainable land/upland growth
(Cruzer al., 2014).

The CFV program aimed at: (1) enhancing the adoption of sustainable land
management technologies by farmers through S&T-based farming, thereby enhancing their
productivity and efficiency as well as the conservation and protection of vulnerable upland
resources; (2) empowering key groups and community stakeholders to manage vulnerable
upland resources better sustainably; (3) conducting sustainability exercises to ensure the
growth of upland communities in general, and the adoption of model farms, in particular
on a sustainable basis and integrated into local planning and implementation processes;
and (4) creating linkages between research-enhancing agencies and capacity-building
organizations and support structures for conservation farming communities (Cruz et al.,

2014).


The CFV system adopted a structure for promoting multilevel technology that
empowers local soil conservation extension units of local government units (LGUs) and
change agents (farmers-volunteers). The farmers-volunteers were seen as an arm to
encourage innovations and solutions to upland farming. The CFV system provided upland
farmers with the soil management technology that suits their farming conditions. Some of
these technologies included the following: (1) conservation agriculture technologies; (2)
sloping agricultural land technologies; (3) soil and water conservation technologies; and
(4) other agroforestry practices (Cruz et al., 2014; Elauria er al., 2017; Landicho, 2016).

The concept of CFVs originated from the ASIALAND Network experiences, i.e.,
Management of Sloping Lands for Sustainable Agriculture in the Philippines from
implemented from 1998 to 2004, funded by the Swiss Development Cooperation and
facilitated by PCAARRD (Cruz et al., 2012). It was implemented in coordination with
several State Universities and Colleges (SUCs) from October 2008 to December 2011 with
30 million pesos. The UPLB-CFNR team, being the project lead, continued and expanded
this initiative to five sites, namely: Alfonso Lista, Ifugao; Ligao City, Albay; General
Nakar, Quezon; La Libertad, Negros Oriental; and Panabo City, Davao del Norte. LGUs
and partner universities such as Silliman University, Bicol University College of
Agriculture and Forestry, Ifugao State University, and the University of Southeastern
Philippines, were the project’s principal collaborators and partners. The project was
completed in 2013 and led to several upscaling and capacity-building follow-up programs

aimed at farmers and LGUs to hasten the institutionalization and implementation of the


CFV project as a climate change adaptation (CCA) strategy and a path to sustainable

development.

Adoption and Diffusion of Innovation

Adoption starts with the recognition that a need exists and moves to search for
solutions. Recognition precedes the initial decision to attempt to adopt a solution and
finally decide to implement the solution. Getting a new idea adopted even when it has
apparent advantages is often very difficult. Historically, many innovations require a
lengthy period, sometimes of many years, from when they become available to the widely
adopted time. Therefore, a common problem encountered by many individuals and
organizations is how to speed up the rate of diffusion of a specific innovation (Damanpour
and Schneider 2006; Mendel et al., 2008).

According to Garland ef al. (2010), the adoption process is complex at an
organizational level. It is particularly challenging to promote change in routine practice
when decision-makers within organizations do not perceive changes as necessary.
Individuals in organizations may have difficulty knowing, weighing, or selecting
appropriate innovations to solve particular problems. Complex organizational dynamics
like hierarchy, culture, and values are not always faced in individual problem-solving,
influencing each individual’s perspective (Aarons et al., 2011).

Understanding the goal of adoption requires consideration of the implementation
method, as it affects the complexity of the adoption process and, ultimately, sustainability

If successful adoption precedes successful implementation, there needs to be a focused


exploration of adoption theories and constructs (Panzano and Roth 2006). Furthermore,
organizations like individuals can be classified as low-, medium-, or high-adopters. While
meaningful for planning and descriptive purposes, these classifications of adopters need a
deeper empirical inquiry into whether there are strategies that can change organizations
from medium or low adopters to high adopters (Rogers 2003; Greenhalgh ef al. 2004).

As described by Walker (2008), innovation is a complex construct and is studied
from multiple perspectives at different levels of analysis by scholars from various academic
disciplines. At the organizational level, researchers have generally defined “innovation” as
the development (generation) and use (adoption) of new ideas or behaviors. On the other
hand, the adoption of innovation is a process that results in the assimilation of a product,
process, or practice that is new to the adopting organization.

According to the study carried out by Zaltman et al. (1973), there were different
identified characteristics or attributes of innovation which were drawn primarily from
studies on diffusion of innovation. Diffusion research mainly examines the adoption of
innovation by individual decision-makers such as farmers, physicians, and consumers and
measures innovation characteristics as perceived by the individual adopter. Thus,
innovation characteristics can be represented by two constructs: a macro-construct that
reflects the characteristics that facilitate or inhibit innovation adoption by organizations
within a population, and a micro-construct that reflects the perceived characteristics by
organizational members that facilitate or inhibit innovation use (Damanpour and

Schneider, 2009; Rogers, 1995; Boyne ef al., 2005).


Rogers’ (1995) innovation diffusion theory has influenced innovation management
concepts, and several scholars have later expanded the concepts based on his works. This
study used well-established theories, mostly in sociology, psychology, and
communications, to develop an approach to study the diffusion of innovations. Some
authors mentioned that innovation, as a process, comprises technical design,
manufacturing, management, and commercial activities of new (or improved) products

(Freeman and Soete, 1997). Table 2 presents the innovation development processes.

Table 2. Studies on the Innovation Development Process (Wonglimpiyarat ef al., 2005)

AUTHORS CONCEPT

Cooper & Kleinschmidt The innovation development process of the manufacturing
industry comprises of: (i) preliminary assessment, (ii) detailed
investigation (problem definition), (iii) development, (iv)
testing and validation, and (v) commercialization

Kline & Rosenberg The chain-link model represents the process of innovation—
a set of linked activities that may occur in a variety of
sequences. A model includes innovative activities as well as
the elements of research, knowledge, and market

Rogers The innovation development process comprises six stages: (i)
problem definition, (ii) research (basic and applied), (iii)
development, (iv) commercialization, (v) adoption and
diffusion, and (vi) consequences

‘Schmookler The development of technological innovation depends on the
evolution of market demand. The pull from the demand side
influences the development of the product life cycle in
technological innovation

Diffusion is defined as the process by which an innovation is adopted and gains

acceptance by members of a particular community. It is a special type of communication


concerned with new ideas. Several factors interact to influence the diffusion of an
innovation. The four major factors that influence the diffusion process are the innovation
itself, how information about the innovation is communicated, time, and the nature of the
social system into which the innovation is being introduced (Rogers, 1995). In its simplest
form, diffusion research investigates how these significant factors and many other factors
interact to facilitate or impede the adoption of a specific product or practice among
members of a particular adopter group.

Rogers (1995) has described that diffusion is a social change by which alteration
occurs in a social system’s structure and function. When new ideas are invented, diffused,
and are adopted, these lead to inevitable consequences which affect social changes.
Rogers’s theory of innovation diffusion provides a foundational understanding of adoption
theories. Although Rogers’s theory is a critical foundation, it is not always easily applied
to understand adoption. Rogers defined the occurrence of innovation as the perception of
novelty or new ideas to a particular population. An innovation, in general, can be a process,
an idea, or an object that is perceived as new by an individual or other unit of adoption.
Adoption and diffusion theories highlight individuals’ decision process and choices in
accepting or rejecting a specific innovation. Adoption theories focus on the various minor
factors that add together and make up the entire decision process, while diffusion theories
highlight a more significant innovation adoption trend across time. Rogers is one of the
main foundations of the adoption-diffusion theory. He illustrated how diffusion is
influenced by separate individuals who make their own adoption decisions in a certain

period of time (Figure 4).


Early | Late
Majority | Majority

Early

Adopters Laggards

Innovators.

25%

Figure 4. Adoption/innovation curve (Rogers, 2003)

The strength of Roger’s theory of adoption-diffusion is that it assumes the adoption
proves as part of diffusion. The theory tries to explain how individuals go through their
assessment of particular innovation and the various stages in the entire adoption phase.
Rogers (1995) has outlined five stages necessary to arrive at a final decision on whether to

accept or reject an innovation, These stages are the following: (1) awareness, (2)

persuasion, (3) decision, (4) implementation, and (5) confirmation. In his theory,
awareness is the first stage wherein individuals gain knowledge of a particular innovation’s
existence. Persuasion is the second stage, which entails a deeper level of knowledge about
the innovation required to make a personal judgment on whether such innovation is
beneficial or not. The third stage is the decision to adopt or reject the innovation based on
an individual’s existing knowledge, attitudes, and perception of the technology. The
implementation comprises the fourth stage, and this phase involves the actual execution of
the individual’s decision. The last and fifth stage is confirmation, and in this stage, the
individual evaluates their decision and implementation process and decides whether to

continue or discontinue the adoption of the innovation.


Rogers’s theory of innovation diffusion provides a foundational understanding of
adoption theories across disciplines to comprehend and predict change. Although several
research studies seek to understand the adoption process, only a few theories are widely

used.

Innovation-Adoption Models

Today, several models are being utilized in understanding the process that an
individual undergoes before finally accepting an innovation. These theories that model
adoption cover behavioral change and the accompanying predictors that can influence
change through contextual, and cognitive and affective factors (Straub, 2009). These
include the Concerns-Based Adoption Model (CBAM) and Technology Acceptance Model
(TAM), and the Universal Technology Adoption and Use Theory (UTAUT).

Theories and models are essential in directing the research process, and scholars
have reviewed the different theories of adoption and acceptance over the years. The
Concems-Based Adoption Model (CBAM) model is developed to represent the highly
complex process entailed when educational institutions become involved in adopting
innovations. It attempts to carefully compartmentalize a highly dynamic and intertwined
process that involves many individuals who form the institutions. The model does not
directly provide methods to improve the use of innovation or delineate adoption strategies
However, the model’s variables can be used as the criteria for assessing the effects of
intervention strategies and do not suggest a theory for a more effective selection of

intervention strategies (Dobbs, 2004; Bailey and Palsha, 1992; Hall, 1974).


CBAM is also known as a framework and methodology for measuring, describing,
and explaining different aspects of curricular and instructional innovation implementation.
According to Hall and Loucks (1978), five assumptions strengthen the use of this model,
which include the following: a) change is a process; b) change is individual; c) the
perceptions and feelings of individuals are crucial to successful implementation; d)
individuals proceed through stages in their feelings about, perceptions of, and level of skill
in the use of innovation; and, e) change facilitators must proceed systematically, assess
regularly, and provide support continually. Therefore, CBAM tools provide information
and cues to guide change to track the implementation of an innovation.

On the other hand, TAM and UTAUT are two technology acceptance models that
have several similarities since UTAUT was developed based on TAM, and both have found
widespread adoption in health care. Many researchers have used TAM to explain the
adoption and acceptance of information technology and information systems. It is
debatable whether it can be used to investigate all cases of information technology or
information systems adoption and implementation. However, TAM has some limitations,
even if it was one of the initial theories widely used in information systems research. For
instance, TAM does not consider social influence among the factors that influence
technology acceptance (Lee et al., 2011; Aizen and Fishbein, 1977; Davis et al., 1989).

UTAUT is primarily aimed to synthesize the multitude of available models on
technology acceptance into one unified model and focused on assessing the likelihood of
success for new technologies and understanding the drivers of acceptance (Venkatesh et

al,, 2003), Although using UTAUT is seen as the best practice in measuring user


acceptance, some limitations are still associated with this theory. One limitation is the lack
of the aspect of trust as one of the constructs; in theory, it limits the mediating factors of
technology acceptance to only four factors, namely: age, gender, experience, and
voluntariness of use (Abukhzam and Lee, 2010; Taiwo and Downe, 2013; Alzahrani and
Goodwin, 2012). Nevertheless, UTAUT is more applicable to users than organizations.
Thus, it is more suitable for understanding studies that are mostly affected by human
factors. The diffusion of Innovation Theory is more suitable for organizational context and
applied in various fields, including agriculture, sociology, and information systems

(Rogers, 2003).

Adoption and Diffusion of Agroforestry Systems

Cultivating trees and crops in intimate combination with one another is an ancient
practice that farmers have used worldwide. There are innumerable examples of traditional
land-use practices involving the combined production of trees and agricultural species on
the same piece of land in many parts of the world. These are some practices of what is now
known as agroforestry. During the nineteenth century, forest and agricultural plantations
became an essential objective for practicing agroforestry. Trees were an integral part of
these farming systems and were deliberately retained on farmlands to support agriculture.
In effect, agroforestry’s objective is not tree production but food production (Nair, 1993;
King, 1987; Matthews, 1991).

In the early 1970s, several factors and developments contributed to the general

acceptance of agroforestry as a land management system that applies to both farm and


forest. These factors include: a) the re-assessment of development policies by the World
Bank; b) a reexamination of forestry policies by the Food and Agricultural Organization
(FAO) of the United Nations; c) a reawakening of scientific interest in both intercropping
and farming systems; d) the deteriorating food situation in many areas of the developing
world; e) the increasing spread of tropics deforestation and ecological degradation; f) the
energy crisis of the 1970s and consequent price escalation and shortage of fertilizers; and,
g) the establishment by the International Development Research Centre (IDRC) of Canada
of a project for the identification of tropical forestry research priorities (Sharma, 1992).

According to Lundgren and Raintree (1982), agroforestry is a collective name for
land-use systems and technologies where woody perennials are deliberately used on the
same land-management units as crops and animals in some form of spatial arrangement or
temporal sequence. In this system, there are both ecological and economic interactions
between the different components. Therefore, agroforestry involves two or more species
with seasonal cycles of more than one year typically. In ecology and economy, even the
most basic agroforestry system is more complex in comparison with monoculture.

Many developing countries will need to double their food production by 2020 to
sustain their growing populations. This goal will require maintaining, if not increasing,
current growth rates in national food production in sustainable ways that do not degrade
the natural resource base. The continued threat to the world’s natural resources is
intensified by prolonged poverty and food security (Hazell 1995; Sanchez et al., 1998). No
matter how sophisticated, efficient, productive, or ecologically sustainable they are,

agroforestry systems can only contribute to long-term land use if adopted and maintained


(Sanchez, 1995). Many researchers have lamented the fact that adoption and diffusion have
lagged behind scientific and technological advances in agroforestry research, reducing the
potential impacts of agroforestry-based development projects (Mercer, 2004). As
Patanayak et al. (2003) argue, this situation explains why researchers and policymakers
want to see more socioeconomic research on agroforestry and the development of a
predictive understanding of how farmers make agroforestry decisions. Most research
supports the notion that decisions to adopt resource-conserving practices like agroforestry
are primarily driven by expected contributions to increased productivity, output stability
through risk reduction, and enhanced economic viability compared to the alternatives
(Salam er al., 2000; Scherr 2000).

Adoption-diffusion first emerged as an essential research agenda in rural sociology
in the 1940s and 1950s (Ruttan 1996). According to Rogers (1983), rural sociology has the
most numbered diffusion studies in which most of the research can claim significant credit
for initially forming the intellectual paradigm for diffusion research. There is a point in
time wherein there was a decline in the agricultural economists’ interest in adoption
research. Not until the 1970s, economists’ work on adoption-diffusion studies began to
expand rapidly (Marra er al., 2003).

Adoption typically has been viewed from two perspectives. First, the individual
farm level wherein each household chooses whether to adopt and adjust the intensity of
adopting a specific innovation. This perspective is mainly concerned with the static or
dynamic factors influencing the adoption decision by incorporating learning and

experience. On the other hand, at a macro-level, diffusion studies examine how adoption


evolves across a population or region, aiming to identify specific trends in the diffusion
cycle over space and time. Diffusion studies typically begin after the innovation is already
in use and analyze the innovation’s spread as a dynamic, aggregative process over
continuous time. Thus, diffusion concerns the extent to which the innovation is put to
productive use. (Sarkar, 1998; Feder and Umali, 1993).

Most recent adoption studies explain how various farmers, farms, and project
characteristics correlate to agroforestry’s importance. Researchers reviewed the
agricultural and forestry technology adoption literature to identify the critical determinants
of adoption across various technologies, focus on adopting agroforestry and related
technologies, and identify explanatory variables of adoption.

Based on Mercer and Pattanayak (2003) study, it was revealed that there were five
general categories of factors known to influence agroforestry adoption. These included
market incentives, biophysical conditions, risk and uncertainty, household preferences, and
resource endowment. The study also showed that most empirical studies examine
agroforestry adoption as a snapshot in time. Agroforestry adoption, on the other hand, was
a dynamic process that occurs over time as farmers experiment with agroforestry,
incorporate it into their farming enterprise, or abandon it entirely. However, due to the lack
of data with adequate time series, some farmers were unaware of any empirical research
rigorously analyzing the time dimension of agroforestry adoption.

Although research on the adoption and diffusion of agricultural innovations has a
long and rich history dating back to the 1950s, interest in understanding the process with

the more complex agroforestry systems is relatively new, beginning in the early 1990s. A


substantial literature on agroforestry adoption, however, has been developing over the past
ten years. A study conducted by Mercer (2004) showed that agroforestry adoption follows
economic theory predictions similar to the adoption of agricultural innovations. Farmers
will invest in agroforestry when the new system’s expected gains are higher than the
alternatives for using their land, labor, and capital. However, agroforestry adoption also
differs from traditional agriculture, especially concerning the role of risk and uncertainty.
The differences in adoption levels are likely due to the long periods required to reap the
benefits from agroforestry investments. It also highlights the relatively more significant
importance of risk and uncertainty in agroforestry adoption decisions than annual cropping,
innovations.

Another study conducted by De Souza Filho ef al. (1999) focused on addressing
adopting sustainable agricultural technology using a modeling framework. This framework
‘was superior to conventional approaches to the study of adoption and diffusion. It could
accommodate both the heterogeneity of individual farmers and the explicitly dynamic
nature of the adoption process. The authors’ results suggested that in their study in Brazil,
the probability of a farmer adopting the Low External Input and Sustainable Agriculture
(LEISA) technologies increased through the following: if the farmer was more integrated
with farmers? organizations; had contact with non-governmental organizations; was aware
of the negative effect of agrochemicals on health and the environment; could rely on family
labor; and, had a farm located in an area of better soil conditions. LEISA technology could
enable such farmers to achieve a higher income and attain sustainability by: a) optimizing

the use of locally available resources, thereby achieving a synergetic effect among the


various components of the farming system (soil, water, animals, plants, etc.) which
complemented each other in the production of output; and, b) minimizing the use of
external inputs, except where there was a severe deficiency and where the effect on the
system would be to increase recycling of nutrients. On the other hand, the probability of
adoption was reduced by increases in farm size (Thanh, 1996).

In 2008, a study by McGinty et al. looked at the social dimension of agroforestry
adoption and maintenance in Brazil. The study looked at the effects of socio-economic
factors and attitudes to self-efficacy in terms of farmers’ intentions to adopt or maintain
agroforestry. The researchers discovered that agroforestry development programs could
benefit from focusing on farmers’ perceived control of specific behaviors to increase the

persistence of agroforestry practices. (Figure 5).

Attitudes about
agroforestry

/

Participation with
‘agroforestry
development program

rainforest
conservation

jn ma
of agroforestry

igement

Socio-economic
cha

icteristics

Intentions to adopt or,
maintain agroforestry

Figure 5. Relationships between the predictor variables and farmers’ intentions to adopt
or maintain agroforestry in Southern Bahia, Brazil (McGinty et al., 2008).


The decision-making of farmers and households whether to adopt or reject an
agroforestry practice can be described as a mental process. A study by Alavalapati ef al. in
1995 analyzed the factors influencing the adoption of agroforestry practices in India by
using logit analysis. Their research assumed that agroforestry was environmentally and
economically adaptable and compatible with local agricultural practices. A government
institution was expected to be responsible for agroforestry extension services that facilitate
the flow of knowledge and available resources to farmers at various adoption processes.
Figure 6 showed the model that was used in their study to analyze adoption. Similarly, the
study found that the innovation-decision process was affected by the household’s socio-
economic, communication, and psychological characteristics at all stages. The results
indicate that extension programs and campaigns needed to create and maintain strong
networks and ties to the community to support community leaders and influencers in the

locality.

‘Agroforestry Organization
‘Awareness campaigns
Coordination/Service support
Resource support

Home gardens

“Awareness “Attitude ‘Adoption
of agroforestry towards agroforestry of agroforestry

Farm planting

Houschold

Sociveconomic factors: age, stalus, income, and land pussession

Communication factors: change age id urban contacts
Psychological factors: values. belicls, and orientation

Figure 6. Agroforestry innovation-decision model at the household level
(Alavalapati et al., 1995)


Recent studies highlight the importance of various socioeconomic, physical, and
demographic factors that significantly affect the adoption of agroforestry practices. These
include the gender of farmers, household family size, level of education, farmers’
experience, membership within farmers’ association, contact with research and extension,
the security of land tenure, agroecological zone, the distance of the village from the nearest
town, village accessibility, and livestock income (Mwase et al., 2015; Pattanayak, 2002).
Studies suggest that any increase in output prices and rural wages relative to the prices of
external inputs leads to a decrease in the speed of diffusion of sustainable agricultural
technologies. Conversely, technological progress, alternative rural credit policies, and
premium prices can enhance the relative profitability for farmers adopting sustainable
practices. It can speed up their diffusion (Coulibaly er al., 2014). These factors that affect
adoption can help extension efforts efficiently target agroforestry technologies within
farmer populations (Nkamleu and Manyong, 2005). Therefore, policymakers need reliable
information on the likely effects of various socioeconomic variables on adopting or

rejecting an innovation.

Farm Tourism in Asia

Farm tourism, also known as agritourism, has been defined by Smith and Long
(2000) as the opportunities for tourists to reside and participate in farms’ working activities.
It is increasingly being recognized as an essential alternative farming that diversifies the
economic base. In addition, farm tourism provides educational opportunities to tourists and

greater community cohesion (Ilbery ef al., 1998). The term also refers to rural tourism on


working farms, where the working environment is considered part of the product from the
consumer’s point of view. This type of tourism also includes the act of visiting a farm or
any agricultural, horticultural, or agribusiness enterprise for pleasure, education, or active
participation in specific activities (Denman and Denman, 1990).

According to Frater (1983), farm tourism is not a new phenomenon; it has already
existed as recognizable activity in some parts of the world, especially in developed
countries, for over a hundred years. Farm tourism also indicates that its development is
closely associated with the level of economic development and urbanization. Therefore,
farm tourism has long been considered a potential means for socio-economic development
and rural regeneration, especially where development options are limited. As early as the
1970s, farm tourism has become a popular industry in continental Europe and America.
Little is yet known about farm tourism in developing countries as the local demand for
tourism is generally lower for less developed regions like Asia (Reichel et a/., 2000).
However, in the past two decades, tourism in Asia, mainly in rural areas, has increased
remarkably, due to the growing demand for authentic and unique experiences that allow
escaping from routine and mass tourism destinations that do not offer experiences that
visitors increasingly value. (Brandao and Heleno, 2021).

Tourism has been identified as one of the largest and fastest-growing industries
globally (Deng er al., 2002). The recent growth of nature-based tourism has led to the
development of farm tourism in every part of the world. However, farm tourism or
agritourism has been popular in Asia, in which the development and organization of farm

tourism vary from country to country. Though most countries in Asia are considered third-


world countries, they promoted and developed farm tourism with the government’s support
and the cooperative movement, which is the primary source of investment. In contrast,
others are entirely private enterprises (Choo and Jamal, 2008).

Studies revealed that several Asian countries successfully developed the farm
tourism industry starting in the late 1980s. Japan was one of the first countries in Asia to
develop farm tourism since the early 1990s. Japan, which has an average farm size of 1.55
ha per household, has attempted to adapt to changing trends by stabilizing the rural
economy to improve rural households’ secondary income. Residents were involved in
agriculture and forestry, which play a role in managing the environment. They conserved
these natural resources and mountainous areas to develop and maintain traditional
agriculture and forestry business. One of the main goals was to revive the local economies
by promoting exchange goods with urban citizens and reducing social problems, including
decreasing populations (Miazaki, 1997).

In Malaysia, farm tourism which started in 1991, was focused on diversifying farm
activities to improve country account balance. With the government sectors’ support,
Malaysia developed and introduced many farm activities to attract visitors by promoting
marketing and tourism packages run by private and local sectors (Norida and Abdul, 2014).

On the other hand, during the early 1990s, farm tourism in China developed,
resulting in a dramatic increase in rural labor in agriculture and related services. This period
also saw the application of new agro-industrial techniques in agricultural production. As a
particular trend emerged and grew fast, local farmers initiated farm tourism on their farms

and farmhouses. Likewise, farm activities were driven by market forces without


government support and regulation, thus improving agricultural services quality (Yang er
al., 2010).

The significant improvement of Asian countries in international tourist arrivals
during the past decades shows tourism opportunities and potentials. This level is achieved
when public and private organizations develop better marketing strategies to lead to a
world-class tourist destination. Hence, the culture, structure, and environment are the vital

elements of Asian countries to become sustainably competitive in farm tourism.

Farm Tourism in the Philippines

Agriculture and tourism are two of the most dynamic industries in the Philippines
that play a vital role in its cultural and economic growth. The Philippines, as a tropical
country with world-class beaches and vacation destinations, is a growing tourist hotspot
located in Asia. The country is filled with natural resources, a diverse environment, and
rich cultural heritage. Today, the government perceives that the most promising investment
lies in farm tourism, as evidenced by a shift in policy and the passage of Republic Act
10816 or the Farm Tourism Development Act of 2016. However, the Philippines’
investments and developments in farm agriculture and tourism lag far behind compared to
the other neighboring countries (Cayabyab, 2013). Nevertheless, tourism has become the
initiative for economic development in a developing country that seeks opportunities to
strengthen and complement the existing industries such as agriculture and agroforestry

(Lago, 2017).


According to Spire (2013), farm or agritourism emerged in the Philippines in the
early 1990s, when most farms were not yet institutionally defined and were only privately
owned or managed. In 1991, the Philippine Department of Tourism (DOT) and the United
Nations Development Program (UNDP) formulated the Philippine Tourism Master Plan
(TMP), which aimed to focus on environmental sustainability. As a result, the Department
of Agriculture and DOT, in 2002, identified the different agritourism sites in the country,
which were listed as the accredited sites that must adhere to the minimum standards for all
operations and maintenance activities. Some of the accredited sites in the Philippines
include C & B Orchid Farm in San Rafael, Bulacan; Sonya’s Secret Garden in Alfonso,
Cavite; Oro Verde Plantation in Guimaras; Del Monte Plantation in Manolo Fortich,
Bukidnon; Bohol Bee Farm in Dauis, Bohol; Dragon Fruit Farm in Burgos, Ilocos Norte;
and The Farm at San Benito, Batangas (SEARCA, 2012).

Over 200 farm tourism sites are established across the country, and some of these
sites are located in the protected areas. Of these sites, only 170 are accredited farm tourism
sites by the DOT. Fruit and vegetable farm tourism can be seen in the Benguet and
Bukidnon provinces, while similar agritourism enterprise destinations are located in the
Provinces of Ilocos Norte and Sur, Batangas, Laguna, Cavite, Palawan, Albay, Bohol,
Iloilo, and Davao.

With tourism as the key growth driver of the Philippine economy, studies pointed
out that the development of farm tourism in the Philippines is the more effective way to
utilize its resources. It allows the family to have jobs that will serve as the source of income

and opportunity to start a small-scale business, reducing urban migration (Manalo er al.,


2019). As a result of previous shifts in policy and the passage of laws like the Republic Act
9593 or the Tourism Act 2009, the National Tourism Development Plan 2016-2022 was
formed to have adopted a more strategic and innovative approach in exploring new
opportunities. Figure 7 shows the target development of tourism in the Philippines, which
concentrated on pursuing inclusive growth by expanding community participation and
services, including the environment and climate change, and increased focus on risk and
crisis management. The tourism development highlighted what is achievable through the
efforts of the numerous stakeholders comprising the tourism industry. According to the
Philippine Statistics Authority (2018), 12.7% is the tourism industry’s total contribution to

the Philippines economy.

‘EMPLOYMENT

oes =
4, SHARE TO TOTAL
ad EMPLOYMENT pa

ga and VISITORS ator)
eo

NBOUND 59 74 120 9

DOMESTIC 705 © 76.3 89.2
NUMBER OF POOR ‘
BENEFICIARIES 486 556 541

Figure 7. National Tourism Development Plan (Source: www.tourism.gov.ph)


In the Philippines, the adaptation of farm tourism has been marked up during recent
years. This sudden rise was believed to help reduce economic problems, especially for the
family farms that expanded their revenues due to their belief that it was a monetary
essential (Flanigan ef al., 2015). Based on the International Trade Center (2010), linking
tourism to agriculture may enhance the potential to improve the Philippines’ poverty status
by matching in-demand labor-intensive products and services with low-income families’
capacities. Though farm tourism is a crucial concept, there are various ways to engage it in
its agricultural system. The approach may be through science, economics, sociology, and
policy to ensure that the farmers will have a healthy and better future in farm tourism.
The recently approved Republic Act 10816 or Farm Tourism Development Act of
2016 promotes and establishes a comprehensive farm tourism development program. The
policy provides policies or the implementing rules and regulations to better recognize the
importance of agriculture in making food and other products and provide a livelihood to
most of the population. Farm tourism in the Philippines, if properly managed, will provide
the most developing and profitable form of leisure. Most farmers who want to be engaged
and adapted to farm tourism are willing to learn and experience something extraordinary
in a new and comfortable way (Roman, 2015). The tourism industry’s development
significantly impacts tourists’ demand with its maturity and promotion to use local cuisine.
Farm tourism should able to attract new customers and provide knowledge to the public
regarding agriculture. With the appropriate policies related to the environment and

agriculture, farm tourism will give the community job opportunities, increase the local


people’s productivity, and produce new agricultural products that can help sustain the
country’s agritourism (Barbier and Tew, 2016).

Farming is considered an integral aspect of Filipino culture. As a result, many
academic and tourism experts are presently promoting agriculture courses in schools and
universities and highlighting farm tourism’s potential to reduce poverty. The promotion of
agriculture has gained popularity in the Philippines and brought benefits to the tourism
industry. Some of the beneficial contributions of farm tourism in the industry are: (1)
economic growth which offers a path to economic development in rural areas; (2) social
benefits by improving the business environment and achieving a balance in tourism
development between the urban and rural areas; and (3) heritage and ecological
conservation that encourages the preservation of the land and prevents land conversion to
attract farm tourists (Spire, 2013). However, according to the study of Mena (2018), there
are perceived challenges that the government and farmers in the Philippines should address.
These challenges include seasonality and weather or climate change, calamities, inadequate
water supply and price of farm products/activities, and weak marketing promotions and
government support. Nevertheless, successful farm tourism sites require naturally beautiful
attractions and activities to participate in agricultural operations. Transitioning to farm
tourism includes strong capacity building and training of the farmers, which will advance
their knowledge on farming technologies, farm management, and diversification of income
sources, and increased awareness of the various aspects of farm or agritourism (Pinky and

Kaur, 2014).


The promotion of farm tourism in the Philippines has many benefits that range from
preserving cultural identities, boosting community purchasing power, developing local
societies, and hamessing positive attitudes toward protecting the environment. Today, it
can be used as a significant intervention that can complement farms and agricultural

activities and pave the way to sustainable development.

Tourism and Tourism Potential

Tourism is one of the essential development factors in the economy of most
developing countries. It is considered an activity essential to nations’ lives due to its direct
effects on national societies’ social, cultural, educational, and economic sectors. Tourism
is also considered a bridge in international relations. Tourism enhances economic activities
with its multiplier effects and positively exploits local cultural and natural specialties
(Zimmer and Grassman, 1996).

Tourism has the potential to grow local economies. However, it can only contribute
significantly to job creation and enterprise development if the nature and location of the
project, the amount of investment, and the type of support provided policies align with this
(Kirsten and Rogerson, 2002). However, Binns and Nel (2002) believed that if tourism, as
part of the local economic development strategy, impacts the local community
significantly, it must alleviate the plight of the poor. Therefore, this kind of tourism aims
to unlock opportunities at all levels and scales of operations, including eco-tourism and
community-based tourism initiatives, and should be the core of any government activity

related to tourism. As a result, before investing heavily in tourism, a local government must


know the condition of respective tourist resources, their attractiveness, and levels of tourist
demand and potential.

These different aspects of tourism suggest that tourism potential can be assessed
and quantified based on individual areas or regions. As described by Formica (2000),
tourism potential is an attractiveness that indicates the relations between demand and
supply of tourism. The ability of a place to attract and receive tourists with concerns about
accessibility, resource quality, resource interpretation, and so on is referred to as tourism
potential (Anderson, 2007). “The entirety of natural, cultural, historical, and socio-
economic backdrop for the development of tourist activities in a certain place” is how

tourism potential is defined (Shohan et al., 2012).

In general, tourism potential is a site’s ability to attract and receive tourists with
concerns about accessibility, quality, interpretation of resources, and operational factors.
The potential of tourism in a region is achieved by minimizing infrastructure imbalances
within the entire region, depending on both endowed resources and established resources.
These tourism resources, products, and services offered by a destination are the most

critical aspects defining tourist attraction (Anderson, 2007; Sanchez er al., 2016).

Approaches and Methods in Measuring Tourism Potential

Measuring tourism potential has been conducted in various ways in research. There
are different practices in every tourism aspect to assess the tourism potential to quantify all
attributes towards a single value using various tools. The evaluation of tourism potential is

an essential aspect of destination development and financial consideration and thus


becomes the primary purpose of assessing tourism resources. The municipal budget may
be limited, and the potential of regional tourism resources must be evaluated to help the
local government make decisions on allocating resources for sustainable tourism
development. Consequently, the evaluation of tourism potential is a critical factor for
tourism planning; hence, a clear understanding of the potential tourism resources benefits
destination development and marketing (Ptacek ef al., 2015).

Tourism is a globally competitive industry with diverse destinations that compete
fiercely to get the largest share of finite travellers. As a result, significant tourism studies
potentially utilize various tools, approaches, and methodologies to evaluate tourism’s
potential in a specific area (Deng ef al., 2003). The evaluation of the tourism potential is a
complex and comprehensive problem in which every researcher cannot assume that the
importance of each criterion or indicator is equal. Many different methods have been
employed to determine the potential of tourism. Some of the most commonly used tools
are Delphi Method, Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP), and Geographic Information

System (GIS).

Delphi Method

The Delphi Method, a bottom-up and qualitative approach, is commonly used to
gather and categorize stakeholders’ attitudes and stated values concerning rural tourism
and its effects. Over the last thirty years, it has systematically combined expert knowledge
and opinion to arrive at an informed group consensus on a complex problem. This method

was also chosen as the best method for gathering expert opinions and extracting knowledge


from a group of people with the necessary expertise in tourism and hospitality.
(Briedenhann and Butts, 2006; Donohoe and Needham, 2009). Thus, the Delphi technique
is considered a good way of utilizing peoples’ interpretation and foresight through the
systematic gathering of opinions from experts and determining the extent of consensus
regarding tourism and hospitality-related issues (Taylor, 1992).

The method is structured to be a reflexive alternative to focus group interviews and
other similar approaches. It is known to fit situations well when there is high uncertainty
about the impact of different factors (Needham and de Loe, 1990). This process provides
an anonymous environment where the panelists express their opinions independently from
the others. The exact process ensures that opinions reflect rational judgment, not the
influence of opinion leaders, as often occurs when using a committee or jury of expert
opinion approaches (Wilson, 2000).

Based on the study of Kaynak and Kara (2012), it was reported that using the Delphi
method showed significant improvements in the tourism market potential of Cambodia.
Their findings show that expected changes in the tourism industry structure have slightly
increased, and experts considered several changes as high impact factors on tourism
potential. Similarly, expected changes in societal and personal values were perceived to
have slight increases and medium to high impact in evaluating future tourism potential

effects.


Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP)

Thomas L. Saaty first proposed the Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) in 1977.
It has been subsequently used in tourism research to evaluate tourist risks, airline service
quality, restaurant location selection, and hotel spatial allocation (Wu ef al., 2004). It
integrates experts' opinions and evaluations and breaks down the complex decision-making
system into a simple element hierarchy system. The selected criteria create different effects
on the tourism potential of destinations. Therefore, it is necessary to determine weighting
coefficients for each criterion in a multicriteria evaluation. AHP makes it possible to
facilitate multicriteria decision-making concerning environmental impact assessment,
landscape assessment, tourism assessment, and economic evaluation (Duke and Aull-hyde,
2002; Ramanathan, 2001). AHP is popular in tourism planning and tourism destination. It
facilitates an approach to understanding decision factors and their relative weight or
importance and is useful when evaluating expert decision-maker's preferences or opinions
(Hsu et al., 2009).

This technique utilizes a ratio scale to make pairwise comparisons between all
criteria. According to a hierarchical assessment system, the method decomposes the
decisions in the process that includes criteria, sub-criteria, and alternatives and the decision
problem into criteria and levels according to their common characteristics. The top level is
the focus of the problem or ultimate goal; the intermediate levels correspond to criteria and
sub-criteria, while the lowest level entails the decision alternatives. The AHP weighting is
determined mainly by the decision-makers who conduct the pairwise comparisons to reveal

the relative importance of two criteria (Gumusay et al., 201

rfani et al., 2015).


Hoang er al. (2018) who investigated the tourism potential in the Central Highlands
of Vietnam showed that several attractive destinations were revealed using AHP since the
weight scoring results of the internal potential were more important than the external
potential. Among the potential internal criteria, a site's cultural and historical value had the
most substantial influence on tourism development, followed by the aesthetic and artistic
value, the entertainment value, the scientific value, and biodiversity. On the other hand,
accessibility and quality of accommodation were more critical among the external criteria.
Therefore, studies that evaluated the said criteria could prioritize tourism investments at

both regional and district levels.

Geographic Information Systems (GIS)

Geographic Information System (GIS) is another essential tool for evaluating the
tourism potential in an area. This method is also more appropriate for assessing a whole
region than separate sites and can compare different areas’ potential (Bina, 2008). Remote
sensing and GIS have been used extensively to assess tourism potential. Assessed resources
include both natural and cultural resources as well as tourism infrastructure. This process
covers factors such as slope, altitude, climate, vegetation, land use, fauna, culture, sports
facilities, transportation, accommodation, and others (Anamika, 2013).

As Milam and Jones (1995) stated, applying this assessment method produces a
hierarchy of tourism centers. GIS approach could speed up the data analysis process and
reduce the study’s length and improve and increase the final product’s quality. Moreover,

the GIS technique enables researchers to determine the area of intensity zones of each


landscape unit’s primary tourism potentials. The selected area and the average values of
the appropriate interval of intensity zones pointed out the individual landscape unit’s
primary tourism potential. Potential accessibility is estimated using a GIS-based cost
distance analysis determined by the tourist site’s distance to the destinations, public traffic
quality, and vehicle types (Kim ef al., 2011).

A related study by Mikulec and Antouskova (2011), who investigated the tourism
potential in the protected areas in the Czech Republic using GIS, showed that this
evaluation tool gave detailed evaluations on the highest tourism potential for specific
regions. This study also revealed that GIS application in assessing natural tourism
destinations is effective and efficient in providing a higher quality of information for the
decision-making process depending on the amount of quality data available. Likewise, GIS
application in tourism destination assessment provides value-added analysis compared to
other observation and site investigation approaches. There is evidence that an area's
promotion should be focused on nature and its natural potential, as confirmed by the map

analysis and tourist evaluation.

Reconciling Agroforestry System Adoption and Farm Tourism
for Sustainable Upland Development

Decades of research have illustrated the numerous benefits of combining trees and
agriculture as an adaptation and mitigation strategy by highlighting the ability of

agroforestry to balance the need for increased production with environmental conservation


and the provision of ecological services like soil, water, and air quality control, support for
cultural services and biodiversity in light of climate change (Smith, 2010; Zomer ef al.,
2016). Furthermore, as a development strategy, the socio-economic benefits of
implementing agroforestry systems that seek to improve the condition and livelihood of
upland farmers and communities can impact the local economy. These impacts are seen
through improved economic stability, diversification of local products and industries,
diversification of rural skills, improved food security, and landscape diversification
(Tolentino er al., 2011; Zomer et al., 2016). However, the financial benefits of agroforestry
systems resulting from increasing diversity and productivity are greatly dependent upon
the impact of market and price fluctuations of crops, livestock, and timber (Current et al.,
1995; Ospina, 2017).

There has been an increasing interest and steady proliferation of farm tourism sites
that merge recreation and agricultural farms. This trend was also reinforced by the passage
of the Farm Tourism Development Act of 2016 of the Philippines. The economic impacts
of farm tourism are evident, which can be maximized by reconciling it with agroforestry.
The development of farm tourism in suitable agroforestry farms can further add value and
diversify smallholder farmers' household income sources. However, the merging of
agroforestry farms and farm tourism is not an easy task. There is a need to consider the
supply and demand sides of farm tourism as these factors may either develop or limit the
interconnection between the two industries (Hill et al., 2014; Hyungsuk, 2012).

A concept that intertwines agroforestry and farm tourism is called

multifunctionality. Multifunctionality is critical in rural uplands as it raises awareness and


highlights the values of different agricultural outputs. These outputs include environmental
services, agritourism opportunities, food quality, landscape management, biodiversity
protection, food and fiber production (Bernardo er al., 2004; Ploeg ef al., 2000). Due to an
increase in agroforestry farm production and farm activities, diversification will result in a
robust multifunctional system embedded in its region with high environmental
sustainability (Holmes, 2006; Marsden and Sonnino, 2008; Wilson, 2008). The synergistic
aspect of multifunctionality is a vital feature as strong evidence indicates on-farm functions
do not work in isolation but play an interconnected role with other farm functions (Barbieri
et al., 2010).

Agroforestry systems and conventional farms have functions that produce more
synergies than others. On-farm recreation is one aspect that seems to foster multiple
synergies with other farm functions, adding to the values within the farm household as it
assists in promoting and encouraging the sales of other farm specialties or value-added
products and services (Barbieri, 2009). The recreational function of farms is an important
aspect that can significantly add to its multifunctionality, such as being a farm tourism site.

The concept of recreational multifunctionality was introduced by Barbieri and
Valdivia (2009) as a step in agroforestry's transitional pathway. Improved recreational
multifunctionality of farms in the uplands can be achieved through the adoption of
agroforestry technologies. Agroforestry brings improved recreational functions to the farm,
enabling it to transition to farm tourism as an added pathway for sustainable development
(Barbieri et al., 2010). The diversity of products and services from crops, livestock, and

trees found in established agroforestry farms and its interactions can benefit farm tourism


in many ways. The study of synergies between agroforestry and recreational services will
serve as a foundation for pursuing greater multifunctionality that is sustainable, promotes
rural development and well-being, and has numerous environmental benefits (Wilson,
2008).

The multifunctionality that agroforestry farms can provide is crucial for sustainable
land use and can become pathways to achieving sustainable development goals. Therefore,
identifying the multiple environmental, social, and economic functions of land use and the
subsequent analysis of how well specific agroforestry landscapes perform conceming those
functions is vital and must focus on future research (Wiggering ef al, 2003). Recreation is
one of the functions of the land. As such, tourism and recreational potential studies in
agroforestry systems are vital in assessing the farmland's present and future development
trajectory.

Farm tourism in the uplands will be based on farmers' and farm owners’ ability to
successfully practice and introduce agroforestry technologies and extend their farmland's
multifunctionality. Farm tourism's success will depend on many external factors like
accessibility, services, aesthetics, quality of accommodation, and others. A mismatch in
the tourism demand and agriculture supply in the uplands can hinder any site's tourism
development (Lago, 2017).

Reconciling agroforestry adoption and farm tourism is dependent on the
understanding that agroforestry supports another use of the land. The adoption of
agroforestry systems brings associated recreational benefits that should be recognized and

assessed when examining the overall benefits of incorporating trees and shrubs into


agricultural production (Barbieri er al., 2010; Hyungsuk, 2012). Economic opportunities
developed in the recreation-agroforestry interface should be explored to lead to many
value-added farm products and services (Smith, 2010). The synergy that can be formed
between agroforestry and farm tourism is essential when external factors such as economic
pressures and climate change become one of the major driving forces behind environmental
degradation, lack of food security, and loss of biodiversity. Successful integration of these
two distinct fields will bring the Philippines closer to sustainable development and achieve

many SDGs.

Conceptual Framework

Adoption of Agroforestry System as Gateway to Farm Tourism

Farmers are more likely to adopt multiple technologies than rely on a single
innovation to overcome various agricultural production constraints. The majority of
agroforestry adoption studies employ dichotomous choice (logit or probit) regression
models to explain how different characteristics of farmers, farms, and development projects
influence adoption decisions. A common deficiency in agroforestry adoption studies is that
potential interlinkages between the different technologies are not considered (Yu ef al.,
2008). Many empirical studies investigate the adoption of agroforestry as a snapshot in

time. On the other hand, the adoption of agroforestry is a long and complicated phase in


which farmers experiment with it, incorporate it into their farming operations, or abandon
it entirely (Mercer and Pattanayak, 2003).

These characteristics that affect agroforestry system adoption are usually classified
into five broad categories: economic incentives, biophysical conditions, risk and
uncertainty, household preferences, and resource endowments (Mercer and Pattanayak,
2003). The decision to adopt a new system such as agroforestry can be influenced by the
number of farming practices and technologies implemented by the farmer and the
determinants of adoption (Kassie ef al., 2013). Farmers’ approaches to agroforestry
adoption change over time as their experience grows, their farmlands change, and their
household resources increase or decrease as they get older (Bannister and Nair, 2003).

According to Deininger and Feder (2001), the capacity of households to produce

their subsistence and generate market surplus and their social and economic status are

determined by tenure. They added that land rights influence activities that put land to its
most efficient use and provide incentives to adopt innovations and technologies.
Smallholder farmers cultivate a variety of crops, animals, and trees for various purposes,
and these factors are likely to influence their decision-making (Upton, 1996). In addition,
farmer education and the level of diversification of the production system is an essential
factor influencing agroforestry adoption (Mahapatra and Michel, 2001).

In acquiring technical information, the frequency with which farmers interact with
extension agents is critical (Salam et al., 2000; Adesina and Chianu, 2002). In addition, the

effectiveness of agricultural extension services and knowledge dissemination are critical


in developing farmers’ human resources and their decision-making and farm management
activities.

The level of adoption of agroforestry systems and their diversification influences
the farmland’s development trajectory by improving its recreational multifunctionality,
thereby creating another land-use opportunity in the form of farm tourism while providing
ecosystem and economic benefits. The unified conceptual framework showing agroforestry
system adoption and farm tourism potential is shown in Figure 8.

After years of its initial implementation, the CFV project is expected to produce
multifunctional agroforestry farms, becoming distinct tourism resources in the country and
its respective region. These farm sites are the product of the continued adoption and
practice of agroforestry and conservation farming practices. Established CFV farms that
continue to thrive may opt to add farm tourism to their operations. The evaluation of
tourism resources is, therefore, crucial in assessing tourism potential.

According to Hoang er al. (2018), a destination's tourism potential depends on
endowed resources and established resources, including tourism resources, products, and
services. Evaluating a site's tourism potential depends on its attraction, carrying capacity,
seasonal variability, accessibility, sustainability, tourism infrastructure, and economic
benefit (Cetin and Sevik, 2016; Dwyer and Kim, 2003; Pourahmad et al, 2017).
Multicriteria evaluation of CFV farm sites' tourism potential will require regional and
national tourism experts’ input through the analytical hierarchy process (AHP). The tourism
potential analysis will not consider non-existing external potential criteria such as

accommodation, catering service, and labor quality. The focus will be given to resource


endowments and other internal factors, namely landscape/aesthetic value, entertainment
value, socio-cultural value, scientific value, biodiversity, the size of tourism destination,

and tourism seasonality.

“enusjod wisiinoy wisey pur uondope suraists Anjsorojou8e Surmoys yomourey jemdoouos parpiug *g aanSiy

Twuxai04
NSRHIOL
awed

cwrnae yusyog wstanoL
WT ue woisss
Ian,
Aaso10yox3y AI

‘awuxaioa
srIa0L
AWS

‘sousrigiovavHo
‘T10H3s10K

sano oa a
mang peda susinodouovany opr eg

res ‘ONIINUVA NOLLVAWISNOD

sousniovuvns

‘AOISANZOIE

[NOLLISNVL NSPINOL WUVEKHLSTOIONOY

1690119345 ALITYNONONAALTANTYNOLLYSHOT

Nouaoay

40 siNvSInewaaa


CHAPTER III

METHODOLOGY

Area of the Study

The study was conducted in General Nakar, Quezon; and La Libertad, Negros
Oriental (Figure 9). These municipalities are pilot sites of the CFV project and include
Barangays Aya, Elecia, Nasunggan, and Talaon in La Libertad; and Barangays Magsikap,
Minahan Norte, and San Marcelino in General Nakar.

General Nakar has a total population of 29,705, and is Quezon province's most
extensive municipality in terms of the land area covering 1,343.75 square kilometers (PSA,
2016). The selected barangays in the municipality of General Nakar were located in the
hilly regions of the area and have an elevation that ranges from 24 to 66 meters above sea
level (Elauria ef al., 2016). The soil is clay to loam in the CFV areas. Type II (no
pronounced dry season with a very pronounced peak rainy period from December to
February) and Type IV (rainfall is spread more or less evenly throughout the year) are two
forms of climate in the region. The selected CFV barangays belong to Type II with annual
rainfall ranging from 2,100 to 6,600 mm with an average temperature of 26.8 degrees
Celsius. The municipality has a total of 19 barangays spread across lowland and upland
areas. Three upland barangays were the initial sites of the CFV project and were the main

focus of the study, namely: San Marcelino, Magsikap, and Minahan Norte.

CORDILLERA One a
ADMINISTRATIVE

CAGAYAN VALLEY

ocos REGION

Philippine Sea
General Nakar, Quezon

arromaL,caprrat. 2

~

La Libertad,
Negros Oriental CARAGA

ZAMBOANGA PENINSULA

Recion

a? Celebes Sea

Figure 9. Location of the study sites in the Philippines (Sanglahi, 2016)


La Libertad is a town on the coast of the Negros Oriental province classified as a
third-class municipality. The municipality has an area of 139,60 km?, which is 2.59% of
the total area of Negros Oriental. La Libertad has a population of 38,602 people, accounting
for 2.85% of the total population of Negros Oriental and 0.52% of the total population of
Central Visayas, according to the PSA 2015 census. The population density of La Libertad
was measured at 280 people per square kilometer or 720 people per square mile based on
these estimates. This whole region is heavily involved in producing peanuts, soybeans,
maize, copra, and various sugarcane fields that make lots of sugar cane.

La Libertad has three barangays included in the initial years of CFV
implementation. These barangays are Aya, Elecia, and Nasunggan. A fourth barangay,
Talaon, which sits in the middle of the initial CFV sites, was also included. The four
barangays range from 600 to 800 m above sea level. Large parts of these sites have slopes
above 18%, prone to flood, leading to heavy soil erosion and landslides. The area has a
Type I climate, with annual rainfall ranging from 750 to 2,300 mm and temperatures
ranging from 20 to 35 degrees Celsius all year. These upland barangays account for
approximately 50% (4,788 ha) of La Libertad’s total uplands. Mainly privately owned, the
farm sizes vary between 0.25 and 5 ha, while the average farm size is at 1.51 ha (Elauria
et al., 2016). Plowing of land in the slope is standard, and carabaos are used, whereas others
use manual handheld plowing tools. The fields are widely planted with maize, cocoa, and
palay, while the rest of the region consists of a mixture of native fruit trees, vegetables,

coffee, bamboo, and root crops.


Agroforestry Adoption Research Design

The first part of the study focused on the determinants of agroforestry system
adoption. This phase included a detailed analysis of socioeconomic, physical, and
environmental variables that affect conservation farming practices and the adoption of
agroforestry systems in CFV sites in General Nakar and La Libertad municipalities.
Quantitative and qualitative research methods were implemented, and these included farm
household surveys, focus group discussions (FGD), and key informant interviews (KII),
respectively. FGDs and interviews yielded essential data that reinforced survey results,
supported findings, and shed light on other farming community issues and concerns. Farm
visits and site surveys conducted in the study sites validated the farming villages’

biophysical and socioeconomic conditions, cultural environment, and infrastructure.

Farm Household Survey

The farm household survey was conducted through a one-to-one interview utilizing
a structured 7-page survey questionnaire administered by qualified and trained enumerators
accustomed to each study area's local language. A total of 460 farmers were sampled and
surveyed. The form of sustainable agroforestry practices (SAP) used on each respondent's
farm and socioeconomic and demographic characteristics were collected. These
agroforestry practices were contour hedgerows, organic farming, multistorey cropping,
terracing, rockwall, mulching, contour composting, boundary planting, and livestock

raising. The survey questions also covered community and social networks, credit and


support services, government effectiveness and provisions, and farm environment.
Questions and concerns in the survey instrument were also included in the FGD guide to
validate and clarify the information.

The survey instrument was administered to randomly selected farmer-adopters and
farmer-volunteers in selected Barangays of La Libertad and General Nakar (Appendix A).
‘A sample size of 229 farmers per study site was determined using the GPower program
using the following parameters in Figure 10. The final sample size was set to 230 per site.
GPower is a stand-alone power analysis program for social and behavioral statistical tests
(Faul et al., 2007). This software calculated the sample size based on the variability of the

data and data processing. The total sample of surveyed farmer-respondents was 460.

[Ba G"Power 3.1.9.7 i - x
File Edit View Tests Calculator Help
Central and noncental distributions Protocol of power analyses |
‘Options: Large sample #-Test,Demidenko (2007) with var core “ |
‘Analysis: A priori: Compute required sample size
Input: Tall) Two |
Odds ratio 18
Peeve xe1) HO os
atert prob = 00s
Power (1B ere prob) 095
ther X 02 Sear
Xelstribution = Normal
| xparm a
Xparm ¢ =1 Save
Joutput: —Criicalz = 13599640
Total sample size = 2s ae
Actual power assorass

Figure 10. GPower sampling size parameters per site.

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic's travel restrictions and regulations during the data

collection process, the farm household surveys took longer to complete. Data gathering in


General Nakar and La Libertad was completed in December 2020 and February 2021,

respectively.

Focus Group Discussion

A total of seven FGDs were conducted during the data collection phase. Existing
policies conceming the COVID-19 pandemic limited the FGD sessions per barangay to
just one. The prevailing regulations on social gatherings also affected the maximum
number of participants and types of activities allowed by the LGU. Despite the limitations,
the FGD was allowed to occur with the assistance of LGU coordinators and barangay staff
and upon the strict observance of safety protocols. The number of FGD participants is

shown in Table 3.

Table 3. Number of FGD participants in the study sites.

NUMBER OF
STUDY SITE BARANGAY PARTICIPANTS

General Nakar, Quezon Magsikap 14
Minahan Norte i

San Marcelino 15

La Libertad, Negros Oriental Aya i
Elecia 16

Nasunggan 15

Talaon if

Total 93

In both study sites, the LGU staff served as the facilitator of the discussions and as
the farmers’ coordinator. The majority of the participants of the FGDs came from the

participating barangays, wherein the CFV sites were established. Farmers who stopped or


intermittently implemented agroforestry technologies were included as respondents both
in the survey and in the FGDs. The participants included Burungay officials, farmers,
farmer-leaders, and several representatives from the Municipal Agriculture Office of the
respective LGU. FGD participants (farmers) were registered beforehand and also
administered with the survey instrument. The FGD participants were divided into smaller

groups of 2-3 individuals, each with their designated facilitator (Figure 11).

Figure 11. Small group discussions during the FGD.

The FGD activity was split into two parts: small group discussion and open forum.
Extracting detailed information and having better interpersonal communication was the

goal of the small group discussions, The discussion revolved around identifying natural


resources, understanding the farming village structure, farming practices, and cropping
patterns, and evaluating livelihood and economic status and government support.

The concluding phase of the FGD activity was an open forum for all participants
and attendees. The discussion focused on understanding the people’s perceptions of various
farming issues, government service delivery reliability, prevailing farm practices and

cultural patterns, and the concept of farm tourism.

Site Survey and Farm Visit

Farm visits and site surveys were utilized to document and confirm the farming
villages! physical and environmental conditions. In general, the villages’ natural resources
were inspected together with the kinds of farming practices, trees and crops planted, farm
and village layout, road access and travel conditions, and irrigation, transport, and other
farm facilities. In upland areas wherein the access was difficult, a drone was utilized to
take images and video documentation of the farm landscape showing the different farming
practices and soil and water conservation technologies applied. In addition to upland

villages, vegetable and livestock markets in the lowlands were also observed.

Key Informant Interviews

In-depth information on the study sites’ livelihood, history, culture, and tradition
related to farming were obtained through personal interviews with selected informants in
the CFV sites. The selected informants were chosen based on their first-hand knowledge

and experience in farming, agroforestry, the CFV project, and the study site’s locality.


Officials from the LGUs of General Nakar and La Libertad and farmer-leaders from the
CEV sites were among the primary informants.

The data gathered from key informant interviews were analyzed and used to
confirm and support the survey findings. The resulting analysis of themes, narratives, and
issues related to farming, agroforestry, government support, and rural development in the
uplands was used to generate recommendations given the survey results.

Interviews took place at the most convenient time and location for the key
informant. The key informants interviewed were: (1) a farmer-leader in General Nakar, (2)
a farmer-leader in La Libertad, (3) a municipal agriculture officer in General Nakar, (4)
and a municipal agriculture officer in La Libertad. The researcher provided a clear
description of the purpose and context of the study. Unlike the survey, the discussions with
the informants were not explicitly based on the survey questions. Instead, it revolved
around the study's objectives and their experiences and perspectives about farming,

agroforestry, farm tourism, and rural development in the uplands.

Agroforestry System Adoption Data Analysis

Multivariate Probit
The agroforestry adoption analysis is based on the multivariate probit (MVP)
technique adopted from the research of Kassie et al. (2013). MVP models the impact on

each of the different practices through explanatory variables allowing wide-ranging


correlations between non-observed and/or unstated (error terms). Positive correlations and
alternatives (negative correlations) may be a source of correlation among various
agroforestry practices. The multivariate probit model is characterized by a set of binary

dependent variables (Ynpj), such that:

Ying = XrpiB + Uagye J Equation (1)
= f1 Vip > 0
Yipj ~ { 0 otherwise * Equation ®

where j=1, denotes the technology choices available (agroforestry technologies) (Kassie er
al., 2013).

In Equation (1), the theorywas that a logical h'* farmer had a latent variable, Y"1j,
which indicated SAP's j" option of overlooked preferences and demands. This latent
variable was presumed to be a linear combination of observed features (Xnpj), household
and plot characteristics that affected the adoption of jth SAP, and unnoticed features that
occurred in a stochastic error word, utp (Kassie er al. 2013). Therefore, the vector of the
estimated parameters was defined as Bj. Due to the latent nature of Yn, the estimates were
based on observable binary discrete Yhpj variables, which showed whether a farmer had
undertaken a specific SAP on plot p. Whether a farmer adopted another practice or not,
then the Eqs] and Eq2 defined univariate probit models where information on the adoption
of a farming practice by farmers did not alter the estimation of the likelihood of adopting

another method (Kassie ef a/., 2013). Nonetheless, if it was possible to implement multiple


farming procedure, a more practical definition was supposed to be based on the assumption
that the error terms of Eq] jointly obeyed an ordinary multivariate distribution with a single
zero conditional average and variance, where utpj~MVN(0,5) and the covariance matrix E

was given by:

1 Pr Pra Pim
P21 Pas Pom
Pix P31 | P3m

Pim P2m P3m ” 1

The off-diagonal elements in the covariance matrix pjm were of particular interest,
reflecting the unnoticed connection between the stochastic portion of the SAP jth and the
‘mth form. This hypothesis indicated that Eq (2) offers an MVP model that reflected
decisions to follow different farming practices. This specification for non-zero off-diagonal
elements allowed for the association of several latent equations with error terms, which
represented unnoticed features that affected the choice of alternative SAPs (Kassie et al.,
2013).

In Table 4, the list and definition of explanatory variables for agroforestry system

adoption are shown. The multivariate probit regression model utilized these variables.


Table 4. Definition of explanatory variables of agroforestry system adoption.

VARIABLES

DESCRIPTION

Contour Hedgerows

‘Adoption of Contour Hedgerows as agroforestry technology (I = yes;
0=no)

Organic Farming

‘Adoption of Organic Farming as agroforestry technology (1 = yes; 0=
no)

Multistorey Cropping

‘Adoption of Multistorey Cropping as agroforestry technology (1 =
yes; 0=no)

‘Adoption of Contour Composting as agroforestry technology (I = yes;

Contour Composting 9 <5)

Boundary Planting Adoption of Boundary Planting as agroforestry technology (1 = yes; 0

Rockwall/Contour Adoption of Rockwall/Contour Rockwall as agroforestry technology
Rockwall (1 = yes; 0 = no)

Livestock Raising aa of Livestock Raising as agroforestry technology (1 = yes; 0
Terracing ‘Adoption of Terracing as agroforestry technology (1 = yes; 0 = no)
Mulching ‘Adoption of Mulching as agroforestry technology (1 = yes; 0 = no)
Plot size ‘Area that is cropped/planted

7 Plot ownership (1 = owned, 2= rented, 3 = public, 4 = borrowed, 5 =
‘enure
others)
Plot Distance (km) Distance from residence/house (in kilometers)
Godfertplt (reference) _ Perception that plot has good fertile soil (1 = yes; 0 = no)
Modfertplt Perception that plot has moderately fertile soil (1 = yes; 0 = no)
Porfertplt Perception that plot has poor fertile soil (1 = yes; 0 = no)
Fitsipplt (reference) Perception that plot has flat/gentle slope (1 = yes; 0 = no)
Modsipplt Perception that plot has moderate slope (1 = yes; 0 = no)
Stepsipplt Perception that plot has steep slope (1 = yes; 0 = no)
Shwdepplt (reference) Perception that plot has shallow deep soil (1 = yes; 0 = no)
Moddepsolplt____ Perception that plot has moderate deep soil (I = yes; 0 = no)
Depsolpit Perception that plot has deep soil (1 = yes; 0 = no)
Kinship ‘Number of relative that farmer has in village
Connections ‘Number of relative/s that farmer has in leadership position
Trader ‘Number of traders that farmer knows
aaa Distance to agriculture extension office (in kilometers)

Distance Mkt (km)

Distance to main market office (in kilometers)

Farmsize (ha)

Total farm size (ha)

LnExpenditure Total expenditures
Extenskill Farmers confident in skill of extension agents (I = yes; 0= no)
—— Total asset value of farm equipment, house furniture, gadgets, and
vehicle
Pestsdisease Pests and disease are key problems (1 = yes; 0 = no)


Table 4. Continued.

VARIABLES DESCRIPTION
Household member has salaried employment / nonfarm (I = yes; 0=
Salary 1)
HHsize Total family size (number)
Gender Gender of household head (1 = male; 2 = female)
‘Age ‘Age in years
Educ Education level (years of schooling)
Govtsup Household can rely on government during crop failure (I = yes; 0= no)
Fertavail Timely availability of fertilizer is a problem (1 = yes; 0 = no)
Livestock Total number of livestock owned
Rainfallindex Rainfall satisfaction index (1

Grou Participation in farmer’s

Descriptive and inferential statistics were used to analyze the data. Agroforestry
practices utilized as variables for agroforestry system adoption were contour hedgerows,
organic farming, multistorey cropping, contour composting, boundary planting, rockwall,
livestock raising. Together with other demographic and socioeconomic variables and
biophysical farm characteristics, these technologies were utilized to obtain the
determinants of agroforestry system adoption in the study sites. The analysis and
processing of survey data using the MVP approach utilized Microsoft Excel and STATA

programs.

Average Treatment Effect
Estimating the agroforestry system adoption of farmer respondents in General
Nakar and La Libertad CFV sites utilized the average treatment effect (ATE) framework

by Diagne (2012). The ATE measured the effect of a treatment or intervention on a person


randomly selected in the population. The ATE estimation framework is based on the

following set parameters and equations:

W = exposure status (observed)
W= 1 exposure
W = 0non-exposure

Y, = Potential adoption outcome when exposed

Yo = Potential adoption outcome when not exposed
Y1i- Yo; = treatment effect for farmer i

Y =w Y/ + (1-w) Yo= observed adoption outcome
E(Y)- Yo) = Average treatment effect (ATE)

ATE = E(Y/) = adoption rate

ATE can be estimated without the observation of Y; for w-0. Rosenbaum and Rubin
(1983) revealed that w is independent of Yi and Yo conditional of X, such that 0 < Prob

(W=1|X) < 1. The ATE equation below shows the identification:

ATE= y= E( y }
P(x)

where p(x)=P(w=l|x) is the conditional probability of exposure (propensity score)
P(x) = estimated by logit

In Stata, treatment effects estimation (Figure 12) utilized outcome-dependent and
outcome-independent variables. Outcome independent variables used included the positive
determinants of agroforestry system adoption and agroforestry technologies adopted by

farmer respondents based on the results of the multivariate probit technique. On the other


hand, the outcome dependent variable was set as the continued practice of agroforestry in
the farm of the farmer-respondent, which has a value of 1 for “Yes,” and 0 for “No” based

on the survey responses. The result indicated the adoption and diffusion of an introduced

innovation on a person randomly selected in the population.

a {effects -Treatment-etfects estimation

ett [| Wess | at | SE | Repoting | Manian [Abc
eam:
Feparson ater

soe saya,

Otc mot eta

Soret xr emtam tone mo!

Figure 12. Stata treatment effects protocol adopted from Diagne (2012).

P-value is set at 95% confidence interval. The alternative and null hypotheses were
described below:

: The determinants of agroforestry system adoption and implemented conservation farming and
agroforestry technologies in farms lead to higher adoption levels of agroforestry as a system.

‘Ho: The determinants of agroforestry system adoption and implemented conservation farming and
agroforestry technologies in farms do not lead to higher adoption levels of agroforestry as a system.


Farm Tourism Potential Research Design

The second part of the study determined the survey respondents’ interest and
willingness to venture into farm tourism and assessment of the tourism potential of CFV
barangay sites. Six CFV pilot barangay sites and one additional non-CFV site were chosen
for the study's farm tourism portion, and these included the following: Magsikap, San
Marcelino, Minahan Norte, Aya, Elecia, Nasunggan, and Talaon. The study utilized a
combination of the analytical hierarchy process, key informant interviews, and surveys. A
study by Hoang er al. (2018) on the tourism of the Vietnam Highlands applied a set of
criteria for evaluating an upland region's external and internal tourism potential. These
tourism potential criteria were adopted for this study but modified based on the Philippine

Farm Tourism Act of 2016. The selected criteria and description are shown in Table 5.

Table 5. Criteria for tourism potential evaluation of CFV sites (Hoang et al., 2018).

TOURISM SELECTED EVALUATION
POTENTIAL CRITERIA ___ DESCRIPTION scALE _RATING
Deals with beauty,

rtistic taste, and Very High 10
Land art ;
Pesce g. enjoyment and High 7
epathetics and pJeasure through Medium 4
1 environmental scenery Low 1
Poca observation.
Level ofpleasure and Very High 10
Entertainment positive experiences in High 7
Value the tourism Medium 4
destination. Low 1


Table 5. Continued.

TOURISM SELECTED


EVALUATION

POTENTIAL CRITERIA DERCAIPTEG SCALE Lets
Scientific Nationwide 7
practices and fea
Value Regionwide 4
agroforestry
: Provincewide 1
technologies observed.
‘Attractiveness and Very High 70
sviny Watiety of farm-related High 7
Farm Activity tivities and outdoor Medium 4
recreation Low 1
This describes the
variety and variability of Very High 10
eee Farm —_ livestock, crops, trees, High 7
Biodiversity and other micro- Medium 4
organisms in the general Low 1
farm landscape.
Size of The Bigger the tourist >50 hectares 70
a destination area, the >10-50 hectares 7
oerism higher the tourism 1-10 hectares 4
Destination
carrying capacity. < I hectare 1
“Appropriate duration >300 days 10
Tourism and timing of farm >200-300 days 7
Seasonality tourism activities in a 100-200 days 4
ear <100 days 1
Linkages The density of tourist Merhaea! »
with other sites in the locality and e
: i Medium 4
tourism sites _ the region.
Low 1
Travel time from each
tourist site to the Very High 10
Potential accommodations, High 7
External Accessibility restaurants, markets, bus Medium 4
Potential stations, airport, and Low 1
city/town centre.
Level of safety and
security incidents;
ri Very High 10
Safety and Beneral perceived level Ge ah “
sn and of tourist safety and
Security iat Medium 4
security in the
Low 1

destination and its



Seven key informants with relevant expertise and experience in farming, farm
tourism, and tourism growth in the Philippines assessed the tourism potential criteria. Key
informant interviews conducted with these respondents yielded quantitative data utilized
in finalizing the weights of each selected tourism criteria. Key informants were asked to
make verbal, qualitative statements about one criterion's relative importance over another
using AHP. The results were a series of weights representing the relative importance of the
selected criteria based on each respondent's scoring.

After the internal and external criterion weights were finalized through AHP, the
same set of key informants utilized the criteria with accompanying weights to evaluate and
rank the selected barangay sites of General Nakar and La Libertad. Ten tourism potential
criteria served as the basis for evaluating the potential farm tourism site.

Based on the key informants’ common choices and scoring, the AHP decomposes
the decision issue into parameters and rates. The pairwise comparison scale used in AHP

is shown in Table 6.

Table 6. AHP pairwise comparison scale (Saaty, 1980)

VALUE OF ay INTERPRETATION
1 x and y are equally important
3 x is slightly more important than y
5 x is more important than y
7 x is enormously more important than y
9 x is absolutely more important than y


The AHP pairwise comparison scale converted qualitative judgments to numerical
values similar to intangible attributes, The following decision matrix was used to measure

the criteria's priorities:

M1 412 Qn

an a; a:
A 21 2g rn

Any Au ++ Ann

where axy was the pairwise comparison rating between criterion x and criterion y of a

level with respect to the upper level. axy entries were subjected to the following rules:

Axy > 05 axy = Mayr 5 Axx = 1 Vx

The criteria's priorities were calculated by finding the matrix A's key eigenvector
W. If vector W was normalized, it became, as follows, the vector of the priorities of the

one-level criteria concerning the upper level:
AW = max W

where Amax was the maximum eigenvalue of the matrix A.
When the matrix for pair comparison satisfied transitivity for all pair comparisons,

the following relationship was consistent and verified:

Axy = Axhdhy VX, y, A


AHP allows discrepancy but provides a measure of discrepancy in each set of
judgments. The consistency of the judgment matrix was determined by the Consistency
Ratio (CR), which is defined as:

cl
CR= ral

where Cl is the Consistency Index; RI is the Random Index.
Table 7 shows the average consistencies of randomly generated matrices. The Cl

for a matrix of order n was defined as:

ci = Amex a
=

It was appropriate to have a reliability ratio of 0.1 or less. The judgments might not
be reliable if the value was higher and should be elicited again. The views of experts should

provide AHP with a CR under 0.1 or 10%.

Table 7. Average consistencies of random matrices (Saaty, 2000)

12030 0405 6 7 BDC 3S
0.0 0.0 0.58 0.90 112 1.24 132 141 145 149 151 148 1.56 1.57 1.59

Once the criteria's weighted values were available to assess tourist sites’ potential,
each criterion was graded into 4 levels: "excellent" (scores 10), "good" (7), "fairly good"
(4), and "poor" (1). The score of each tourist site criterion was calculated using the
following formula:

Ty = Si X wi


Finally, each farm tourism site's total score was calculated using the formula below:

where 7\j was the score of criterion j of the tourism site i (alternative i); 7; was the total
score of the tourist site i; 1 was the weighted score of the criterion j, and Sij was the rating
score of the criterion number j of tourist site i that was derived from Table 5

Before ranking and evaluation, site visits to all the selected barangays were
conducted to document the landscape. Documentation focused on farm tourism-related
characteristics such as infrastructure, agroforestry technologies present, farm landscape
and layout, aesthetics, and scenic value. Field visits were conducted in conjunction with
the first phase of the study. Pictures and videos showing each Barangay CFV site's scenic
landscape and outlook of the farming village were taken using a quadcopter drone and a
handheld camera.

The actual conduct of the seven key informant interviews for criteria scoring and
assessment of tourism potential utilized various platforms and in-person interviews. During
the interview phase of the study, the COVID-19 pandemic made it challenging to travel to
most areas in the country due to restrictions, stringent travel requirements, and the existing
quarantine status of cities and municipalities. As a result, internet-based software solutions
such as Zoom, Google Meet, Gmail, and Facebook Messenger were utilized for

communicating through video and voice calls.


The interest and willingness of farmer-respondents to venture into farm tourism
were evaluated through survey questions integrated with the first phase of the study dealing
with agroforestry adoption. The same set and number of farmer-respondents in General
Nakar and La Libertad were surveyed for farm tourism. Embedded questions relating to
farm tourism measured each respondent's awareness and perspectives on the topic. Interest
and willingness to venture into farm tourism were evaluated through specific key questions

addressed in the survey instrument's final page (Appendix A).

Farm Tourism Survey and Tourism Potential Data Analysis

The farm tourism portion of the survey was analyzed using descriptive and
inferential statistics. STATA program was used to analyze socio-economic and
demographic data and the farmer respondents’ answers to the farm tourism portion.
Microsoft Excel was used to process the survey data and integrate the results.

Calculating each tourism criterion's final weights and comparing and ranking the
scores given by key informants were processed through an AHP Excel template (AHPcale
ver 2018-9-15) developed by Klaus D. Goepel. The file is open-access and can be retrieved
at http://bpmsg.com. In this analysis, the internal and external tourism potential criteria
were evaluated separately. The AHP template used consisted of input worksheets for pair-
wise comparisons, a sheet for the consolidation of all judgments, a summary sheet to

display the result, a sheet with reference tables, and a sheet for solving the eigenvalue


problem when using the eigenvector method (EVM). All the formulas were embedded in
the template for easy input and automated calculation and organization of data

The key informants used the finalized weights of each tourism potential criteria to
evaluate and score each site. Final scores of the sites were ranked together with details on
how it performed per criterion based on the inputs of each key informant. Internal and
external criteria subtotals were summed up to obtain each barangay site's final scores and
rank. Results and scores were organized and compiled in Microsoft Excel. Additional
information gathered from the key informant interviews was used to support the choices,

criteria scores, and ranking.

CHAPTER IV

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Study Sites

The study sites in the uplands became part of the CFV program’s pilot areas since
its implementation in 2007. General Nakar, Quezon; and La Libertad, Negros Oriental,
were among the pilot sites and were the main focus of this study. These agricultural areas
reflected the typical upland conditions of marginally degraded land areas with existing
farming communities. Therefore, CFV pilot sites like General Nakar and La Libertad
provided suitable environments wherein agroforestry and sustainable farming practices
could serve as the primary intervention for natural resources conservation and upland rural
development.

General Nakar is Quezon Province's northernmost municipality (Figure 13). It is
bordered on the north by Dingalan, Aurora; on the east by Polillo Strait; on the south by
Real and Infanta, Quezon; and on the west by Rizal, Bulacan, and Nueva Ecija Provinces.
General Nakar is known for its abundant natural resources attributed to its forests, which
account for 94% of its total land area. Several flora and fauna species thrive in the region.
Primarily agricultural, people are dependent on farming and fishing, which shifts to organic
farming of palay and vegetable production through the local government's efforts. As a

new industry, manufacturing is highly seen in herbal products and supplements by many


women in barangays as a livelihood potential. General Nakar also boasts several natural
tourist attractions, including fine sandy beaches, waterfalls, and springs, making it ideal for

nature trips, trekking, hiking, and camping.

@20.2

LAND COVER MAP
Municipality of General Nakar
Province of Quezon

Legend

[Jewry unto

terete tency

i rorery Forest

re |

(Gi Te Panton and Perens |

Mangrove est |
|

Figure 13. Map of CFV sites in General Nakar, Quezon (General Nakar LGU, 2016)


In the upland areas of General Nakar, where the land is not suitable for tilling by
carabao or tractor, upland farmers rely on manual tools to cultivate their land. The prevalent
use of both inorganic and organic (compost) fertilizers, debris burning, and cultivation
along the slopes were frequently observed in the area. Also, rice field patches in areas
where irrigation water is available can be observed in and around the municipality.
According to the National Statistical Coordinating Board, Quezon Province is the country's
No. 3 producers of coconut. Additionally, corn, cassava, citrus, and lanzones are common
and grown in the said province. These lands are cultivated mainly by farmers who already
own the land.

In the Visayas region, La Libertad's municipality was granted municipal status in
Negros Oriental in 1919. As an agricultural area, the 3 class municipality has 28
barangays and a total land area of 17,464 hectares. The barangays included in this study
are Aya, Elecia, Nasunggan, and Talaon (Figure 14). This region is heavily engaged in
agriculture and food crops such as peanuts, soya beans, rice, copra, and (a vast area planted
with) sugarcane. It is also common for La Libertad farmers to have several kinds of
livestock in their farms alongside crops and trees.

The study sites in La Libertad have steep hills, undeveloped and uncultivated fields,
and huge stones before CFV. The barangays of Nasunggan and Aya, and some parts of
Elecia, have areas with slopes ranging from 8% to 15%. Meanwhile, there are also parts of
Elecia and Nasunggan and minor parts of Aya that have 25% to 30% slope. The barangays’
land use is suitable for agricultural production and agroforestry, as it falls into the 0-18 %

slope range for the former and 18-30 % for the latter.


Figure 14. Map of CFV sites in La Libertad (La Libertad MPDO, 2017).

In the upland areas of La Libertad, landslides and soil erosion are expected due to
the effects of land conversion and logging. Flooding and landslides along roads are
experienced during strong typhoon disturbances. The landscape of the region contains
patches of farms and trees distributed in the uplands. La Libertad’s climate is classified as
Type III of Corona Climatic Type, with an absence of a very pronounced season but
telatively dry during November through April, and wet for the rest of the year (PIDS,
2015).


Demographic and Socioeconomic Characteristics of Farmer-Respondents

Age, Sex, and Civil Status

Table 8 shows the distribution of farmer-respondents by sex in all the barangay
study sites, indicating that 59.35% of farmer-respondents were male and 40.65% were
female. These results revealed that in CFV sites, farming was a male-dominated livelihood
which could be explained by the laborious processes required in upland farming, mainly
due to the slope and environment. On the other hand, in La Libertad and General Nakar, a
significant number of farmer-respondents were women indicating that they co-manage the

farms with their husbands, who often pursue temporary off-farm and non-farm job

opportunities.

Table 8. Distribution of farmer-respondents in barangays by sex.

FREQUENCY
General Nakar, Quezon La Libertad, Negros Oriental TOTAL
SEX = %
Magsikap Mynahan Matin ‘Aya Elecia Nasunggan Talaon noo
M 49 wal PS | 17 23 24 36 273 59.35
F 21 19 17 35 34 31 30 187 40.65
Total 70 90 70 52 57 55 66 460 100

Table 9 shows the distribution of respondents by age range, indicating that almost
one-third (28.04%) of the farmer- respondents belonged to 41-50 years old range. This
was followed by the age range of 31-40 years old (25.43%) and 51-60 years old (20.87%).

In general, the dominant age range of farmers suggested that most of them were still


productive and were actively involved in farming. It was important to note that there were
more younger farmers in General Nakar compared to La Libertad. On the other hand, there
were more older farmers at 60 years old and above age range in La Libertad (23.48%)
compared to General Nakar (8.26%). The results showed that succession of responsibility
or source of income was vital in family farms, and new and old farmers were both needed
to sustain farm production and development. The results showed that farmer-respondents

in La Libertad were generally older compared to General Nakar.

Table 9. Distribution of farmer-respondents by age.

AGE FREQUENCY TOTAL %
RANGE General Nakar La Libertad n=460
<30 44 19.13% 1 0.43% 9.78%
31-40 76 33.04% 41 17.83% 25.43%
41-50 52 22.61% 77 33.48% 28.04%
51-60 39 16.96% 57 24.78% 20.87%
>60 19 8.26% 54 23.48% 15.87%

Table 10 shows the distribution of respondents by marital status, indicating that a
vast majority (80.00 %) of all the farmer-respondents were married, with 79.13% in La
Libertad and 82.61% General Nakar. On the other hand, a few respondents were single in
General Nakar (12.361%) and La Libertad (11.09%). The approach to farming as a family
enterprise in the countryside has remained the same for the last few decades. Farm activities
become part of family activities as most farms steadily rely on family labor for upkeep and

farm production.


Table 10. Distribution of farmer-respondents by civil status.

CIVIL FREQUENCY TOTAL %
STATUS General Nakar La Libertad n=460

Single 29 12.61% 22 0.43% 11.09%
Married 190 82.61% 182 79.13% 80.87%
Separated 1 0.43% i 33.48% 2.61%
Widowed 10 4.35% 15 24.78% 5.43%

Household Size and Characteristics

In Table 11, more than half (55/65%) of the farmer-respondents have 1-3 children,
followed by 4-6 children (30.22%). A small portion of the surveyed farmers did not have
any child in La Libertad (9.13%) and General Nakar (5.22%). On the other hand, almost
7% of the farmer respondents have over 6 children (>6). This indicated the importance of
family labor and its size in farms throughout their production cycle. Family labor was the
most accessible resource of most farmers as the labor requirement of farm operations varied
throughout each production cycle. In addition, the household size and number of children
become critical as the head of the farm household ages, thus, requiring more help in terms

of labor and management.

Table 11. Distribution of farmer-respondents by the number of children.

NUMBER OF FREQUENCY TOTAL %
CHILDREN General Nakar La Libertad n=460
0 12 5.22% 21 9.13% T1M%
1-3 133 57.83% 123 53.48% 55.65%
4-6 59 25.65% 80 34.78% 30.22%

>6 26 11.30% 6 2.61% 6.96%



In terms of total household size, more than half (55.84%) of farmer-respondents
have 4-6 individuals residing in their house, followed by 1-3 range of individuals (25.87%)
as shown in Table 12. On the other hand, 18.26% of farmer respondents have over 6 (>6)
individuals residing in their households. Furthermore, the distribution of family members
depending on household characteristics (Table 13) indicated that over 95% of household
members of farmer-respondents were working. In La Libertad and General Nakar,
household members below 18 years old represented 85.22% and 72.61%, respectively,
indicating a significant expenditure on education. On the other hand, elderly household
members over 60 years comprised 19.13% and 25.22% of General Nakar and La Libertad
farmer respondents. Thus, results show that household size and age could significantly

influence succession in family farms.

Table 12. Distribution of farmer-respondents by total household size.

HOUSEHOLD FREQUENCY TOTAL %
SIZE General Nakar La Libertad n=460
1-3 49 21.30% 70 30.43% 25.87%
4-6 140 60.87% 17 50.87% 55.87%
>6 41 17.83% 43 18.70% 18.26%

Table 13. Distribution of farmer-respondents by household characteristics.

i FREQUENCY.
Household Characteristics Tineal Males Taisen
Households with member below 18 196 85.22% 167 72.61%
years old
Households with working members 227 98.70% 220 95.65%
Households with members older than 44 19.13% 58 20%

60 years old


Education

The distribution of farm respondents by education level is shown in Table 14.
Overall, less than one-third of the farmers (29.13%) reached elementary education, while
4.13% had no formal education. Conversely, only 24.78% of farmers in General Nakar had
elementary education compared to 33.48% of farmers in La Libertad. In General Nakar,
more farmers had reached high school level (24.78%) and graduated highschool (21.74%)
compared to La Libertad, which only had 19.13% and 13.48%, respectively. Overall, the
level of education of farmer- respondents indicated that farmers in the rural areas have
varying educational opportunities as the results showed that farmer respondents least attain
college level. Thus, the pursuit of higher education in upland farming communities

remained low and might be influenced by various socioeconomic and institutional factors.

Table 14, Distribution of farmer-respondents by educational level.

LEVEL OF FREQUENCY TOTAL %
EDUCATION General Nakar La Libertad n=460
No formal y y 7
ae 19 8.26% 0 0% 4.13%
Elementary Level 57 24.78% 1 33.48% 29.13%
Elementary 7 °
ementar 40 1739% 61 26.52% 21.96%
Highschool Level 57 24.18% 44 19.13% 21.96%
Pigiecioel 50 21.74% 31 13.48% 17.61%
Graduate

wu

College Level 2.17% 17 7.39% 4.78%

College Graduate 2 0.87% ) 0% 0.43%



Household Income and Expenditure

The majority (98.26% and 100%) of farmer-respondents indicated that farming
was still their primary source of income, as shown in Table 15. Combining farming with
off-farm activities and non-farm work accounted for 52.61% and 37.40% in General Nakar,
while 20.43% and 39.13% in La Libertad, respectively. The results also showed that more
farmers were involved in off-farm work in General Nakar than La Libertad, indicating
more extensive and more capable farms with the capacity to hire labor. Meanwhile, the
combination of three income sources accounted for 13.04% of farmer-respondents in
General Nakar and only 4.78% in La Libertad. Multiple income sources played an essential
role in maintaining a resilient household as the income in farming might have varied

depending on the crop, season, climate, and other externalities.

Table 15. Income sources of farmer-respondents in Quezon and Negros Oriental.

FREQUENCY
INCOME SOURCE General Nakar La Libertad
n=230 n=230
Farming 226 98.26% 230 100%
Farming & off-farm 121 52.61% 47 20.43%
Farming & non-farm 86 37.40% 90 39.13%
Farming & off-farm & non-farm 30 13.04% uf 4.78%

Table 16 shows more General Nakar farmer-respondents (80.87%) with a higher
annual income of over Php100,000 compared to La Libertad (41.74%). Meanwhile, over
50% of farmers in La Libertad had an annual income of Php99,999 and below compared

to just 19.13% in General Nakar. The differences in annual income could be explained by


the variety of income sources of each farming village. In addition, the size of land and type
of crop had a significant influence on farm household income as the investments and risks
differed.

Income and employment opportunities in terms of off-farm and non-farm work in
General Nakar and La Libertad areas varied. General Nakar has an advantage over La
Libertad in terms of employment opportunities due to many industries and services in
Infanta and Real, and other developed parts of Quezon that require human resources.
Similarly, La Libertad’s immediate surrounding towns in the north and south remain
predominantly agriculture-based, and therefore, do not offer many opportunities for non-

farm work.

Table 16. Distribution of farmer-respondents by annual income.

ANNUAL INCOME FREQUENCY TOTAL %

RANGE General Nakar La Libertad n=460
n=230 n=230

Less than Php 40,000 2 0.87% 13 5.65% 3.26%
Php 40,000- Php 59,999 24 10.43% 43 18.70% 14.56%
Php 60,000- Php 99,999 18 7.82% 78 33.91% 20.87%
Php 100,000- Php 249,999 112 48.70% 87 37.83% 43.26%
Php 250,000- Php 499,999 67 29.13% 9 3.91% 16.52%
> Php 00,000 7 3.04% 0 0% 1.52%

As mentioned by the interviewed La Libertad elected official, some farmers in the
uplands choose to move to Metro Cebu and work in the construction industry. At the same

time, their wives and relatives were left to cater to the farm. Alternatively, farmers’ wives


also opted to move to Metro Cebu and find employment as domestic helpers leaving behind
the husbands to cater to the farm. Such trends are still widely observed in La Libertad.
The household expenditure of farmer-respondents is shown in Table 17. This
included utilities, food, house repair and maintenance, education, and healthcare. It is
important to note that the expenditure data in Table 17 did not include the farmer
respondents’ inputs in farming and other investments such as farm equipment and vehicle.
More than 70% of farmer-respondents had an annual household expenditure of Php10,000
or less. On the other hand, less than 5% of the farmer-respondents had an annual household
expenditure of Php40,000 and above. The results showed the typical cost of basic living in
the upland farming villages, and this was further improved by the home consumption of a
portion of the harvested crops by the families of the farmers. Similarly, home consumption
was typical in terms of livestock, especially for swine and native poultry chicken. Thus,
home consumption helped the farmers to cut down on food expenditure while at the same

time making a profit on the surplus sold in the market.

Table 17. Distribution of farmer-respondents by annual household expenditure

ANNUAL HOUSEHOLD FREQUENCY TOTAL %
EXPENDITURE General Nakar La Libertad n=460
Less than Php 10,000 152 182 2.61%
Php 10,000- Php 20,000 28 27 11.96%
Php 20,000- Php 30,000 19 12 6.77%
Php 30,000- Php 40,000 20 5 5.43%
Php 40,000- Php 50,000 4 2 1.30%

> Php 50,000 7 2 1.96%

Farm Environment and Characteristics

Farm Size and Tenurial Status


In Table 18, farm sizes of farmer-respondents indicated that most lands ranged from

one to three hectares (65.65%) and qualify as smallholder farms. This was followed by

16.74% of farmer-respondents having four to six hectares of land. In La Libertad, there

were more farmer respondents with less than one hectare of land (10.43%) compared to

those who have over six (>6) hectares of land (5.65%).

Table 18. Distribution of farmer-respondents by farm size

FREQUENCY TOTAL %
ee General Nakar La Libertad n=460
Tess than Tha. ‘12 5.22% 2 10.43% 7.83%
1-3 ha. 141 61.30% 161 10% 65.65%
4-6 ha. 45 19.57% 32 13.91% 16.74%
>6 32 13.91% 13 5.65% 9.782%
Table 19. Distribution of farmer-respondents by tenurial status
FREQUENCY TOTAL %
TENURIAL STATUS ~~ General Nakar La Libertad n=460
Owned 201 183 83.47%
Rented 7 36 9.34%
Public 7 8 3.26%
Borrowed 17. L 1%

Meanwhile, over 33% of farmer respondents in General Nakar had more extensive

farmlands greater than four hectares (>4) compared to 19.56% in La Libertad. Finally, the


tenurial status is shown in Table 19, which indicated that the farmer-respondents owned

over 80% of these farmlands while only 9.34% were being rented.

Topography and Irrigation Source

Upland farmers in General Nakar and La Libertad were asked about their
perspectives on the topography of their farmland. Table 20 shows that almost 90% of
farmer respondents considered their farm to be on a moderate slope. On the other hand,
6.74% believe that their farms were on steep slopes. The study sites were generally located
on rolling to steep slopes (Figure 15-16). This kind of terrain and slope has many
implications for farming technologies applicable, suitable crops, and kind of irrigation.
Irrigation sources of farmer-respondents varied as those in La Libertad depended more on
spring and rainfall. Meanwhile, farmer-respondents in General Nakar depended more on
river and rainfall as irrigation sources, as shown in Table 21. In addition, some farmer-
respondents had access to piped water irrigation, as observed in General Nakar and La
Libertad. However, these were very limited to certain areas and did not cater to the rest of

the farming villages.

Table 20. Distribution of farmer-respondents by farm topography

FARM FREQUENCY TOTAL %
TOPOGRAPHY General Nakar La Libertad n=460
Flat 17 7.26% 1 0.43% 3.91%
Moderate 199 85.90% 212 92.17% 89.35%

Steep 14 6.84% 17 7.39% 6.74%


Table 21, Distribution of farmer-respondents by irrigation sources.

FREQUENCY
IRRIGATION SOURCE. ~ General Nakar La Libertad
Spring I 305
River 13 48
Rainwater 167 2
Irrigation 25 3
Others 0 0

Figure 15. Topography and vegetation of Aya (left) and Talaon (right) in La Libertad


Figure 16. Topography and vegetation of Magsikap (left) and Minahan Norte (right)
in General Nakar.

As shown in Figure 15-16, the topography of the study sites was comparable with
varying extent of vegetation cover. General Nakar’s landscape was full of thick forests and
abundant vegetation, while La Libertad had more grasslands with patches of trees and
mixed vegetation. La Libertad’s barangays ranged from 600-800 meters above sea level
and had many slopes greater than 15%. On the other hand, General Nakar’s study sites
were located 500 meters above sea level and had fewer areas with steep slopes of less than
18%. As a result, most upland areas rely on rainfall and natural sources of irrigation such

as spring and river because of the hilly and mountainous terrain.


Rainfall and Climate Change Perception

Farmer respondents were asked about their satisfaction level with the amount and
frequency of rainfall in their respective barangays in the last 12 months. The higher scores
in the 5-point Likert scale denote higher satisfaction levels with 5 being the highest and |
being the lowest. Figure 17 indicates that farmer respondents in La Libertad generally have
a higher rainfall satisfaction rating than General Nakar as shown by the number of positive
responses. General Nakar trailed behind with fewer positive results. Results also showed
that majority of the farmers in the study sites were satisfied with the amount and frequency
of rainfall. Table 22 shows the average monthly rainfall distribution in General Nakar and

La Libertad over the last 20 years.

140 128
80 67
60 3
40 2
20 ; 5 z
La Libertad General Nakar
aS 67 5
4 89 128
a3 1 80
m2 2 15
1 1 2

Figure 17. Rainfall satisfaction index of farmer-respondents using a 5-point Likert scale.


Table 22. Average monthly rainfall distribution in the two study sites (2000-2019).

AVERAGE RAINFALL (mm/month)

MONTH General Nakar La Libertad
January 368.48 107.24
February 305.89 82.98
March 257.58 77.24
April 145.79 46.05
May 212.21 90.89
June 213.38 151.18
July 276.77 154.78
August 183.88 112.73
September 254.21 116.86
October 493.47 159.87
November 578.09 148.56
December 712.34 129,20

‘Source: Climatological data from DOST-PAGASA (hitp://bagong. pagasa dost gov ph/climate/climate-data)

The average amount of rainfall every month was essential in these upland farming
villages as their livelihood depended on it. Lack of piped irrigation water had pushed the
communities to depend mainly on natural water sources such as rivers and springs for
agricultural and domestic use. Cropping patterns and distribution in the study sites were,
therefore, influenced by rainfall distribution. Extreme events that affect rainfall pattems
and other climatic variables such as sunlight and temperature significantly affected each
farm's productivity level and resiliency and the entire upland community.

Extreme events brought about by climate change had resulted in erratic rainfall,
extended dry spells, and a shift in climate pattems. Farmer respondents were asked if they
were noticing the effects of climate change in their region. The results in Table 23 indicate

that almost all (96.96%) of farmer- respondents agreed that they noticed the effects while


3.04% did not. Additionally, farmers were also asked if they are experiencing climate
change on their farms. Results showed that a vast majority (93.91%) of respondents
experienced the effects on their farm while 6.09% did not. Monitoring the impact of climate
change in the uplands is essential for regional and local government units to prepare and
strategize how to help and assist these upland farming communities, especially in disaster
situations. Experiencing the effects of climate change in farms indicated that respondents

may require additional support in capability building, credit, and technical services.

Table 23. Distribution of farmer-respondents by climate change experience.

NOTICING THE EFFECT OF FREQUENCY TOTAL
ce EReGON General Nakar LaLibertad |
Yes 228 99.13% 218 94.78% 96.96%
No 2 0.87% 12 5.22% 3.04%
EXPERIENCING THE EFFECT OF CLIMATE CHANGE IN OWN FARM
Yes 214 93.04% ~—«218~—«94.78% 93.91%
No 16 6.96% 12 5.22% 6.09%

Technical and Credit Support Services
Farmer respondents in General Nakar and La Libertad were asked in the survey
about the kinds of technical and credit support services that they had availed. Table 24

shows the breakdown of support services availed by farmers in study sites.


Table 24, Frequency of responses of farmers on technical support services availed.

FREQUENCY
SUN) General Nakar La Libertad
Training Programs 53 104
Livelihood Assistance 140 93
Credit and Financial Support 56 26
Seed/seedling supply 105 113
Information Materials 2 105
Livestock Dispersal 16 5
Others 0 0

Results showed that the top three support services availed by farmer respondents in
General Nakar were livelihood assistance, seedling supply, and financial support. On the
other hand, La Libertad farmers’ top three support services availed were seedling supply,
information materials, and training programs. These results could help guide decision-
makers on what additional supports were desirable depending on the farmers’ needs and
the time of the planting season.

In Table 25, the availability of credit services in the study sites and the type of credit
services availed by the farmer respondents are shown. Results indicated that farmer
respondents in General Nakar had more access to microcredit (73.04%) than La Libertad
farmers (65.65%). Interviewed farmers and FGD participants shared that the location and
distance of their barangays and farms had affected their ease of access to microcredit
services and loans. The type of credit services availed by farmer respondents were

primarily personal and agricultural loans, while emergency loans were minimal.


Table 25. Frequency of responses of farmer respondents on credit services information.

CREDIT SERVICES FREQUENCY.
AVAILABILITY General Nakar La Libertad
Available Microcredit 168 73.04% 79 34.35%
No microcredit, 62 26.96% 151 65.65%
TYPE OF CREDIT SERVICES AVAILED
Agricultural Loans 28 12.17% 37 16.09%
Personal Loans 54 23.48% 44 19.13%
Emergency/Calamity A on a med
Loans
Others 0 0% 0 0%

Agroforestry and Conservation Farming Technology

Farmer respondents in the CFV pilot sites had adopted a wide range of farming
practices over the years. Adopted agroforestry technologies and conservation farming
practices of farmer respondents showed that there were huge significant differences
between the number of adopted practices in La Libertad and General Nakar. Results
indicated that farmer respondents in La Libertad (1,110) implemented a higher number of
agroforestry practices than General Nakar (691). The top five technologies in La Libertad
were livestock raising (93.04%), contour composting (55.22%), contour hedgerow
(53.91%), rockwall (52.61%), and terracing (50.43%). Meanwhile, in General Nakar, the
top five technologies implemented were boundary planting (61.30%), contour composting
(58.26%), livestock raising (56.96%), organic farming (45.65%), and multistorey cropping
system (43.04%). These adopted technologies were implemented in combination with each

other,

Table 26. Distribution of adopted agroforestry practices by farmer respondents.

FREQUENCY n=460.
Sy General Naker La Libertad

Livestock Raising 131 56.96% 214 93.04%
Contour composting 134 —=—«58.26% 127 55.22%
Contour hedgerow 9 3.91% 124 53.91%
Rockwall 35 15.22% 121 52.61%
Terracing 1 0.43% 116 50.43%
Organic farming 105 45.65% 112 48.70%
Boundary planting 141 61.30% 107 46.52%
Multistorey 99 43.04% 105 45.65%
Mulching 36 15.65% 84 36.52%

Total 691 Total 1,110

The frequencies of agroforestry technologies implemented by farmer respondents
in La Libertad far outweighed those in General Nakar except for boundary planting
(61.30%) and contour composting (58.26%). A significant difference between the farming
practices of respondents was the high rate of livestock raising in La Libertad, which
accounted for 93.04% and only 56.96% in General Nakar. Furthermore, rockwall
(15.22%), terracing (0.43%), contour hedgerow (3.91%), and mulching (15.65%) all have

very low implementation rates in General Nakar study sites as opposed to more than double

in La Libertad.


Table 27. Ranking of implemented agroforestry technologies in each study site.

AGROFORESTRY TECHNOLOGIES RANKED

General Nakar n=230 La Libertad n=230
Boundary planting 61.30% Livestock 93.04%
Contour composting 58.26% Contour composting 55.22%
Livestock 56.96% Contour hedgerow 53.91%
Organic farming 45.65% Rockwall 52.61%
Multistorey 43.04% Terracing 50.43%
Mulching 15.65% Organic farming 48.70%
Rockwall 15.22% Boundary planting 46.52%
Contour hedgerow 3.91% Multistorey 45.65%
Terracing 0.43% Mulching 36.52%

Terracing (50.43%) and rockwall (52.61%) had high implementation rates among
farmer respondents in La Libertad, which had transformed their upland landscape through
the years. On the other hand, these technologies were not widely implemented in General
Nakar due to abundant natural forest cover that requires time in clearing up and the high
amount of labor inputs necessary on the existing land. As a result, boundary planting and
contour composting became more preferred by farmers in General Nakar as mentioned by
the interviewed farmer-leader. These required less labor compared to rockwall and
terracing and were found to be more suitable in Quezon.

The complete list of agroforestry system components of farms in Quezon and
Negros Oriental study sites indicated a wide variety of crops, trees, and livestock as shown
in Appendix G. A summary of these results indicating the top twelve kinds for each
component is shown in Table 28. Cassava (74.78%), taro (50.43%), and corn (42.61%)

were the most common cash crops for farmer respondents. Meanwhile, banana (81.52%),


jackfruit (48.48%), and mango (36.09%) were the most common fruit trees. It must be

noted that coconut was counted as a forest tree during the interpretation of survey results.

Table 28. Top twelve (12) components of each agroforestry system based on frequency.

AGROFORESTRY SYSTEM COMPONENT n=460
Cash Crops _%  FruitTrees % Forest Trees % Livestock %
Cassava 74.78 Banana 81.52 Coconut 70.22 Chicken 71.52,
Taro 50.43. Jackfruit 48.48 Mahogany 39.13. Swine 52.61
Com 42.61 += Mango -—-36.09-~=« Gmelina. © 26.30» Goat (31.52
Long beans 26.09 Calamansi 21.52 Acacia 23.04 Cattle. (29.57
Rice 23.48 Guyabano 21.09 Narra 17.83 Carabao 24.35
Yam 21.96 Cacao 20.65 = Lawaan © 8.48 Duck = 7.83
Chili 18.91 Avocado 19.13. = Molave = 5.87. Turkey 2.39
Ginger 15.22 Rambutan 18.04 KahoyDalaga 4,35 Goose 2.17
Bittergourd 13.48  Santol_ 14.35» Kawayan 4.13
Squash 12.17 Papaya 13.91 —Ipilipil 3.26
Pineapple 10.87 Makopa 13.26  Katmon —3.04
Bottlegourd 10.43 Lanzones 11.09 _Bagtikan 3.04

In terms of forest trees, results showed that coconut (70.22%), mahogany (39.13%),
gmelina (26.30%), and acacia (23.04%) were the most common forest trees in the farms of
the surveyed respondents. Meanwhile, the kinds of livestock owned by farmer respondents
showed that chicken (71.52%), swine (52.61%), goat (31.52%), cattle (29.57%), and
carabao (24.35%) were the five most common livestock. On the other hand, a number of
farmers in La Libertad and General Nakar raised duck (7.83%), turkey (2.39%), and goose

(2.17%). Interviewed farmer-leaders cited that owning livestock helped the farmers’ family


through home consumption and market sales. Furthermore, expensive livestock such as
carabao and cattle were also being used as insurance aside from farm labor as these could
be sold for a higher price compared to chickens, swine, and goats. The presence of a diverse
livestock in the upland farming villages offered a level of food security and guarantee to
the farm houschold in times of emergencies and disaster.

In La Libertad, a significant number of livestock sales were held in auction markets

such as the Solongon weekend farm market (Figure 18) where farmers and sellers meet.

Figure 18. Solongon weekend livestock market in La Libertad, Negros Oriental.


Adoption of Agroforestry Systems

CFV Farmer Respondent Profile

The summary of survey data results and descriptive statistics is shown in Table 29.
The results indicated that among the 460 CFV farmer respondents, majority (75%) used
livestock raising as agroforestry practice. This explained the average of 16 heads of
livestock that a farmer owned. The most preferred livestock was chicken (72%) followed
by swine (52%), goat (31%), and cattle (29%). Additionally, more than half of the
respondents preferred using contour composting (57%) and boundary planting (54%). On
the other hand, few have listed terracing (25%), mulching (26%), contour rockwall (34%),
and contour hedgerows (30%) as their implemented agroforestry technology. The rest of
the farmers used organic farming (47%) and multistorey cropping (45%).

In terms of plot characteristics, the soil was generally described as moderately
fertile (53%) under the category of moderate slope (90%), and moderately deep (81%). The
mean plot size of 2.81 hectares indicated that the land of most farmer respondents was
classified as smallholder farms. Moreover, 83% of the respondents owned the plot that was
being cropped. Likewise, the plot distance from the farmer’s house was 0.92 kilometers on
the average.

The socio-economic characteristics generally describe the farmer’s social standing
in terms of education, income, resources, household characteristics, and assets. The study
revealed that farmers had an average family size of five per household. Likewise, 20

relatives or families were living in the same village or barangay. Also, only two relatives,


‘on the average, were classified as “connections” because of their leadership position. The

mean age of farmers was 46 years old with seven years of education on the average.

Table 29. Definition and descriptive statistics of variables included in Multivariate

Probit Regression Model.

Dependent Variables Description Mean SD
Adoption of Contour Hedgerows as agroforestry
Contour Hedgerows fascias Ue er ost 0.30 0.46
. . ‘Adoption of Organic Farming as agroforestry
Organic Farming vechnology (I= yes; 00) 0.47 0.50
‘Adoption of Multistorey Cropping as agroforestry
Multistorey Cropping vechnology (1 “yeu dea0) 0.45 0.50
. ‘Adoption of Contour Composting as agroforestry
Contour Composting ease is oe 0.57 0.50
. ‘Adoption of Boundary Planting as agroforestry
Boundary Planting ems eee 0.54 0.50
Rockwall/Contour ‘Adoption of Rockwall/Contour Rockwall as ney aT
Rockwall agroforestry technology (1 = yes; 0 = no) ” a.
. a ‘Adoption of Livestock Raising as agroforestry
Livestock Raising technology (I = yes; =n0) 0.75 0.43
Adoption of Terracing as agroforestry technology (1
Terracing ayer; 00} 0.25 0.44
Mulching Adoption of Mlchin es azefoey technology (Ig 9g nm
Plot size ‘Area that is cropped/planted 2.81 3.32
Plot ownership (1 = owned, 2= rented, 3= public, 4
Tenure Sey 132 1.06
Plot Distance (km) Distance from residence/house (in kilometers) 0.92 1.44
Godfertplt (reference) _PetsePion tat plot has soot fertile soil (1 = yes; 0 0.46 0.50
Perception that plot has moderately frile soil (1 =
Modfertplt aes 0.53 0.50
Porfertplt Percent plots poor eile soil =3e8 0 gp am
Fltsipple (reference) eoeption that pot eta slope (1 = yes; 0 0.04 0.19
Modsipplt Perception that plot has. moverte slope (1 = yes; 0= 0.90 0.30
Stepsipplt Perception that plot has steep slope (1 = yes; 0 = no) 0.07 0.25
Shwdepplt (reference) Peon that pot eae deep soil (1 006 ne
Moddepsolplt Perception that plot ci a deep soil (1 = yes; 081 039
Depsolplt Perception that plot has deep soil(1=yes;0=no) 0.13 0.33
Kinship ‘Number of relative that farmer has in village 19.98 16.1



Table 29. Continued.
Dependent Variables Description Mean sD
es Number ofrelativels that farmer has in ic aT
leadership position
Trader ‘Number of traders that farmer knows 15.38 12.43
Distance Extnffe (km) Distance to agriculture extension office (in aoe Aen
kilometers)
Distance_Mkt(km) Distance to main market office (in kilometers) 24.29 9.72
Farmsize (ha) Total farm size (ha) 3.34 4.60
LnExpenditure Total expenditures 10294.01 1941.9
an Farmers confident in skill of extension agents pal a
(1 =yes; 0=n0)
pon Total asset value of farm equipment, household 95166 41 _49609,66

furiture, gadgets, and vehicle
Pests and disease are key problems (1 = yes; 0

Pestsdisease 00) 0.57 0.50

Salary Household member has salaried employment/ gy ea
nonfarm (1 =no)

Hisize Total family size (number) 4.83 2.93

oo Gender of household head (1 = male; 2 ve oe

female)

Age Age in years 46.28 124

Educ Education level (years of schooling) 6.87 3.18

Govtsup Household can rely on govemment during crop 4g cg Vo
failure (1 = yes; 0= no)

a Timely availability acess is a problem (1 Rey ne)

Livestock Total number of livestock owned 16.51 1755

ne Rainfall satisfaction index (1 = satisfied... fen

very satisfied)
Group Participation in farmer's group/association(1= 4g cg na

no)

In terms of non-farm employment, 62% of farmer respondents had a reliable
income aside from farming. On the average, a farmer had an asset value of Php 23,166.41
that included farm equipment, household furniture, gadgets, and vehicle. Meanwhile, Php
10,294.01 was accounted as the average household expenditure on food, utilities,

education, house maintenance, health services, and other household expenses.


The average size of land of farmer respondents was three hectares with an average
distance of 23 kilometers and 24 kilometers to the agri-extension office and main market
trade post, respectively. An average of 15 traders were identified by farmer respondents
inside and outside the community while 51% of farmers respondents expressed confidence
in skill and knowledge of agri-extension agents. This showed the important role of external
agents in the adoption of agroforestry systems and conservation farming practices.
Likewise, 58% of the farmer-respondents disclosed a positive response in terms of local
government support during crop failure and/or calamities. However, the farmer
respondents also stated some problems encountered in the farm such as pest and disease

(57%) and availability of fertilizer and pesticides (50%).

Multivariate Probit Model

Figure 19 summarizes the results obtained from the MVP model utilizing the
variables in Table X based on the farm household survey. The likelihood ratio test of Chi?
(36) = 75.0394, Prob > Chi? = 0.0001 denoted that there were two or more agroforestry
technologies being adopted by the farmers. As a result, the binary correlation showed that
some practices were complement in 16 of the 36 cases related. In addition to being
complements, some technologies were found to be substitutes. Furthermore, the correlation
coefficients showed that agroforestry systems adoption was not mutually independent. This
implied that the application of MVP was strongly suggested to further determine the factors
that affect adoption. Concerning the determinants of agroforestry systems adoption, the

results suggested that farmer respondents plot and socioeconomic characteristics were


significant in influencing the farm households’ decision to adopt agroforestry systems as

shown in Tables 30 — 31.

= Rockowall Livestock Raising Termactag,
semen
eovem
oes
2010290 088290
“an eo aor corm
eckson a aMeke
Bera 99 000) eo1@ns aio ean ai0eeH
Limit oa @onen oaroaiy) oai@e _anu@aie oreo _o10@on—

Termcieg 030/000)" -900(0927) 010(0026)% 00010573) -010(0030)%" 01910000) ¥¥4 030.0000)"

Muley 0021072 -001(0861) OO (0ADT) 04,0382) 015/000" 008(0:102) OIG 016000)

Lateed ne tat ab A = EE CEH PONS ACH ACH Pee Me hng = HMCOF = ECO POF = ROH = AAO pemcagF« in
Spete pate = Re =e» tcagNe “OPEC PERCE ACE=pomenee = PtLcLee = FORAY = PABR plea” HENLE
Teminch aagch “poche eae oem

conn sen
eb cu acon

Figure 19. Correlation coefficients for MVP regression equations (statistical significance
in parentheses).

The results of the MVP analysis in Figure 19 highlights the determinants of
agroforestry system adoption. It showed that the use of contour hedgerows and rockwall
were positively affected by the total size of the farm. However, both were negatively
affected by the plot size. This implied site-specific situations that might determine the
suitability of such technologies in agroforestry systems of smallholder farms. Additionally,
the positive coefficient of education in organic farming, contour composting, and terracing
explained that farmers were more willing and able to explore these practices even if it may
necessitate additional knowledge and a deeper understanding of technology specifics.

The results indicated that the level of education of the farmer was critical in

understanding the long -term and short-term benefits of adopting such technologies. These


results follow Huffman’s (2001) study that farmer education is a positive variable and
implies that better-educated farmers are more likely to build earthen bunds on their land, a
finding that is consistent with the notion that education is important in assisting farmers in
making decisions about adopting new innovations and technologies.

Table 30. Coefficient estimates of the multivariate probit model showing four
agroforestry technologies (standard errors in parenthesis).

Explanatory ‘Contour ‘Organic Multistorey ‘Contour
Variables Hedgerows Farming Cropping Composting
‘Age 0.005 (0.007) -0.004 (0.006) 0.004 (0.006) -0.001 (0.006)

Sex 0.182,(0.112) 0.170 (0.120) 0.110 (0.124) -0.050 (0.107)
Edue 0.058 (0.025)** 0.037 (0.021) 0.008 (0.021) 0.042 (0.021)**
Hisize 0.035 (0.043) 0.036 (0.029) -0.019 (0.028) -0.013 (0.022)
Salary 0.003 (0.072) 0.026 (0.048) -0.059 (0.068) 0.037 (0.062)
LnAssetval 6.000 (0.000) 0.000 (0.000) 0.000 (0.000) 0.000 (0.000)
LnExpenditure 0.000 (0.000) 0.000 (0.000) 0.000 (0.000) 0.000 (0.000)
Group 0.669(0.197)**** 0.206 (0.158) -0.027 (0.159) 0.005 (0.161)
Kinship -0.002 (0.005) 0.001 (0.004) 0.007 (0.004) 0.001 (0.004)
Connections 0.044 (0.048) 0.045 (0.034) 0.059 (0.034)* 0.083 (0.034)¢*
Trader 0.013 (0.007)* 0.006 (0.006) 0.000 (0.006) 0.006 (0.006)
Govtsup 0.048 (0.178) 0.099 (0.145) 0.233 (0.146) 0.235 (0.147)
Extenskill 0.219(0.174) 0.071 (0.147) 0.005 (0.150) 0.281 (0.152)*
Farmsize 0.241 (0.072)" 0.039 (0.047) -0.012 (0.050) 0.132 (0.078)
Distance_Exinffe 0.007 (0.021) 0.016 (0.014) 0.009 (0.015) 0.007 (0.014)
Distance_Mkt 0.044 (0.019)** 0.004 (0.014) 0.009 (0.014) 0.004 (0.014)
Rainfall -0.077 (0.103) -0.101 (0.089) 0.098 (0.090) -0.029 (0.090)
Fentavial 0.249 (0.159) 0.213 0.219)* 0.095 (0.132) 0.057 (0.133)
Pestdisease 0.318 (0.163)* 0.019 (0.132) 0.083 (0.134) 0.106 (0.135)
Livestock 0.006 (0.005) 0.000 (0.004) 0.000 (0,004) 0.001 (0.004)
Tenure 0.117 (0.130) -0.012 (0.060) 0.057 (0.060) 0.109 (0.066)*
Plotsize -0.419 (0.111)9#0* 0.067 (0.066) 0.037 (0.069) -0.134 (0.093)
Plot Distance 0.036 (0.066) 0.012 (0.043) -0.051 (0.045) 0.013 (0.045)
Modferplt -0.118 (0.162) 70.155 (0.133) 0.293 (0.135)** -0.077 (0.138)
Porfertpit 0.428 (0.645) 0.376 (0.485) 0.808 (0.524) -0.562 (0.496)

Modslpplt 0.169 (0.447) 0.146 (0.307) 0.373 (0.324) 0.470 (0.315)


Stepsipplt 0.196 (0.522) -0.242 (0.381) 0.286 (0.389) 0.130 (0.385)
Moddepsolpit 0.139 (0.352) 0.070 (0.269) 0.385 (0.280) 0.261 (0.273)
Depsolplt 0.439 (0.406) 0.086 (0.314) 0.161 (0.322) 0.030 (0.320)

*¥**P<0.001, ***P<0.01, **P<0.05, *<0..

Table 31. Coefficient estimates of the multivariate probit model showing five
agroforestry technologies (standard errors in parenthesis).

Explanatory Boundary Livestock ~
Variables Planting Rockwall Raising _Ter#eing__ Mulching
Age 0.006 (0.006) 0.004 (0.007) 9.009 (0.010) 0.013 (0.008) omnes

0.038 (0.125) 0.147

Sex -0.045 (0.109) -0.150(0.129)  0.055(0.170) ty
Educ 0.001 0.021) 0920822) gor (oor1y  9069{0028) DS,
Hisize o.o06,o.02s) “799603 gong coas2) oii (ose) (204?
Salary o.012(0045) 991794) p.923(0.047) 004700054) tty
LaAssetval 0,000,0.000) 9999999) g990(0.000)  0.000(0.000) O99)
LnExpenditure _0,000(0,000)** _ °900(9.000)"* 4.490 (0,000) 0.000 (0.000) * comtoy*
Group -0.226(0.161) 168-17) 9.398 (0.226) fala)
Kinship -0,006(0.008) “9.901 (-995) —-o.092,0,006) 0.011 (0.006)* 6 bps
Connections -0.031(0.035) 9570-037) 1.938 (0,049) -0.049 (0.056) Pi ea
Trader oon 00300007) g013(0.011) 0.014 (0.008)* on
Govtsup o.065(0.148 93815) gaso (0218) .0.231(0.193) (PO
Extenskill 0.162,0.152) 9987158) g.121 0.215) 0373(0.195)* Grey
Farmsize 0.024(0.060) 19795)" — -go79(0.110) -0.055(0.061) gn)
Distance Exinffe — -0.019(0.015) 5915) 90130018) 0.039(0.406)* O13)
Distance Mkt 00140014) 919915) garg aois) 900019) 9.008,
Rainfall 0138 (0.090) °079(099) 9.730.148) 0.005(0.019) 57)
revs 0025013 9414 g31340555) oss6eors) 22
Pestdisease 0.620.135) 95114) go sso.isiy  -0.023(0.179) GS tagy
Livestock -0.002,(0.004) 9904 (0005) 0.097.511) 4.006,0.006) (0.008)
Tenure 043 (0.073) 036

0.198 (0.122) 700.162) one



Table 31. Continued.

Explanatory Boundary Rockwall Livestock

Variables Planting Raising __‘Temacing Mulching

aca 0.042 (0.074) 0.192 (0.086)"" 0,094 (0.135) 0.018 (0.095) fe on
PloxDivnee — gorrcaoes) 99976) ggaseaos2) -o020.0081) gh,
Modest gages) 9140 gisacoa0) -aurscoim — (2
Porfertplt 0.270 (0523) 0491 (0545) g.gig (o.ggn) “1:202(0.603) i sn. ‘
Mosipot —aameoai, 993) ganease) comrass, (208%
Seri para eats) 249049 ooineoasr) oosiosss) 237%
Meiph —0380_ 8380021 gaprogyy 182038 aN
Depsolplt 75 (0.343) 0.558 (0.361) 1059 (0.480) 87: iC 406) ee

The negative significant coefficient of education in contour hedgerows implied that
farmers were aware of alternatives or substitutes that were better suited to their farm’s
production level and status, eventually resulting in a higher profit. A deep understanding
of the benefits of agroforestry and conservation farming requires an awareness of each
farming technology and its suitability in each upland farm. Farmer education and the
degree of diversification of the production system are important factors in agroforestry
adoption (Mahapatra and Michel, 2001). Furthermore, the availability of fertilizer was also
observed as positive determinant of organic farming in the CFV study sites.

As observed in La Libertad, the LGU regularly distributed organic fertilizer to
upland farming communities. This helped augment and strengthen the continued practice
of organic farming in the uplands, which could be susceptible to pests and diseases. A study

of traditional agroforestry systems in Sudan by Gibreel (2013) show that farmers with


access to credit and more education are more likely to adopt the technology. Fertilizers are
unquestionably necessary in crop production; yet, by subsidizing them without supporting
other soil and water conservation measures such as agroforestry technologies, governments
create an unsustainable system that do not benefit soil fertility in long term (Place et al.,
2012). It is therefore important to support farming innovations that that improve soil
fertility and overall soil conditions.

The positive coefficient of expenditure was likewise significant for boundary
planting, rockwall, terracing, and mulching, as shown in Table 31. This indicated that
adopting these sets of practices could lead to significant livelihood benefits and increased
farm productivity, thereby increasing the purchasing power of upland farmers as shown by
expenditure. Enhancing the purchasing power of farmers through the adoption of
agroforestry systems was one of the main goals of the CFV program. Additionally,
mulching also included age and distance of plot from the house as positive determinants.
This indicated that the household's proximity to the farm and age of farmer influenced
adoption of labor-intensive practices such as mulching. Farmers living in or near their
cultivated lands could tend better to their farms and have the convenience to monitor their
crops and livestock easily. Farmers’ approaches to farm tree planting alter over time as their
experience grows, their fields vary, and their household resources rise or diminish as they
become older (Bannister and Nair, 2003)

The number of relatives that had a leadership position was significant in multistorey
cropping and contour composting. Access to information and farm labor were influenced

by this variable and indicated improved social capital on the part of the farmers. In addition,


kinship (number of relatives in a village) and pest disease were positive determinants of
terracing and contour hedgerows. In a study in Malawi by Tangata and Alavalapati (2003),
the differences between adopters and non-adopters of agroforestry systems suggest that the
age of the farmers, extension contact, and the number of people contributing to farm work
are all important factors in the adoption process.

As a positive determinant of contour hedgerows and terracing, kinship could be
explained by the availability of extra labor and assistance through farm inputs, as a result
of having many relatives in the same village. This introduced a layer of security in the form
of insurance roles provided by the network of relatives and those in leadership positions in
the LGU and farmers’ organizations (Kassie et al., 2013).

Meanwhile, pest and diseases as positive determinants indicated that agroforestry
systems benefit those with pest and disease infestations. In addition, the continued
adoption of agroforestry could help improve soil fertility and farm production, especially
in upland marginal lands with resource-poor farmers. By using agroforestry to replenish
soils, safeguard water catchments, restore landscapes, and conserve biodiversity, millions
of peasant farmers around the world may possibly reverse land degradation, benefit the
environment, and improve their incomes (Garrity, 2004; Reubens ef al., 2011).

Farmers’ membership in organizations and distance of farm to the market trade post
were both found to be positively influencing terracing and contour hedgerows. Benefits
obtained by farmer respondents from their respective farming cooperatives or
organizations might include ease of access to farm inputs such as seeds, and fertilizers in

addition to technical assistance and support from other members. Improvement of social


capital of farmers through organizations and networks could also be linked to stable market
prices through coordinated cropping patterns and stronger bargaining power that affect the
pricing of vegetables and other produce. Social capital increases economic growth and
helps economic and community development, according to evidence (Narayan and
Cassidy, 2001; Woolcock and Narayan, 2000).

Participation in formal and informal networks, registered social groups or
community-based organizations, and social movements can all help build social networks
(Woolcock, 2001; Aker, 2007). As a result, investing in collective action/participation
activities based on social capital-trust, with the expectation of reciprocity, and through
mutual cooperation and coexistence, sharing of useful information among members can
definitely help in pushing for uptake and adoption of improved agricultural technologies
in order to achieve increased production output, better income, and welfare, as a result of
increased production output, better income, and welfare (UNDESA, 2018).

Terracing and contour hedgerows were positively influenced by distance of farm to
market trade post particularly due to the ease of transport and access to the markets.
Productive farms with terracing and contour hedgerows could easily market their products
after each harvest due to the proximity of the main market trade post. This is crucial as
crop prices are determined by factors such as annual crop output, product quality, and
farmers’ ability to negotiate pricing, according to Do et al (2020). Farm-to-market roads
had been proven to be beneficial to farms and thus became one of the significant priorities

for development of local government units.


Likewise, the number of traders that a farmer recognizes was a positive determinant
of contour hedgerows, terracing, and boundary planting. A wide network of traders in the
immediate locality and region provided several advantages to the farmers, such as access
to credit, inputs, information, and stable market-outlet services to their farms and, in effect,
provided long-term benefits to the farm household. Based on Carter’s (2005) study, a
farmer will not change his production system until he is confident in his marketing
prospects and as a result also be hesitant to make or maintain agroforestry investments if
prices change significantly. It is therefore critical to have several traders in the network of

the farmer in order to gain better market insights. As cited by the interviewed municipal

agricultural officers, price stability and group pricing of farm produce could be influenced
by social capital-related variables such as group, kinship, connections, and traders.

The MVP results also indicated that farmers’ confidence in the skill of agri-
extension agents was positively affecting the adoption of terracing and contour
composting. However, these agroforestry systems were relatively knowledge-intensive and
demand a significant amount of management involvement at the farm level. This
emphasizes the importance of enhancing civil servant/extension staff performance and
government support service delivery at the local administrative level in order to hasten the
implementation and adoption of agroforestry systems.

In the acquisition of informal education, the regularity with which farmers interact
with extension personnel is critical (Salam, et al., 2000; Adesina and Chianu, 2002). As a

result, the effectiveness of agricultural extension services and information dissemination


are critical in the development of farmers’ human capital, as well as their decision-making
and farm management activities.

In terms of plot characteristics, the farmer's perception of the depth of soil of his
farm was found to be a significant determinant of the adoption of boundary planting and
terracing. Sloping marginal lands with poor to average soil conditions are suitable for
agroforestry systems. Farmers gain benefits from these conservation farming practices and,
as a result, continued to implement such technologies.

A study by Bullock et al. (2013) measured the influence of socio-economic
characteristics, physical and financial assets, tenure security and plot-specific attributes on
the adoption of conservation farming practices and results suggest that tenure security
significantly affected the adoption of organic farming. The production process of food
crops and tree farming is linked to biophysical features, particularly soil quality and slope.
In general, poorer biophysical production conditions (plots with low soil fertility for food
crop production or those that are more prone to erosion) are likely to be positively
associated with tree planting (Pattanayak, et.al., 2003).

Tenure and the farmer’s perception of soil fertility of his land were found to be
positively affecting farm household decisions to adopt and continue to implement
multistorey cropping and contour composting in the CFV study sites. These agroforestry
systems were labor intensive and required long-term planning to reap the benefits. Given
that long-term investments reap benefits over time, this intertemporal feature indicated that
stable land access or tenure through land ownership was a positive determinant on adoption

decisions. The capacity of households to produce sustenance and generate market surplus,


as well as their social and economic position, is controlled by tenure, according to
Deininger and Feder (2001). Land rights also impact activities that make the most efficient
use of land and create incentives for adopting innovations and technology, according to the
authors.

In 2012, Place’s study indicated that land privatization has a good influence on
long-term investment incentives, but limited rights can exist if short-term land transactions,
such as land rental, become popular. Furthermore, results indicated that farmers preferred
to use long-term soil fertility enhancements such as contour composting on their own farms
by adopting agroforestry systems instead of using chemical fertilizers. Thus, farmers’
ownership of the lands they cultivate incentivizes them to invest on long-term agroforestry
systems that benefit not only their land but also the environment of upland farming
communities.

Lastly, the MVP results indicated that the number of livestock heads and kinds of
livestock that each farmer possesses positively influenced the adoption of livestock raising
and its integration into the farm. As discussed earlier, livestock raising provided food
security through home consumption and the sale of surplus to willing buyers in the market.
While agroforestry adoption comes with risk, other investments, such as livestock raising,
are frequently viewed as insurance (Reubens ef al., 2011). As a result, agroforestry systems
that integrate tree, crop, and animal systems are more resilient to fluctuations in output and
pricing, improving overall profitability. Risk minimization is consequently critical, not just
profit maximization, especially for food insecure farmers in the uplands (Jemeck and

Olsson, 2013).


Determinants of Agroforestry System Adoption

The summary of results obtained from the multivariate probit analysis of survey
data is shown in Table 32. Plot and socioeconomic characteristics were further divided into
three subclasses: biophysical characteristics, institutional and policy factors, and household
characteristics. Key informant interviews and FGDs with farmers gave further insights into

the intricacies of agroforestry system adoption in the CFV study sites.

Table 32. Summary of determinants of agroforestry system adoption in CFV study sites.

Biophysical Characteri

Soil Depth Shallow, moderate, and deep soil
Soil Fertility Poor, moderate, good fertile soil
Institutional and Policy Factors
Tenure Plot ownership
Extension Skill Farmers’ confidence in skill of extension agents
Household Characteristics
‘Age ‘Age in years of farmer (household head)
Education Education level (years of schooling)
Expenditure Total household expenditures
Group Participation in farmer’s group/association
Household Characteristics
Connections Number of relatives in leadership positions
Number of traders inside and outside the
Trader ‘
municipality
Kinship Number of relatives in the village
Farm Size Total farm size (hectares)
Fertilizer Availability Timely availability of fertilizer is a problem
Livestock Total number of livestock owned
Distance to Market Farm distance to main market office (in kms)

Distance to Agri-Extension Office Farm distance to agri-extension office (in kms)
Pests and Diseases Pests and diseases are key problems



Biophysical Characteristics

Soil conditions relating to soil depth and soil fertility were found to be significant
determinants of agroforestry systems. Shallow to moderate soil depth and poor to moderate
soil fertility conditions indicated a strong determinant to implement soil conservation
measures that were suitable and could be integrated in upland farms. The interviewed
farmer-leader in General Nakar cited that farmers aimed to generate income from their
marginal lands through the adoption of sustainable farming systems such as agroforestry.
A number of farm lands that had been passed down from generations of families in General
‘Nakar and La Libertad had been observed to suffer from poor soil conditions brought about
by debilitating climate conditions and unsustainable farming practices. Some of these

upland marginal lands were common, especially in Aya in La Libertad (Figure 20a/b).

Figure 20a. Agroforestry farms constitute Barangay Aya’s marginal lands in Negros
Oriental.


Figure 20b. Agroforestry farms constitute Barangay Aya’s marginal lands in Negros
Oriental.

Lack of opportunities and other valuable uses of marginal lands in upland farming
villages had been cited as one of the reasons for the interest in developing and improving
the soil conditions of farms. In La Libertad, the municipal agriculture officer shared that
farmers in their upland villages had long since adopted a mixture of sustainable farming
practices and soil conservation measures (Figure 21a and 21b), especially in logged over

areas and farms on steep slopes. Despite its poor soil conditions, maxit

ing land use in
upland farming villages had resulted in the exploration and trial of agroforestry systems by

earlier farmer-adopters and farmer-volunteers.


Figure 21. Various agroforestry systems in the upland farming villages of La Libertad.


Agroforestry plots and systems may differ significantly in plant composition,
planting layouts, and stand densities in such diverse natural endowments, with a diversity
of socio-cultural norms and practices (Nair, 2011). Furthermore, Reubens et al (2011)
pointed out that plant performance and utility may differ depending on needs, conditions,
and expertise in different areas, Determining the need for adoption and confirming the
success of agroforestry systems, together with the specific set of technologies and
practices, rely on addressing site specific situations such as poor and marginal soil
conditions. Observable gains from soil conservation measures and the increase in farm
productivity contributed to the diffusion of these sustainable systems in upland farming

villages such as the CFV sites.

Institutional and Policy Factors

Tenurial status of the farm and skill of extension agents/civil servants were
significant determinants of the adoption of agroforestry systems based on the MVP
analysis. The importance of tenure security for the adoption and diffusion of agroforestry
systems was verified during focus group discussions and interviews with farmer-leaders.
The interviewed municipal agriculture officer shared that farmlands that farmers own
instead of being borrowed or rented tended to have long-term investments in strategies to
cope with their daily production and food security.

One of the farmer leaders also added that farmer-rented farmlands were often not
as diverse and complex in terms of production and cropping systems compared to farmer-

owned lands. Since farmers could reap benefits over a long time, public policies that


improve land tenure security would likely encourage them to pursue long-term investments
such as ornamental-based agroforestry farms in General Nakar (Figure 22). According to
Pastur ef al. (2012) and Xu ef al. (2012), farmers who recognize the benefits of agroforestry
are more likely to implement particular techniques into their farming methods if they can

afford it.

Figure 22. Agroforestry farms in CFV sites of General Nakar, Quezon.

Effective local governance and institutions (LGUs, NGOs) were also necessary to
secure access to land and guaranteed property rights in order to promote investments in

agroforestry systems and increase farm productivity and household income while


conserving natural resources. Large investments with substantial time lags, such as
agroforestry interventions, can be beneficial if they are supported by enabling
environments that provide stable land tenure, support for long-term land use practices, and
a variety of short-term livelihood possibilities (Sain ef al., 2017).

In the FGD, farmer -respondents in both General Nakar and La Libertad echoed
that tenurial rights were valuable for them because it enabled them to increase and extend
their asset holdings and were key to improving livelihood and sources of income. In
addition, several farmers mentioned that rented and/or borrowed farm lands may lead them
for short term benefits and faster return of investments, thereby pushing them to use
chemical fertilizers and pesticides, thereby avoiding farming systems with long gestation
periods and higher labor requirements, such as conservation farming and agroforestry
systems. The interviewed farmer leader added that while tenurial rights serve a variety of
economic and social purposes, it was intertwined with social values and relationships, and
it may also determine social, economic, and political power in the farming community.

The skill of extension agents/civil servants was an important determinant in the
adoption of agroforestry systems in CFV study sites. The extension agent's role is to
provide the knowledge and skills that a farmer needs to understand and make an informed
decision about a particular innovation such as cropping systems and value-added products

from harvested raw materials (Figure 23).


Figure 23. Cocofiber by-products made by Barangay. Magsikap farmers in General
Nakar.

Extension staff and other change agents may come from a combination of national,
provincial, or municipal extension services. The agent received formal training and
professional knowledge and information, which they must then pass on to the farmers. In
this critical role, the agent’s job is expected to be organized and based on existing
government policies, rural development programs, and local ordinances. This indicated
that the skill and effectiveness of extension agents and civil servants go hand-in-hand with
the institutions they represent such as the LGUs, NGOs, and other government agencies.

Farmer-respondents in La Libertad indicated that, in addition to their confidence in
the skills of extension staff from the municipal agriculture office, they were also aware of
the reliability of their government support (LGU) in the form of trainings, services, crop
insurance, and free agricultural inputs throughout the year. On the other hand, several
farmers in General Nakar lamented the fragmented distribution of agri-extension support

to upland farmers and the lack of continuous focused support on agriculture and farm


development, especially for different sectors such as indigenous peoples, women, and low-
income groups.

The skill of extension agents is critical in bridging the gap between farmers and the
network of government agencies and organizations both agricultural and non-agricultural
in order to properly communicate and address the specific needs of the farming community.
Extension services and the skill of extension agents are useful for laying the groundwork
for strategies such as improving public awareness of farming innovations and livelihood
development opportunities. Effective local governance and support mechanisms are
necessary to operationalize extension agents in hastening the adoption of innovations and
implementing upland development programs. Farmers can adjust or adapt agroforestry
technologies to their own needs during the adoption process. Instead of switching from a
monoculture system to an altogether new agroforestry system, which could require a
substantial investment and diminish short-term earnings from the land, a gradual transition
to agroforestry could be a viable option, especially for resource-strapped farmers (Do ef
al., 2020).

Extension and credit services are crucial institutional support mechanisms that can
positively affect farmers’ adoption decisions. Extension programs, in particular, help
farmers become more aware of advancements in farming systems by embracing several
farm innovations; as a result, farmers who had access to extension services were more
likely to adopt new farm technologies (Mariano et al., 2012; Ghimire et al., 2015; Donkor

et al., 2016).


In General Nakar, extension services included free veterinary medicines,
supplements, and consultation services for livestock in addition to free seeds, farm tools,

and planting materials, Regular workshops and trainings on value-added farm products,

pest management, and subsidies on fertilizers and other agricultural inputs were cited by
farmers in Quezon and Negros Oriental study sites as their top necds from LGU extension
services. In addition, financial assistance and aid in transporting their harvest to the market
place had also been cited as the priority needs of upland farming villages in the study sites
due to the cost of transport. In La Libertad, the LGU has assigned one truck (Figure 24) to

each burungay to transport their villages’ harvest to the lowland markets on a regular basis.

il

Figure 24. Transport vehicle used by upland barangays in La Libertad.

Skills of extension agents are also important in strengthening the human resource
capacity of farmers’ organizations through governance and Icadership training and in
capacitating farmer-leaders and officers on soft skills such as organizational and financial
management and technical knowledge on farming innovations. The adoption and diffusion

of farming innovations such as agroforestry systems were strongly connected to extension


agents' skill and the kinds of extension services their institutions provide to upland farming
villages. Government support and subsidies are necessary, especially during disasters and
crop production failures as it will maintain the productivity of the farm and prevent closure
and complete abandonment. Small-scale farmers can estimate and accept the risk of
agroforestry adoption, but the uncertainties are difficult, if not impossible, to evaluate
(Jerneck and Olsson, 2013).

Household Characteristics

Age, Education, and Plot Distance to House. These factors were found to be
determinants of agroforestry adoption. Age, as a determinant, indicated that older farmers
may not prefer labor intensive systems due to the laborious operations involved.
Furthermore, it may also be possible that older farmers would not pursue investments in
cropping systems with long-term return of investments. As a result, they may opt for a
different set of sustainable practices suitable to their needs and situation. The interviewed
farmer-leader pointed out that new families with a younger generation of farmers could be
more active and intensive in farm planning and production. As a result, they could reap
more benefits than older farmers who may have different priorities and plans for their farm.
Farmers with limited resources must frequently prioritize their families’ urgent needs and
do not have the luxury of making short-term income compromises (Do et al., 2020). The
daily upkeep and operations of farm management and maintenance were expected to take

its toll on ageing farmers and influence their adoption decisions.


Plot distance to house/residence was also found to be a significant determinant of
adoption of agroforestry systems. Close proximity of the farmer’s house to his actual farm
was beneficial for ease of access and daily monitoring of crops and livestock. As discussed
earlier, ageing farmers had difficulty in the day-to-day operations of farms once they
reached a certain age. If they are housed near or in the farm itself, it would be an advantage
and, therefore, it would be easier for them to practice and implement conservation farming
and agroforestry systems. In addition, the home consumption of farm produce also benefits
from the closer plot distance of the farm to the residence of the farmer. This helped the
farm household reduce possible transport costs and other inconveniences when moving
harvested crops to their homes. According to the farmer-leaders interviewed, the
integration of the farmer’s house in the farm itself benefitted the family through easier
management and oversight of the farm thereby influencing investment of conservation
farming practices and agroforestry systems.

Education, on the other hand, influenced the adoption of agroforestry systems
through a systematic and effective understanding of innovations, thereby allowing farmers
to reproduce the technology and gain more insights upon implementation properly. In
addition, the municipal agriculture officer and farmer-leaders agreed that educated and
trained farmer-innovators were critical in setting an example and trend for less-educated
and less-experienced farmers in their community to be more receptive and explore
conservation farming and agroforestry systems.

Farmers! cognitive and managerial skills can be improved by formal education,

particularly at the secondary level. This allows farmers to mix field inputs more effectively,


resulting in increased rice yields (Donkor et al., 2018). They also added that these educated
farmers have a higher tendency to adopt an innovation earlier (early adopter) compared to
other farmers. Farmer-participants in the FGD shared that educated farmer-innovators were
better in copying or reproducing the innovation in detail for others to study and learn from,
thus, facilitating the diffusion of innovation in the upland farming village.

Group, Connections, Kinship, and Trader. Participation in farmers’
groups/associations, number of relatives in leadership positions in the community, number
of relatives in the village, and number of traders that the farmers know inside and outside
the municipality were all found to be determinants of agroforestry system adoption. These
determinants fall under social capital and networks and serve multiple economic and
societal benefits to the farmer, thereby positively influencing his adoption and continued
use of agroforestry systems. Group, connections, and kinship create a safety net for the
farmers through an insurance role and support system that they provide in the community
particularly to each member of the group or to each relative in the village.

The farmers and their farms benefitted from having strong social capital and
networks due to ease of access to information, farming technology, extension and credit
support services, and labor assistance. Farmer- participants and farmer-leaders in the FGD
added that strong community ties benefit everyone in the village through various forms of
collaborations and support they provide such as the bayanihan system. Furthermore, the
introduction of agroforestry systems through farmers’ groups and connections became the
gateway for adoption due to the power structure and level of influence exerted by these

groups in the community as cited by farmers and farmer-leaders. Farmer -groups also


possessed greater bargaining power with market traders and subsequently gained stable
market outlets for their produce.

Cooperatives, with clear leadership structures and consistent commitments from a
large number of farmers, provide prospects for more uniform agricultural commodity
production (Do ef al., 2020). They can thus promote a consistent supply of high-quality
products, allowing farmers to enter markets that would otherwise be out of reach and
increasing the chances of stable and high sale prices (Islam et al., 2018).

The number of traders known by a farmer or farmers’ group was also a significant
determinant of adoption. Farmers could gain multiple benefits from having a wide network
of traders both inside and outside the municipality. Traders were willing buyers of bulk
produce being marketed by the farmers and their groups. Deals and agreements could be
created between the trader and the farmers, and these would have some form of support
such as access to credit and farm inputs in exchange of an agreed amount of harvest as
cited in the farmer participants in the FGDs. Farmer leaders interviewed shared that good
traders help farmers by buying their produce at a reasonable rate thereby helping the
sustainability of their farms. This strengthened the livelihood of farmers and contributed to
their adoption of sustainable farming systems such as agroforestry.

The interconnections of group, connections, kinship, and traders as determinants of
agroforestry system adoption pointed to reduced transaction costs, improved access to
information, and increased market integration of farmers within the network. Knowledge

of the market is important because it can assist determine whether agroforestry


interventions have the potential to saturate it, lowering prices (Carter, 1995). It can also
assist in identifying demands that agroforestry could meet.

According to Fisher (2013), trust is the catalyst that allows information to be
transformed into useful knowledge and is critical in adoption and diffusion. Social
networks, on the other hand, bridges the gap between the supply of new technologies and
the enterprises that may adopt them and is crucial in any extension program (Michels and
Nolan, 2016). In view of climate change and sustainable farming systems, it is therefore
critical to support these organizations, local institutions, and service providers because they
create market opportunities and strong support mechanisms to upland farming villages and
the aid being given by the local or provincial government. The presence of these networks
reinforces the adoption agroforestry and conservation farming systems and its long-term
sustainability.

Farm Distance to Market and Farm Distance to Extension Office. These
variables were significant determinants of agroforestry system adoption in the CFV study
sites. It must be noted that both General Nakar and La Libertad study sites were considered
to be located in far flung areas of the countryside and would require 1-2 hours vehicle travel
from the center of their respective towns. Farm distance to market was important to the
sustainability of agroforestry systems because it has huge impacts on the level of market
access and penetration of the farms’ produce.

Road access and farm to market roads play a crucial role in improving connectivity

to upland farms, However, as cited by the municipal agricultural officer, the quality and


extent of gravel and cemented roads (Figure 25) in the uplands could vary and further affect

the accessibility of farms and markets in addition to rainfall and weather variables.

Figure 25. Roads in La Libertad (left) and General Nakar (right).

The close proximity of a farm to a market trade post also presented a huge
advantage to a farmer because it facilitated the ease of access to traders and other buyers
including up-to-date market information on the prices of farm produce. In addition,
transport costs of both farm inputs and harvests were expected to be lower due to the closer
distance between the farm and the markets, thus increasing the profitability of farm
products sold. Adoption is likely to be influenced positively by a market element that is
predicted to boost the net benefits associated with the technology or crop (Ayele, 2008).

Similarly, farm distance to extension office was a significant determinant of
agroforestry system adoption as it was expected to improve access and communication
with the local municipal extension office. As discussed earlier, extension agents and

government support services to farmers were crucial in the diffusion of innovations such


as sustainable farming systems. A farm’s distance to the agri-extension office together with
toad access and accessibility variables indicated that close proximity was beneficial to the
farmer. Farmer-leaders shared that farms located near main access roads and those in
common roads easily obtained farm inputs such as seeds, tools, and planting materials
supplied by the extension office. In addition, access to extension support and government
subsidies and aid was easier when farms were located near the extension office or was
situated in an accessible location.

Farm Size, Expenditure and Livestock. The MVP analysis indicated that farm
size, total household expenditure, and livestock were significant determinants of
agroforestry system adoption in the study CFV study sites. Farm size was one of the factors
that determines the layout, size, quantity, and arrangement of components and systems in
the farm. Larger farms, therefore, had a higher capability and carrying capacity for
conservation farming and agroforestry systems. In addition, extensive landholdings owned
by large families could adopt agroforestry systems on a larger scale and have a higher
flexibility in combining long-term and short-term cropping systems such as variations in
the SALT system. On the other hand, smallholder farmers are risk averse, preferring low-
investment conservation farming technologies with high-predictability of economic returns
and as a result, they are less likely to adopt new technologies with unknown costs, crop
yields, and output prices compared to traditional practices (Do er al., 2020).

As cited by the municipal agriculture officer, this kind of flexibility greatly
improved the income and profitability of farms when coupled with appropriate planning

and selection and rotation of cropping patterns. When farm size is large and labor


availability is restricted, farmers may be more ready to employ low-intensity agroforestry
technologies; farmers may grow more interested in high-yielding but labor-intensive
methods like alley cropping or highly productive home gardens as farm sizes diminish
(Glover e¢ al., 2013).

Asa determinant of agroforestry systems, farm size also provided a form of security
through an insurance role. One of the farmer leaders shared that they once pawned a 7-
hectare parcel of their 15-hectare farmland back in the 1990s to sustain farm operations.
Fortunately, they were able to recover it entirely after 10 years. Many previous studies have
confirmed that market failures and disasters have negative impacts on farming systems’
profitability and productivity. As a result, larger farms could utilize a portion of their land
to guarantee debts or loans and other forms of financial or credit arrangements. This
reinforced the resiliency of farm households to market shocks and impacts of disasters and

provided an alternative source of capital to augment and continue farm operations.

Figure 26a, Brgy. Elecia in Negros (top) and Brgy. Magsikap in Quezon (bottom),


Figure 26b. Brgy. Elecia in Negros (top) and Brgy. Magsikap in Quezon (bottom).

Total household expenditure was a significant determinant of agroforestry system

adoption in the study sites. Expenditure included annual costs on utilities, education,

health, house repairs, and other miscellaneous costs that indicated farm households’
purchasing power. This showed the household’s financial capability to maintain a high
level of expenditure on a yearly basis. Multiple sources of income from farming, and on-
farm and off-farm jobs provided farm households with stable source of income as shared
by farmer-participants in the FGDs. Such financially stable households would have an
easier way of adopting agroforestry systems compared to other farmers. Farmers who are
unable to produce enough food for their subsistence and who rely on cash payments to

cover a variety of expenses engage in irregular commercial non-farming activities to

‘supplement their revenues (Gabrielsson and Ramasar, 2012).


Furthermore, households with high annual expenditures were expected to increase
their farms' diversity and productivity, thereby adopting a combination of conservation
farming and agroforestry systems. According to the farm-leader, these households were
also receptive to new innovations and farm technologies due to their financial stability as
a result of long-term investments in farming and multiple sources of income such as non-
farm employment (e.g. Barangay Captain, LGU staff/officer, etc.).

The number of livestock in farms was found to be a significant determinant of
agroforestry system adoption. In the FGD, farmer-participants cited four (4) benefits of
livestock raising to their farms and households, namely: home consumption, surplus/direct
sale to the market or trader, an alternative source of farm inputs (organic fertilizer), and
animal services such as grazing/weed control for poultry and some livestock, and draft
power and transport for carabao/cattle. According to the farmer-leaders interviewed, the
presence of livestock dramatically improved the quality of life and livelihood of upland
farmers due to the multiple benefits that could be obtained as it became integrated into the
farming household. Poor households’ first choice for savings is generally livestock, and
this might be an institutional innovation to minimize uncertainty and improve overall
security while allowing farmers to explore into agroforestry (Hardy et al., 2012).

Farmer-participants shared that the home consumption and sale of excess livestock
products such as poultry, goat, and swine greatly supported their daily needs and helped
them in sustaining their investments in agroforestry systems. As observed in the study sites,
farmers usually had a combination of livestock in their farms, such as native chickens,

ducks, goats, swine, cattle, and carabao. There were multiple by-products from these kinds


of livestock. As a result, it reinforced the sustainability of agroforestry systems through
proper management and selection of animals that were naturally suited to each respective
farm.

As cited by the municipal agriculture officer, livestock raising in the upland farming
villages must be carefully planned to determine and sclect the appropriate livestock species
and number being introduced and integrated into specific locations within the agroforestry
farm. Such livestock raising could be properly unified within an agroforestry system to
help achieve productive systems with fewer labor inputs and human oversight, and better
sustainability and profitability. Another role of livestock raising is in the reduction of risks
in the household especially in subsistence level farming of resource-poor farmers who
benefit from animal health extension services (Hardy ef a/., 2012).

Proper integration of livestock and its by-products with the farm environment of
agroforestry systems synergized the benefits of both and enhanced the system as a whole.
Farmers’ training and capacity-building activities on livestock raising and animal
health/veterinary medicine support (Figure 27) must therefore be an important focus of

extension services of the LGU and provincial govemment units.

Figure 27. Animal health and veterinary extension services in [a [_ibertad.


Fertilizer Availability and Pest and Diseases. The problem of timely availability
of fertilizers and the presence of pests and disease issues in upland farms were significant
determinants of agroforestry system adoption based on the MVP analysis. Upland farming
villages, such as the study sites in General Nakar and La Libertad, had a significant number
of resource-poor farmers who cultivated the land with little investments in soil amelioration
measures and pest management. As a result, these situations created a suitable site for the
implementation of conservation farming and agroforestry systems. Farmers with no access
to organic fertilizers had an inclination to rely on soil and water conservation measures to
promote soil fertility and reduce soil erosion.

The adoption of suitable agroforestry systems to aid in augmenting soil fertility
could reduce the farmer’s dependence in organic and chemical fertilizers thus reducing
farm input cost. Farmers are often aware of the environmental damage caused by their
current practices and understand the long-term benefits of agroforestry, but they are
unwilling to adopt it unless their family's security is not compromised and, preferably,
strengthened, such as by supplying basic necessities (Glover er al., 2013).

Pests and disease problems in upland farms were also significant determinants of
the adoption of agroforestry systems. Pest management issues in conventional farming
typically required farm inputs such as various forms of pesticides. Unfortunately, most
upland farmers had little to no access to these farm inputs and thus became incentivized to
adopt conservation farming and agroforestry systems that could help solve their pest and
disease problems through integrated pest management in these sustainable systems. Other

elements that affect the wider social and biological systems that surround these farms may


also be crucial. Off-farm benefits of agroforestry, such as those supplied to local
populations, may be essential from a social standpoint, but they may not affect resource-
poor smallholder farmers’ decision-making (Das and Bauer, 2012).

Upland marginal lands owned and cultivated by resource-poor farmers with soil
fertility and pest and disease problems could become productive as a result of agroforestry
adoption, thus reducing pressure on the remaining natural forests. The interviewed farmer-
leader shared that the advantages of conservation farming and agroforestry systems offered

enough incentives for many of their members, including long-term environmental benefits.

Average Treatment Estimation of Agroforestry System Adoption

The average treatment estimation (ATE) of the adoption of agroforestry systems in
General Nakar and La Libertad CFV sites measured the effect of an intervention (adoption
and diffusion of innovation) on a randomly selected person in the population of each study
site based on the determinants of agroforestry systems and adopted technologies. This
estimation was based on the framework of Diagne (2012) that utilized outcome-dependent
and independent outcome variables.

Determination of the variables used was based on the previous MVP analysis of
Positive determinants of the adoption of agroforestry systems and the farmer-respondents’
confirmation of the continued practice of agroforestry in the survey. Additionally, farmer

respondents with two or more combinations of conservation farming practices and


agroforestry technologies, and with a tree component in his farm, qualified as an
agroforestry system. Livestock raising was excluded from the list of technologies and
practices for ATE. The variables from the survey data that were used in the ATE are shown

in Table 33.

Table 33. Description of variables used for adoption estimation through ATE.

Variable Description
‘Agroforestry ecosystem (1 or 0) — combination of two or more
practices/technologies in the survey (except livestock raising) plus a tree
‘Agroeco component in the farm — Contour Hedgerows, Organic Farming,
Multistorey Cropping, Contour Composting, Boundary Planting,
Rockwall, Terracing, and Mulching

AgroFor still Continued adoption and practice of agroforestry, (Yes=1, N=0)
Age Age in years
Education Education level (years of schooling)
Group Participation in farmer’s group/association (1 = yes; 0 = no)
Kinship Number of relative that farmer has in village
Traders Number of traders that farmer knows
Connections Number of relative/s that farmer has in leadership position
DistMarket Distance to main market office (in kilometers)
DistExtension Distance to agriculture extension office (in kilometers)
Plot Distance Distance from residence/house (in kilometers)
p Plot ownership (1 = owned, 2= rented, 3 = public, 4 = borrowed, 5

‘enure _

= others)

Expenditure Total expenditures in a year
Soil Depth Moderate (1 = yes; 0 = no)
Soil Depth Deep (1 = yes; 0 = no)

Soil Fertility Moderate (1 = yes; 0 = no)
Farm Size Total farm size in hectares
FertAvail Timely availability of fertilizer is a problem (1 = yes; 0 = no)
PestsDiseases Pests and disease are key problems (1 = yes; 0 = no)
Extension Skill Farmers confident in skill of extension agents (1 = yes; 0 = no)
PestsDiseases Pests and disease are key problems (1 = yes; 0 = no)

Extension Skill___ Farmers confident in skill of extension agents (1 = yes; 0 = no)



The variables were analyzed in STATA comparing the study sites of General
Nakar, Quezon and La Libertad, Negros Oriental to obtain P-values and to evaluate the
acceptance of the alternative hypothesis or reject the null hypothesis. Average treatment
estimation (ATE) provided potential population adoption rates when utilizing the
determinants of agroforestry system adoption and technologies implemented. P-value was

set at 95% confidence interval. The alternative and null hypotheses are described below:

He: The determinants of agroforestry system adoption and implemented conservation farming and
agroforestry technologies in farms lead to higher adoption levels of agroforestry as a system.

Ho: The determinants of agroforestry system adoption and implemented conservation farming and
agroforestry technologies in farms do not lead to higher adoption levels of agroforestry as a system.

Figure 28 below shows the results of the ATE for General Nakar, Quezon. The
resulting P>[z| was 0.186 and was not significant as it was more than 0.05, indicating failure
to reject the null hypothesis. Thus, results indicated that the adoption and diffusion of
agroforestry systems in General Nakar study sites were low based on the determinants of
agroforestry system adoption and conservation farming and agroforestry technologies

implemented.


hare

neve

lroxeen

suse

Figure 28. Estimation of adoption in Stata for General Nakar, Quezon.

In La Libertad, the resulting P>[z| was 0.004 and was significant as it was lower
than 0.05, indicating the acceptance of the alternative hypothesis. This indicated that the
adoption and diffusion of agroforestry systems in the barangay study sites were successful
and continuous based on the determinants. The results of the average treatment estimation
showed great differences between La Libertad (P>[z| 0.004) and General Nakar (P>Iz|

0.186),

sce

1 Lshe10 6.20405

Figure 29. Estimation of adoption in Stata for La Libertad, Negros Oriental.


General Nakar Agroforestry System Adoption

In General Nakar, widespread adoption and diffusion of agroforestry systems were
low, and not on the same level as La Libertad, based on the results of the estimation, the
determinants, and the practices/technologies implemented by the farmer-respondents.
Based on the FGDs and interviews, there were municipal programs and projects on
agriculture that were in place together with extension services being provided to the
farming communities such as the Farmer’s Field School (FFS) and the presence of the
Farmer’s Information and Technology Services Center (FITS). Regular training and
workshops were also being held for technology promotion such as coco-fiber production,
poultry raising, organic farming, livestock management, etc. Similarly, farm tools and farm
inputs such as seedlings, seeds, and fertilizers were being given to farmers. Crop insurance
was also available but was not yet widespread, according to the farmer-leader interviewed.
Presently, the establishment of demo farms and communal gardens in selected locations in
the upland and lowland areas of the town could be observed together with frequent IEC
and training workshops held through FFS and FITS and DA-ATI support.

During the FGDs and the interview of the farmer-leader, several concerns were
raised on the fragmented delivery system of extension services in upland and lowland
farming communities of General Nakar. It must be noted that farming communities in
General Nakar were composed of diverse groups of people such as the Dumagat tribe and
their clans, local upland inhabitants, migrant farmers from other provinces, local lowland
farmers, and other groups. These groups were scattered across the upland barangays of

General Nakar, and ease of access could vary due to the road conditions and rolling terrain.


‘A concem was raised on the failure of some farming groups to receive the subsidies given
by the extension office. Poor access of far-flung communities to goods and services
provided by the LGU resulted from poor transportation systems, underdeveloped roads,
and low interconnectivity of upland and lowland areas. Farmer- participants stressed that
further efforts from the LGU were necessary to reach resource-poor farmers located in far-
flung areas of General Nakar and guarantee equitable distribution of subsidies and support.

Several farmer-participants echoed their sentiments on the failure of many
development projects due to the eventual lack of funding, focus, and support from the LGU
once the major phase has been completed. On the other hand, the interviewed farmer-leader
cited many good development projects related to farming that have been implemented and
have positively impacted their farming communities. However, the positive benefits were
not sustained due to changes in the priorities of the LGU as the local political leadership
changes.

Overall, farmer-participants supported the on-going efforts of the municipal
agriculture office and the town officials to support the farming communities of General
Nakar, including the development and improvement of farm to market and major access
roads. In addition, close monitoring and continued dedicated support to extension projects
related to farming and the provision and effective distribution of farm input subsidies,
especially to marginal farming communities, were agreed upon by the farmer-participants
and the farmer-leaders in the FGD as the solution to improve the productivity of farms and
the adoption and continued implementation of sustainable farming systems study sites in

Quezon.


Low adoption and diffusion of certain agroforestry technologies and practices in
General Nakar fail to shed light on the other beneficial aspects of the CFV program. As a
transformative upland development strategy, farmer-leaders and farmer-participants cited
the overall improvement of their community’s view of sustainable farming and the negative
impacts of conventional farming to the broader watershed landscape. Lastly, farmers
shared that they had already abandoned certain practices involving chemicals and other
extractive activities as they have become aware of its negative impacts to the downstream

communities.

La Libertad Agroforestry System Adoption

The estimation of adoption in La Libertad indicated that the determinants and
technologies implemented were significant in influencing the improved adoption and
diffusion of agroforestry systems. The study sites in La Libertad benefitted from the strong
local governance of the current town executives together with a robust extension support
delivery system that effectively aided the farming livelihood of the municipality. Based on
the FGD conducted in four (4) barangays of La Libertad, confidence in extension and
government support was high. Farmer-participants also shared that the extension services
were good and effective because resource-poor farmers were guaranteed to obtain
provisions as the distribution of aid was fair. The La Libertad LGU gives regular subsidies
in the form of farm inputs and credit and knowledge support services to upland farmers.

Farm tools and equipment, supply of planting materials and seedlings, trainings and

workshops, and transport subsidies on farm produce were the regular extension services by


the LGU throughout the year. Rice farmers were provided with 20 kgs of seed per hectare
of farm and two bags of inorganic fertilizers (urea and complete). In addition, farmers could
get their choice of free vegetable seeds twice a year from the municipal agri-extension
office. Transport subsidies through the program “Paunay sa La Libertad” provided free
transport of harvested crops, thrice a week, from each upland barangay to the lowland
markets.

The municipal agriculture officer shared that almost everything was being provided
to the upland farmers in La Libertad. It only required effort on the farmers' side to cultivate
and manage their farms and transform them into productive lands, Crop insurance was also
given out for free by registering with the extension office. Presently, about 50% of the
farmers in La Libertad have already availed of crop insurance, according to the municipal
agriculture officer. Insurance provided a form of security to the farmer in case of extreme
weather conditions that could negatively impact farm production.

Supportive local policies and barangay ordinances had been crafted to aid the
adoption of agroforestry systems. According to the municipal agriculture officer, an annual
funding allocation of one million (Php1,000,000) has been given to the continuation of the
CFV initiative. Municipal and barangay development plans were also enhanced by
incorporating promotion strategies and support to sustainable farming systems.
Furthermore, travel allowances were provided by the LGU to all heads of farm and
livelihood organizations, cooperatives, and other stakeholder groups to guarantee

participation in regular meetings, thereby aiding planning and coordination.


Support to the predominantly farming livelihood was also being provided by the
provincial government of Negros Oriental and the district office of the regional
congressman through the funding of road construction projects aimed at improving
accessibility and farm to market roads. Emergency and disaster situations were also critical
periods for farmers wherein the support and assistance of various government institutions
and agencies were needed in order to prevent further market failure and loss of farming
livelihoods. Farmer-leaders shared that the municipal LGU of La Libertad has supported
the people in times of disasters such as typhoons, floods, and events such as the COVID-
19 pandemic. Farmer-participants cited the need for additional credit support and labor
assistance to maintain their farm’s productivity and aid the continued practice of
conservation farming and agroforestry systems.

Asa result of the many forms of support given to the upland farmers in La Libertad,
the adoption and diffusion of agroforestry systems have flourished through the initiatives
of the CFV project. Such initiatives improved the quality of life and livelihood of the
upland farming communities. In addition, they transformed marginal lands into productive
agroforestry systems that helped conserve natural resources and provide multiple benefits

to the farmers and the environment.


Proposed Adoption Model for Agroforestry System
in Upland Farming Communities

The proposed adoption model of agroforestry systems is based on the results of the

analysis of the determinants of adoption and its estimation in conservation farming villages

of the Philippines. As a result of the CFV project initiative, capacity-building and technical
support programs that encouraged the use of agroforestry innovations and conservation
farming practices became frequent and widespread through community organizing, multi-
stakeholder planning, and institutionalization of the CFV program in local policies and
ordinances. This enabled farmer-volunteers, farmer-leaders, collaborators, and LGU
extension staff to improve their technical knowledge on conservation farming practices and
agroforestry technologies through multi-level technology promotion and the tripartite
collaboration among state universities or colleges (SUC), local government units (LGU),
and farmers.

The establishment of linkages among the LGUs, government agencies, universities,
NGOs, and research-extension agencies created a robust support system for adopting
agroforestry systems in the upland farming communities. However, continuous adoption
of the farming innovations and choice of technologies were influenced by multiple
determinants. The results of the study showed that there were 19 variables that were
classified into six (6) categories which influenced the choice of sustainable farming
technology, and the adoption of agroforestry systems. These categories included the

following: biophysical and household characteristics, institutional structures and policies,


social capital and networks, conservation farming and agroforestry technologies, and
endowments.

The conservation farming and agroforestry technologies included in the study were
contour hedgerows, organic farming, multistorey cropping, boundary planting, contour
composting, rockwall, terracing, livestock raising, and mulching. Biophysical and
household characteristics influenced the suitability of the farming household to practices
and technologies that they could manage based on soil conditions of the farm, age of
farmer, level of education, expenditure, access to fertilizers, and presence of pests and
disease in the farm. Furthermore, the influence of institutional structure and policies on
household characteristics determined the choice of long or short gestation cropping systems
and technologies. Tenure / Land rights and the skill of extension agents influenced farmers’
adoption decisions by supporting and empowering them to select and implement the most
suitable type of sustainable practices in the farm. Provisions and subsidies to resource-poor
farmers such as fertilizers, seeds, and planting materials enhanced the productivity of farms
and support the continued adoption of sustainable farming and agroforestry systems.

The adoption model emphasizes the role of social networks in improving social
capital through membership in farmers’ groups, connections and kinship, and linkages to
traders inside and outside the municipality. Institutional structures and policies, together
with community social networks, create stronger community ties that provide security and
insurance to the farmer and technical and credit support system. The institutionalization of

the CFV project by the LGU through development plans and budget allocation and the role


of social networks are critical determinants in the adoption of agroforestry systems and its
long-term sustainability.

Conservation farming and agroforestry technologies are further influenced by farm
endowments which can vary from farm to farm. These determinants include the following:
number of livestock, farm distance to market and agri-extension office, farm size, and plot
distance to farmer’s residence. Farm size and accessibility of the farm are critical in
determining its capacity for farming and market access. Moreover, integrating social
networks and endowments with conservation farming and agroforestry technologies
facilitate the preservation of community traditions and cultural practices and enhance the
market integration of farms. Strong community ties of farmer groups and traders create a
sustainable market-outlet integration in the upland communities, thereby supporting the
continued use of sustainable farming practices by upland farmers.

The adoption of agroforestry systems in upland farming villages through the
selection of two or more combinations of technologies with a tree component in the farm
is determined by the influence of biophysical and household characteristics, institutional
structures and policies, social capital and networks, conservation farming, and agroforestry
technologies, and endowments. The adoption model highlights the synergies between the
categories of determinants and their positive effect on the choice of technologies. Important
synergies such as social networks and institutional structures and policies highlight the
critical roles of external change agents in positively influencing and facilitating the
adoption and diffusion of agroforestry systems. The proposed model of adoption of

agroforestry systems in upland farming villages provides a benchmark and insight into the


web of positive interrelationships that constitute the determinants of adoption. The model
can aid the planning and implementation of local development projects and technology
promotion programs of LGUs, NGOs, and public and private institutions geared towards

achieving sustainable upland farming communities.


“sommunumuos Suruey puejdn ur wraisds Ansosojos8e Jo japow uondopy “og andi

ssonngied =
vasing +

women olzomsig ued +
mmoles win, +

i
i


i



i

i peer
1 sixaienoaxa
i

i

t

t

t

t

t

watsas

ssompay mow =

0 30 ax J0 wondopy

sa1s010xHoa suaishs Budd
RULSTIOAOUDY ANY wos 30 pure Boj vo swat
‘ONIN NOMYAISKOD

>
nee eg
7 a
vin | — ssusmauseanne
Img ‘Tronseion
Trasaver
‘paes
sousreaioyani
*NSKARAOIE



Adoption Indicators of Agroforestry Technology

Adoption indicators are qualifying criteria of a highly adoptable and transferrable
technology. In this study, 18 positive determinants of agroforestry systems were analyzed
and synthesized to generate 4 adoption indicators. The indicators also support the study of
Mercer and Pattanayak (2003) that revealed the five general categories of factors known to
influence agroforestry adoption which includes market incentives, biophysical conditions,
risk and uncertainty, household preferences, and resource endowment.

As a synthesis, these indicators have interconnections that simplify the positive
determinants into categories of adoption indicators. These adoption indicators gauge the
adoptability and transferability of agroforestry technologies in farming communities and
can be used in extension services and development projects. These indicators are: (1)
accessibility, (2) adaptability, (3) marketability, and (4) perception of risk.

Accessibility. This indicator defines that the agroforestry technology can be
implemented at low expense incrementally at small scale and provide results and benefits
that can be easily observed and communicated to others in the community. This is critical
especially for resource-poor farmers that have low access to farm inputs such as labor and
soil amendments. In the context of a socially stratified and burdened upland farming
community, agroforestry adoption is a difficult, knowledge-intensive, long-term,
uncertain, and costly investment for many resource-poor farmers (Jemeck and Olsson,
2013). Through community relations, social networks, and government extension

subsidies, agroforestry technologies can be accessible and implemented at varying scales


thereby facilitating faster diffusion and technology transfer. Other upland farmers with
better access to resources can integrate a variety of conservation farming and agroforestry
technologies in their land to make better use of land, labor, and time (Panel, 2014).

Adaptability. This indicator defines that the agroforestry technology is compatible
with the farmer’s existing human and capital assets, extension support services, cultural
values, and community practices. The farmer’s demographic and socioeconomic
information such as age, education, community ties, expenditure, farm size, soil conditions,
and other site-specific characteristics of the farm play a crucial role in the adaptability of a
technology. A lack of arable land, according to studies, can deter smallholder farmers from
adopting agroforestry such that when the farmland is relatively small, technologies that
require bigger areas of land are unlikely to be implemented (Moyo and Mapfumo, 2001).

Marketability. This indicator defines that the agroforestry technology provides the
highest level of advantages to the farmer in terms of overall cost, benefits, market
integration, and function taking into account the farm’s location and prevailing biophysical
and socioeconomic conditions. This criterion includes the farm’s road accessibility and
distance from the market and extension office as well as the distance of the farmer’s
residence to the farm. Marketability, as an indicator, is viewed from an economic
standpoint and includes other variables that affect the profitability of farm produce from
establishment to harvest and to the eventual sale and delivery goods.

Crop prices are determined by factors such as annual crop output, product quality,
and farmers' ability to negotiate pricing, according to studies (Do ef al., 2020). Smallholder

farmers’ actions are influenced by economic factors such as the availability of markets for


outputs and inputs, the level of input and product prices, and possible income losses or
gains (Salam ef al., 2000; Adesina and Chianu, 2002). These are mostly commercial
incentives that explicitly reduce and/or boost the rewards of adopting a technology or crop.

According to the study of Pannell er a/. (2014), farmers may choose lesser short-
term gains even if measures can result in larger long-term benefits depending on the level
of market integration and perceived profitability of their harvests. Other variables that
affect this criterion are timely availability of fertilizer, presence of pests and diseases,
source of irrigation, and tenurial status of farm.

Perception of Risk. This indicator defines that the perceived future adoption of the
agroforestry technology has a high chance of success due to the interplay of insurance and
supportive roles in the community as influenced by social networks and institutions. This
criterion is shaped by farmers’ groups, number of relatives, number of traders in the
network, government support and extension, and other social capital-related variables. A
technology with a low perception of risk from the perspective of the farmer has an edge
over other alternatives as it is expected to be easier to adopt.

Based on Jerneck’s and Olsson’s (2013) study, a farmer's propensity to accept risks
vary according on their buffers, food security, and destitution margins. As a result,
resource-poor farmers frequently favor activities and innovations that have a good
probability of preserving their current standard of living over other pursuits that offer larger
gains but are viewed as riskier. Managing and minimizing risks is critical in the success of
adoption and diffusion of agroforestry technologies. The presence of crop insurance in

farming villages and government farm subsidies, through the facilitation of the LGU agri-


extension office, indicate the role of institutions in managing the risk of adopting

innovations in upland farming communities.

Farm Tourism Survey of Farmer-Respondents

A total of 460 farmers were surveyed on farm tourism-related questions to assess
their awareness and perspectives on farming and tourism and their willingness to venture
into it. La Libertad and General Nakar each have 230 farmer-respondents who participated
in farm household surveys. A portion of the survey instrument used in the first part of the

study on agroforestry adoption was allotted for farm tourism.

Farm Tourism Awareness

Results indicate that farm tourism awareness in General Nakar was relatively higher
(73%) than La Libertad (53%). This outcome could be explained by the increasing trend
and number of various farm tourism sites across Quezon and Laguna provinces in the last
decade. These farm tourism sites vary in attractions and products that they offer to potential

tourists and have been gaining popularity in CALABARZON during the last 5 years.


80% 73%
60% 53%
4T™%
i 27% ald
Yes
20%
0%
La Libertad General Nakar

Figure 31. Farm tourism awareness in La Libertad and Negros Oriental study sites.

La Libertad has fewer access to farm tourism sites in the region of Negros unlike
General Nakar in Southern Luzon. One of the reasons for high farm tourism awareness of
farmers in General Nakar is due to the rapid increasing trend of farm tourism in
CALABAZON as seen in the growth of small family farms. This also supported by the
promotion of DOT and joint efforts of the LGU and the provincial government.

Farmer respondents were asked if it was possible to integrate farming and tourism
successfully. The results indicated that most of the respondents in General Nakar (75%)
were undecided in terms of farming and tourism integration. In comparison, more than half
of La Libertad (54%) farmers believed in the possibility. Farms in La Libertad enjoyed a
much higher level of agroforestry and farm development than General Nakar, and might
have positively affected their views on value-added farm ventures such as farm tourism.
Undecided farmers, indicate a potential group of participants for future capability building
and farm tourism-related seminars and workshops that would expand each farmer’s

understanding of the integration of farming and tourism and what it entails.


80% 15%
% 54%
cor La Libertad
Aone 36% General Nakar
20%
20% 10%
5%
(4 ||
No Yes Undecided

Figure 32. Percentage of farmers who agree that farming and tourism integration can be
successful.

The present status of each farmer’s land was assessed in the survey. Farmers
answered if their farm was a good candidate for future farm tourism ventures. As expected,
most farmers in General Nakar who were undecided of the integration were also undecided
when asked about their perception if their farm is a good candidate for future farm tourism
ventures (46%). Meanwhile, La Libertad expressed confidence in their farms as they
answered positively in this matter (57%). It is important to note that 44% of surveyed
farmers in General Nakar stated that their farms were not a good candidate for farm
tourism.

Undecided farmers in General Nakar indicate the lack of in-depth information on
farm tourism. Concepts on farm tourism can be included as value added training in the all
the capability building workshops and seminars. It is important to note that farm tourism
concepts were not included in the topics of the CFV initiative back in 2008 when the project

started.


om 51%
50% 44% 46%
40% 32%

. Libertad
30% General Nakar
20%

10% 11%
10% &
0%
No Yes Undecided

Figure 33. Farmers’ perception of the suitability of their farms for future farm tourism
ventures.

Farm Tourism Benefits

While most (83.00%) farmer-respondents in La Libertad agreed that their
community would benefit from the influx of tourists due to farm tourism, only a few
(16.00%) respondents from General Nakar felt the same (Figure 34). In addition, more than
half (65%) of farmers in General Nakar were undecided on the matter. The results followed
earlier indications that undecided farmers could be potential participants for IEC in Quezon
and Negros Oriental to improve knowledge and awareness.

Farmers in General Nakar mostly have undecided to negative answers on the
suitability of their upland farms for tourism mainly due to accessibility issues. A significant
number of farm tourism spots in CALABARZON, particularly in Quezon, are located in
the lowlands and this contributed to the responses of the farmers in General Nakar. Added
knowledge of farm tourism operations and farm attractions will widen the farmers

perspectives and can help them decide if they want to pursue this kind of venture.


100%
83%
80%
65%
60%
40% ala ieiberiad
" General Nakar
aus 8% on poe 9%
0% = Ba
No Yes Undecided

Figure 34. Farmers” perception on whether the influx of tourists is beneficial.

In terms of farm tourism benefits such as environmental protection, most farmers
in General Nakar (66%) and La Libertad (83%) agreed that developing farm tourism could
help protect the natural environment (Figure 35). The results showed a positive outlook in
La Libertad, while most farmer respondents in General Nakar were still undecided and not

convinced, as shown by the disconnect in their responses to the questions.

100%
83%
80% car
, La Libertad
oe General Nakar
40% 31%
20% 13%

we” 4%

va —
No Yes Undecided

Figure 35. Farmers’ perception of the environmental protection benefits of farm tourism.


Willingness of Farmers to Venture into Farm Tourism

Farmers were asked about their willingness to share their knowledge on farming
with potential tourists and visitors. Education is an important part of farm tourism as well.
The majority of farmers in La Libertad (89%) and General Nakar (51%) expressed their

willingness. On the other hand, 47% of farmers in General Nakar were undecided.

100%

39%
Lag @La Libertad
%; General Nakar
60% 51% 47%
40%
20% 7
oe 2% 3%
o» i aes
No Yes Undecided

Figure 36. Willingness of farmers to share knowledge about farming with tourists.

To further examine farm tourism in the two study sites, farmers’ willingness to join
trainings and accept tourists in their farms were also assessed. About 91% of La Libertad
and 83% of General Nakar farmer-respondents were interested in joining training and
seminars to learn more about farm tourism. This trend was a good indicator for future
capacity-building activities and farm tourism campaigns. Results indicated that farmers
were interested in expanding their knowledge on the integration of tourism and farming

given the proper support and intervention. Figure 37 shows the proportion of the willing


and unwilling respondents to open their farm to tourism and accept tourists and visitors. In
La Libertad, 86% said yes, while it was only 28.70% in General Nakar, Undecided farmers
in General Nakar remained and represented 46.09%, while only 5.22% were undecided in

La Libertad.

100% 1%
83%
80%

60%

rs La Libertad

20% 9 an 12%
M% 9) 7
3% om
0%

No Yes Undecided

Figure 37. Willingness of farmers to join farm tourism workshops and

100.00% 5° doo,
sm .09% La Libertad
A General Nakar
60.00% 46.09%
40.00% 28.70% 25.22%
20.00% 8.70% 5.22%
0.00% =
Yes No Undecided

Figure 38. Willingness of farmers to accept tourists and visitors to their farms.


The economic status of farms from the perspective of farmer respondents was
assessed in the farm tourism survey. This was important in gauging the level of productivity
and sustainability of farms in the uplands. Results indicated that 45.65% of farmer
respondents’ farms in La Libertad were profitable, while only 31.74% were profitable in
General Nakar. On the other hand, 43.04% of La Libertad farmers stated that they only
made some profit out of their farms while in General Nakar it was higher at 48.26%. Farmer
respondents who answered that they operated at a loss in General Nakar was at 6.96%
which was higher than La Libertad (1.30%), Results show that, in general, farmers in La
Libertad were better off in terms of profiting from their farms compared to General Nakar.
Additionally, more farmers in General Nakar broke even and operated at a loss compared
to La Libertad. This might be partially explained by the differences in the level of LGU

support to farmers and extent agroforestry development in each study site.

Table 34, Economic status of farmer-respondents’ farms in the study sites.

ECONOMIC STATUS FREQUENCY
OF FARM General Nakar La Libertad
Profitable B 31.74% 105 45.65%
Some profit i 48.26% mW 48.26%
Break even 27 11.74% 12 5.22%
Operates at Loss 16 6.96% 2 0.87%
Not Applicable 1.30% 0 0%

In the final part of the survey, farmer respondents were asked if they were willing
to invest in developing their farm into a farm tourism destination. The results indicated

that willingness to make investments was inversely proportional to those who expressed


willingness to join trainings. Results indicate that 49% of farmers in La Libertad were
willing, and 43% were unwilling to make investments. In General Nakar, only 11% were
willing, 27% were unwilling, and 62% were undecided on whether they will invest money

and resources in farm tourism or not.

10% 62%
60%
. 49%
emus 3%
La Libertad

General Nakar

40%
30% 2E4.

pee 11%
10% §%

Ea

No Yes Undecided

Figure 39. Willingness of farmers to invest in farm tourism development of their farms.

The disconnect in some of the responses indicated that most of the farmer-
respondents need to be enlightened and advised on the aspects of farm tourism. A deeper
understanding of farm tourism's value-added aspect will grow once the farmers fully
understand, through training and IEC, what farm tourism is, how they can take part in it,
and what kind of skills and resources they will require. The support of the LGU is crucial
in addressing the knowledge gap on farm tourism and providing resources for tourism

development and research.


Present Status of Local Tourism in Study Sites

General Nakar, Quezon

General Nakar’s present tourism industry is based on the abundant natural resources
of the municipality and the adjacent towns. Numerous waterfalls lay hidden within General
Nakar’s dense forests. The LGU tourism officer noted that the site has a high potential in
nature-based tourism and can accommodate a higher capacity of tourists than Infanta and
Real, Quezon. Before the COVID-19 disruption, General Nakar has steadily become a
tourism destination for outdoor recreation and extreme sports, mainly due to its terrain,
extensive mountain ranges, and thick natural forests. Tourism influx has been increasing
in the past years due to the linkages of General Nakar with motorbike groups, 4x4 off-road
enthusiasts, and various outdoor and extreme sports advocates. Promotion of these
activities in General Nakar is mainly done through social media and word-of-mouth and
partnerships with regional and corporate sponsors in events.

According to the LGU tourism officer, accessibility and accommodations were the
top issues concerning the tourism industry in the municipality. Presently, the capacity of
accommodations is low, and they can only cater toa maximum of 500 pax in General Nakar
through small room rentals and resorts with incomplete facilities. Furthermore, the tourism
officer said that the quality of accommodation and service is not the same as those in
Infanta and Real. Better accommodations currently aid the situation in the adjacent towns
that benefit from the influx of tourism in General Nakar. The LGU tourism officer stated

that accommodations in the municipality have issues with accreditation by the DOT due to


non-compliance with standards and policies, mainly due to a lack of awareness of tourism
operators. Presently, there are only two travel agencies based in the municipality.

Groups and associations of tourism operators and community guides in General
Nakar were non-existent before but have since started organizing themselves with the help
of the LGU. Some of these groups that have been formed are Gencral Nakar Resort Owners
Association (GENAROA) and General Nakar Cablao Outdoor Guide Association
(GENACOGA). The promotion of tourism has improved through the years due to the
assistance provided by the provincial government through digital and online promotions.
One of the main reasons the LGU tourism officer cited for slow tourism uptake and
promotion of sites in General Nakar was the poor marketing by the operators and the
general lack of awareness in tourism development. Tourism sites and operators in the

municipality depend primarily on the LGU for annual promotions and events,

Figure 40. Promotional banner on tourism by the provincial government of Quezon.

In the coming years, tourism in General Nakar is expected to improve due to the

Metro REINA Tourism Development plan, which aims to improve interconnectivity and


promote Infanta, Real, and General Nakar Quezon. The LGU tourism officer indicated that
improved localized tourism plans for the municipality and its barangays are needed,

including concrete plans for sustainability

Figure 41. Coastal areas and forests comprise General Nakar’s dynamic landscape,

At present, farm tourism remains as a proposal included in the tourism plan of
General Nakar. There is no concrete farm tourism plan in the region yet. However, the

tourism officer noted the potential of the nature and agriculture-based municipality due to


small and large farmlands in the area. He added that more investments are needed to
streamline and improve the tourism resources of General Nakar, which still lacks branding
and identity. Investments to improve accommodation, facilities, and transportation such as
DOT-aceredited and designated tourist vehicle services are expected to improve tourism
services in the coming years.

Today, General Nakar is still devoid of modem conveniences, as the municipality
lacks fast-food chains and typical commercial establishments. In many upland areas,
mobile signal reception is weak. Karinderyas and sari-sari stores can be found all over
town, and habal-habal is the preferred mode of transportation over jeepneys and buses.

Tourism development in the town is slow but is expected to improve in the next few years.

La Libertad, Negros Oriental

The tourism industry in La Libertad relies mostly on its coastal areas. Geological
formations and annual events are the main attractions for local and international tourists.
La Libertad is known for the Danicop and Marble caves, Francisco Absin Memorial Park,
and La Limar Beach Resort. The LGU tourism officer shared that only La Limar Beach
Resort (Figure 42) in La Libertad accepts foreign tourists due to its quality of service and
facilities. It was revealed that the resort is privately owned but was leased in good faith to
the LGU to help improve the tourism and economy of the town. The LGU-managed beach

resort is the flagship tourist spot and tourism accommodation of La Libertad.


Figure 42. La Limar Beach Resort in San Jose, La Libertad, Negros Oriental.

As the largest beach resort in La Libertad, La Limar is often busy during the
weekends and peak travel periods. However, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, it was
transformed into a temporary quarantine facility. The LGU tourism officer said that there
are five other resorts in La Libertad that can accept guests. However, she pointed out that
these accommodations are low quality compared to La Limar. Small room
accommodations in other resorts in La Libertad are said to be commonly rented out by
travelling agents and people in transit. The capacity of the accommodations in La Libertad
is well over 1000 pax with La Limar taking a large share.

As shared by the LGU tourism officer, tourism promotions of La Libertad only rely
‘on social media, the Internet, and word of mouth as they do not have a large budget for
marketing and promotions. The tourism officer added that they only have Php100,000
annual fund allocation for tourism promotions and depend partly on the promotion of the

provincial government of Negros Oriental (Figure 43).


Figure 43. Promotional poster on places to visit in Negros Oriental.

Furthermore, they also do not charge entrance fees in all LGU-managed sites such
as La Limar as the local administration believes that tourism is a service to the people. As
a result, the LGU takes all the responsibility in terms of funding and planning for any

tourism-related project in their municipality. Unfortunately, the LGU tourism officer


indicated that La Libertad does not get a lot of support from the DOT due to conflicts in
the technicalities of some crucial requirements. La Libertad has not yet fully adapted or
complied with many DOT systems such as monitoring tourism influx, tourism data
management, and others.

Presently, beach resorts in La Libertad and its neighboring towns, together with
attractions such as caves, waterfalls, and other natural wonders, draw tourists regularly.
However, tourism development is not the priority of the current local administration, as
pointed out by the tourism officer. Agriculture and farming are still the top priority of the
LGU. They focus more of their resources on supporting upland and lowland farmers
through subsidies, training, and free agricultural inputs such as seeds and fertilizers.
Additionally, support during disasters is also a priority of the LGU as the town faces regular
typhoons throughout the year. As a result of the high-level support, farmers in La Libertad
have maintained a productive and vastly developed upland region of agroforestry farms.

The LGU tourism officer noted the good potential of their upland barangays for
farm tourism. However, she cautioned that the present status of transportation and
accessibility of many upland areas need to improve together with tourism facilities in the
uplands. Getting to La Libertad from the nearest airport in Dumaguete City will take three
hours by bus, and about two hours by private vehicle. Travel to the upland barangays will
take another hour on the average and will pass through the varying extent of paved and
earth roads and rolling terrain. The common mode of transportation in the uplands is still
habal-habal, but jeepneys and elf trucks are used as well. In addition to accessibility,

insurgency is also an issue in La Libertad. The tourism officer confirmed that the crime


rate is low in the region and is generally safe for everyone. However, issues on insurgency
remain unresolved.

Tourism development in La Libertad is not a priority, but farm tourism may offer a
chance to reconcile upland farming and tourism. The tourism officer indicated that farm
tourism is highly possible in selected areas in La Libertad, but it will require investments
and proper marketing and promotion. Nevertheless, La Libertad will benefit from farm
tourism as a predominantly agricultural town and help push its own products further, as the
municipal agriculture officer shares. Other tourism-related products such as handicrafts
and souvenirs can be found in La Limar and in the downtown markets.

Local sellers and establishments dominate the market in La Libertad as there are
very few big commercial businesses present. Modem amenities for tourists are still lacking,
but essential services are provided, such as ATMs, remittance centers, and lodging.
Tourism demand is expected to grow in the near future as Dumaguete is poised to follow
Cebu’s urbanization, which is expected to generate a steady influx of tourists for Negros

Oriental.

Agroforestry-Farm Tourism Development Pathway

The agroforestry and farm tourism survey results in General Nakar and La Libertad

indicate that challenges in the agricultural industry continue to affect the productivity and

sustainability of upland farms across the country. This is further exacerbated by the effects


of climate change and natural disasters that impede crop production and food security in
the farming communities. The existence of farms and the diversity of agricultural
landscapes in terms of their crops and livestock, farming systems, and topography in the
uplands shape the recreational use of the land in multiple ways (Vanslembrouck & Van

Huylenbroeck, 2005).

Recreational Multifunctionality of Agroforestry

Differences in the agroforestry systems of farms in the CFV sites in Negros and
Quezon can affect its suitability for farm tourism and other recreational uses. Studies
confirm that upland farm landscapes are complex because they are shaped by the
physiognomy (physical qualities) and composition (distribution) of farmland resources, as
well as their ecological connectivity (Dunning, Danielson, & Pulliam 1992; Taylor et al.
1993). Given that agroforestry promotes recreational multifunctionality and that different
types of agroforestry systems influence the type of recreational use of the landscape
(Barbieri, 2010), it is reasonable to assume that tourists’ preferences and perceptions of
farm tourism landscapes vary subjectively (Gao ef al., 2014), It is in this regard that the
adoption of conservation farming and agroforestry technologies, together with the
recreational benefits that agroforestry systems provide, pave the way for the introduction
of farm tourism in upland farming communities (Barbieri, 2013).

In La Libertad, farmer-participants in the FGD shared that the present agroforestry
farm landscapes in the uplands took years to create after waves of deforestation,

widespread timber logging, and unsustainable farming practices in the previous decades.


On the other hand, upland farms in General Nakar are embedded in thick natural forests
and utilize conservation farming practices such as contour composting, mulching, and
reduced tillage that are suitable to be integrated into the current landscape. Both CFV sites
have varying landscapes as a result of the interaction between farming, natural resources,
and the environment. A significant factor in the suitability of upland farming communities
to farm tourism will depend on the visual appearance of agroforestry landscapes that
convey a powerful impression of rurality through their natural beauty, authentic way of life
in the countryside, and cultural attractions that are observed when traveling to these

destinations (Aznar, Marsat, & Rambonilaza 2007).

Agroforestry-Farm Tourism Transition

Through the adoption of agroforestry systems and technologies, farm tourism can
take advantage of farm resources and the natural environment to create tourism attractions
and activities that bring together production, recreation, and education. As a complement
to conservation farming and agroforestry, farm tourism will create a line of business that
will require farmers to gain a certain degree of management, marketing, and
entrepreneurial skills that are also crucial aspects of modern-day farming (Yamagishi ef
al., 2021). The introduction of tourism into upland rural regions is generally seen
positively, with the notion that combining the two businesses will solve local concerns such
as labor shortages/employment in tourism and market shortages in agriculture production
(Andereck & Vogt, 2000; Torres & Momsen, 2004). The farm tourism survey shows

differences in the responses of La Libertad and General Nakar which indicate that most


farmer-participants haven’t fully understood farm tourism and the potentials of their
farming communities given the increasing trend of farm tourism in the Philippines.

In most uplands, farm tourism is typically used as a complement to income or as a
low-risk coping strategy, with crop and livestock production as the top priority (Fisher,
2006; McGehee, 2007). Moreover, tourism may act as an alternative for off-farm work for
farmers who do not farm full-time to fulfill the economic needs of the farm business and
household until the crop/livestock production situation improves (Ollenburg & Buckley,
2007).

The transition from agricultural production complicates the farmers’ agricultural
business processes to entrepreneurial and service-based orientation in farm tourism. La
Libertad and General Nakar will require further assistance from the national and local
government in providing supplemental training to farmers on tourism, business
management, hospitality, marketing, and other soft skills. Additionally, maintaining a
strong agroforestry farm resource is critical as it lays the ground work for future tourism
activities. A strong agroforestry resource base provides multiple recreational,
environmental, and economic benefits vital to the long-term sustainability of the uplands
and the possible transition to farm tourism (Barbieri et al., 2010).

Promoting, developing, and educating present and future generations about farm
tourism could result in a more positive approach to agroforestry and conservation farming
as an economic and social driver in improving farm tourism potential, household income,
environmental resiliency, and food security. As an agricultural country, the Philippines

must take advantage of the synergies between conservation farming, agroforestry, and


tourism and harness the production-education-recreation spectrum as a path to achieving

sustainable development goals.

CFV Farm Tourism Potential Criteria and Weights

Seven key informants were interviewed to finalize each tourism criteria's weights
and the succeeding ranking of barangay study sites. These were purposefully chosen
individuals with specialized knowledge and expertise on the topics related to the study.
They were: (1) a tourism officer from General Nakar LGU, (2) a tourism officer from La
Libertad LGU, (3) an official from DOT-CALABARZON, (4) an official from the DOT
Farm Tourism National Program, (5) an owner/manager of a farm tourism location in
Luzon, (6) an owner/manager of a farm tourism location in Visayas/Mindanao, (7) and a

key expert on farm tourism and hospitality.

Internal Criteria Weights and Scoring
A total of ten (10) criteria was evaluated and ranked by key informants through
AHP (Appendix B). Each key informant's ratings to each criterion are shown in Appendix

C. The finalized weights for seven internal tourism criteria are shown in Table 35 below.


Table 35. Final ranking and weights of intemal tourism potential criteria.

CRITERION DESCRIPTION WEIGHTS +l.
LV Landscape/Scenic Value 19.00% 3.20%
FB Farm Biodiversity 17.80% 1.10%
EV Entertainment Value. 15.40% 2.40%
sv Scientific Value 14.60% 0.90%
FA Farm Activities 11.70% 0.90%
SD Size of Tourist Destination 10.90% 1.10%
TS Tourism Seasonality 10.60% 1.50%

Eigenvalue Lambda: 7.041 _ Consensus: 55.10%

Consistency R: GCI: 0.02 Psi: 16.20% __CR: 0.50%.

As shown in Table 35, out of the seven internal tourism potential criteria, the top
three criteria that ranked the highest were: landscape/scenic value (19.00%), farm
biodiversity (17.80%), and entertainment value (15.40%). Entertainment value was closely
followed by scientific value having a weight of 14.60%. The three bottom-ranked internal
criteria were farm activities (11.70%), size of tourist destination (10.90%), and tourism
seasonality (10.60%). The matrix distribution of finalized scores for internal tourism

criteria is shown in Figure 44.

A
FB
sp

Matrix BR &

normalized
‘riucipal
Eigenvector

ev |2
sv |3
ra |a |
vB |s
so |
ts |

Figure 44, Matrix distribution of finalized scores for internal tourism criteria


The results showed a consistency ratio of 0,005 (CR<0.1), indicating that the final
AHP scores were reliable and adjustments between the criteria were not needed. The final
weights and ranking of criterion indicated that key informants gave the landscape/scenic
value and farm biodiversity criteria the highest weights. Landscape/scenic value, in the
context of farm tourism and this study, refers to tourism aesthetics that deal with beauty,
artistic taste, enjoyment, and pleasure through environmental scenery observation. This
criterion is one of the first to be noticed in any potential tourism destination. Potential
tourists, farm tourism site operators, and tourism agents will have an easier time promoting
a specific destination if the perceived level of attractiveness of the site is high. Other tourist
destinations such as nature and ecotourism sites, national parks, beach resorts, festivals and
events, and urban attractions also benefit from having a high level of landscape/scenic
value which supports the ease of promoting the site.

As echoed by all key informants in today's tourism industry, promotion relies
heavily on social media and the Internet. Therefore, images and videos showing attractive
landscapes and scenic views of tourism destinations and their environment contribute
largely to driving visitors to the potential destination. This trend is influenced by how a
potential tourist subjectively examines images and videos promoting these destinations.

The second-highest ranked internal criteria determined through AHP was farm
biodiversity, with a significant weight of 17.80%. In farm tourism, this criterion was
defined as the variability of livestock, crops, trees, and other micro-organisms in the
general farm landscape. As indicated by the interviewed DOT officials and key expert, the

variety of crops, trees, and animals in a farm tourism destination was of utmost importance.


A diverse farm can offer more products and activities to potential tourists, thereby
positively influencing other internal tourism criteria such as entertainment value, farm
activities, and scientific value. The farm tourism operators interviewed confirmed that the
many farm tourism activities and attractions were dependent on integrating diverse farm
components. Additionally, the DOT official indicated that a more complex farm with a
wide variety of crops, livestock, and trees was more resilient and more straightforward to
promote and market than other farm destinations that only depended on a few components.

The third-ranked internal tourism criterion was entertainment value (15.4%). This
criterion referred to the level of pleasure and positive experiences in the tourism
destination, which could significantly vary from one person to another. As mentioned by
the tourism officers of the LGUs concerned and the DOT officials, the entertainment value
‘was very subjective and covered the entire experience of travelling to the destination,
arriving and spending time at the destination, and departure. The factors that affect this
criterion are diverse and vary from person to person. As a result, entertainment value to be
gained when planning to visit a specific destination could be affected by the status of the
region and locality of the site. This trend was confirmed during the interview of key
informants who also indicated that the style and approach to promoting the destination
could significantly affect how potential tourists perceived entertainment and positive
experiences.

Scientific value was the fourth-ranked criterion having a weight of 14.60%. This
criterion referred to the overall value and uniqueness of the farms and their farm

components. In this study, the uniqueness and value of the destination were rated by key


informants based on the following: worldwide, nationwide, regionwide, and provincewide.
Criterion included all the farming practices and technologies observed in the destination.
The key expert interviewed shared that the arrangement and layout of components in a
farm tourism site and its integration into the landscape gave rise to the destination’s brand
and identity. Branding and identity were essential when promoting farms on a regional and
national scale, such as the strawberry farms in Baguio, the rice terraces in Banaue, and
family farms in CALABARZON.

The three bottom-ranked internal criteria were farm activity (11.70%), size of
destination (10.90%), and tourism seasonality (10.60%). The result of the AHP showed
that these criteria were closely ranked with a difference ranging from 0.30% to 1.10%. In
assessing the tourism potential of a destination, farm activity referred to the possible variety
of farm-related activities and outdoor recreation that could be done at the site. Unlike
entertainment value, this criterion was more specific and focuses on the potential activities,
and recreation tourists could do. As indicated by the interviewed owners/managers of farm
tourism destinations, the type of activities and recreation that any destination could offer
was greatly influenced by the size and general landscape of the farm.

As echoed by the DOT officials interviewed, the size of destination was also an
essential criterion because the site could host more attractions and accommodate more
visitors. It followed the assumption that the bigger the tourist destination area, the higher
was the tourism carrying capacity. However, the interviewed owners/managers of farm
tourism destinations indicated that the farm size alone was not a sure indicator of success,

as evidenced by many successful integrated family farms and community farms that did


not occupy a large piece of land. The key expert interviewed indicated that smaller farm
tourism destinations found success in diversifying their farm components and maximizing
space despite occupying a smaller land area. Based on the key informants’ resulting final
ranking of criteria, the size of destination ranked second to the last.

Tourism seasonality ranked last with 10.60% in the final AHP result based on the
key informants’ inputs. Seasonality referred to the appropriate duration and timing of
tourism activities in a year. Based on the interviewed LGU officers, tourism seasonality
‘was connected to climate and weather variability in the area and can affect the influx of
tourists, Additionally, the DOT officials indicated that rainy months were typically avoided
depending on the destination's type of attractions and recreation. As echoed by the
owners/managers of farm tourism sites, tourism seasonality in the Philippines should be
incorporated into the plan of the site. They mentioned that most attractions should be
available all year round together with alternatives. Furthermore, the DOT officials
indicated that special celebrations, promotions, and festivities in tourism destinations could
be distributed all year and positioned to take advantage of the peak season of travel, such

as the summer months in the Philippines.

External Criteria Weights and Scoring

Key informants evaluated three external tourism potential criteria and determined
the ranking of each criterion via AHP (Appendix D). These three criteria included potential
accessibility, safety and security, and linkages with other tourism sites (Appendix E). The

AHP result in Table 36 showed a consistency ratio of 0.003 or 0.30% within the acceptable


range. The final ranks of the criteria showed significant differences in the weights with a
consensus of 48.30%. The matrix distribution of finalized scores for external tourism

criteria is shown in Figure 45.

Table 36. Final ranking and weights of external tourism potential criteria.

CRITERION DESCRIPTION WEIGHTS +7-
PA Potential Accessibility 38.40% 2.10%
SS Safety and Security 33.50% 1.90%
LT Linkages with other Tourism Sites 28.10% 1.60%
Total 100% ‘MRE: 5.60%
Eigenvalue Lambda: 3.003 Consensus: 48.30%
Consistency Ratio GCI:0.01 Psi: 0.00% __ CR: 0.30%
Matrix 5 £ 8 normalized
principal
Eigenvector

= 28.12%
PA 38.40%
ss 33.48%

Figure 45. Matrix distribution of finalized scores for external tourism criteria

Potential accessibility (38.40%) ranked first out of the three external tourism
potential criteria. This criterion referred to the general travel time from each destination to
the accommodations, restaurants, markets, bus stations, airport, and city/town center. The

accessibility being evaluated in this criterion focused on the ease of travel to the destination


and in and around its region and locality. According to the interviewed DOT officials,
potential accessibility influences the interconnectivity of many tourism destinations and
the available services in each area. High potential accessibility increased the chances of
success of a particular destination due to its proximity to many other tourist-related services
in its region. In addition, as indicated by the owners/managers of farm tourism sites,
potential accessibility depended heavily on location, availability of roads and proper access
to the site, and the transport services available in the locality and the destination.

Safety and security were ranked second in the final output. In general, this referred
to the perceived level of tourist safety and security in the destination and its surroundings.
This criterion was also connected to the frequency and number of reported incidents such
as criminal activity, insurgency, and/or rebels’ presence, especially in the countryside.
Department of Tourism (DOT) officials indicated that a region’s tourism industry is
frequently affected by bad publicity, especially in far-flung areas. As a result, local and
international tourists will usually stay away from a destination with conflict or issues about
peace and order.

Through the years, the Philippines has its share of incidents wherein tourists were
kidnapped and harmed. These kinds of incidents negatively affect the country and the
region where the incident took place. Farm tourism site owners/managers indicated that
safety and security were influenced by many externalities but could be managed by a strong
LGU presence and proper governance. All key informants pointed out that safety and

security would always be critical in determining the potential success of any destination.


The extemal criterion that ranked last was linkage with other tourism sites
(28.10%). This criterion referred to the density of tourist sites in the locality and the region,
which helped expand the reach of the destination through interconnectivity. DOT officials
mentioned that other tourism sites and attractions around a potential destination could
quickly help its promotion. Farm tourism site managers/owners cited the town of Tiaong
and Candelaria, Quezon, and San Pablo, Laguna as examples of the diverse tourism
destinations in close proximity with each other. These locations have various
establishments and unique attractions for potential tourists all in the same region.

The combined internal and external tourism potential criteria weights are shown

below in Figure 46.

Ext_PA 38.40%
Ext_SS 33.50%
Ext_LT 28.10%

Int_LV 19%

Int_FB 17.80%

Int_EV 15.40%

Int_ SV 14.60%

Int_FA 11.70%

Int_SD 10.90%

Int_TS 10.60%

0.00% 5.00% 10.00% 15.00% 20.00% 25.00% 30.00% 35.00% 40.00% 45.00%

Figure 46, Final weights of internal and external tourism potential criteria.


Farm Tourism Potential Ranking and Scoring of Study Sites

The final weights of internal and external tourism potential criteria were utilized to
determine the final score of each barangay site based on the rating given by each key
informant. Subtotals of each barangay site's internal and external criteria scores were added
to obtain the final score and rank. The summary of the scores given by each key informant

to each site is shown in Appendix F.

General Nakar, Quezon

The final scores of CFV barangays in General Nakar, Quezon, are shown in Table
37. San Marcelino and Magsikap scored 76.211 and 76.139, respectively. On the other
hand, Minahan Norte scored significantly lower with a total of 73.739. Based on the
internal potential criteria scoring of key informants (Table 38), Magsikap scored low on
landscape value (LV), entertainment value (EV), scientific value (SV), and farm

biodiversity (FB) compared to Minahan Norte and San Marcelino.

Table 37. Final scores of CFV barangays in General Nakar, Quezon.

MINAHAN SAN
KI/ SITE MAGSIKAP NORTE MARCELINO.
Tourism Officer LGU 1 11.306 10.526 10.853
Tourism Officer LGU 2 9.65 10.415 10.391
DOT Official 1 11.927 10.877 11.738
DOT Official 2 10.988 9.203 6
Farm Tourism Owner/Manager | 10.931 9.713 10.04
Farm Tourism Owner/Manager 2 10.844 11.678 12.005
Key Expert 1 10.493 11.327 11.654

TOTAL 76.139 73.739 76.211


Table 38. Averaged criteria scores given by key informants on the farm tourism potential
of CFV sites in Quezon.

Site/Criterria LV EV SV_ FA FB sD TS LT PA ss
Magsikap 0.760 0.770 0.730 0.585 0.801 0.763 0.689 1.826 1.536 _2.345

Minahan 1.33 0.946 1.022 0.819 1.246 0.436 0.696 1.124 0.713. 2.201
Norte

San 1.33 0.924 1.022 0.760 1.335 0.763. 0.689 1.124 0.768. 2.177
Marcelino

DOT officials and the LGU tourism officers interviewed indicated that the kinds of
farms in Magsikap were less diverse. The farm technologies were promising but did not
appear to stand out in the region. On the other hand, San Marcelino and Minahan Norte
scored higher and have identical scores for LV and SV while having only a small difference
between EV scores. Magsikap scored significantly low on farm biodiversity, while San
Marcelino scored the highest. Farm tourism owners/managers interviewed indicated that
the variety of crops, livestock, and the general appearance and layout of the farm was a
critical consideration to determine the main attraction of the farm and the accompanying
products and services that it could offer potential tourists. Farm biodiversity goes hand in
hand with farm activities, as pointed out by the tourism key expert interviewed. The DOT
officials mentioned that the top-performing farm tourism destinations in the Philippines
were generally diverse in farm products and number of attractions for tourists.

As mentioned by the tourism officers and DOT officials, there were exceptions,
and these were farm sites that offer a single banner product or attraction, such as the
successful sunflower farms in CALABARZON. The LGU tourism officer interviewed

stated that most farms in General Nakar needed more investment to spur enhanced farm

2a.

development before any farm tourism plans. He pointed out that only a handful of farms in
Magsikap, Minahan Norte, and San Marcelino may be suitable for farm tourism ventures.
Tourism seasonality and size of destination scores for all three CFV sites did not
vary significantly as they all belonged to the same region with extensive land, thick natural
forests, and rolling terrain. Except for Minahan Norte, the other two CFV sites have a
portion of their area on the shoreline (Figure 47). These areas are interspersed with thick
vegetation and rice fields in the lowland areas and the rivers and streams that flow through
the rolling landscape. Farm tourism owners interviewed stated that the rainy months are
expected to bring difficulty in travel and affect farm activities, entertainment value, and
accessibility. DOT officials revealed that it was crucial to have alternative attractions and
products to offer to potential tourists during the rainy months. They added that destinations

must prepare for the country's peak and off-peak travel months as well.

San Marcelino

Magsikap

Figure 47. Overview of Magsikap and San Marcelino areas near the shoreline.


Farm layout, planting arrangement, and farming technologies used varied from
farm to farm in General Nakar, depending on the main crop and products of the site. An
existing trend in many upland agroforestry farms was cultivating ornamental plants and

trees in a terrace or contour system, as seen in Figure 48

Figure 48. Omamental-based agroforestry system in San Marcelino.

Several thriving farms were located along the side, and the foot of the mountains
‘or could be located near a stream or river, as seen in Figure 49 and Figure 50. The key
expert and tourism officers interviewed indicated that active and productive farms would
have an easier way of incorporating farm tourism than inactive farms with no regular
operations/activities and those that have stagnated through the years. They added that
diverse, productive farms would have more products and activities to offer to tourists and

would develop more attractions in the coming years than monoculture plantations or farms.


Figure 50. Acrial view and understory vegetation of Mang Nato’s farm in Magsikap.


DOT officials indicated that the entertainment value of farm tourism destinations
would also depend on basic tourist facilities available on the site and in the locality. Owners
and managers of farm tourism destinations pointed out that farm activities and
entertainment value were constantly affected by facilities and infrastructure. Most farms in
the uplands which did not have farmhouses lack basic toilet facilitics. In Minahan Norte, a

few large farms have facil

lies such as rest areas/warehouse and proper toilet rooms, as
shown in Figure 51. These kinds of agroforestry farms were commonly owned by farmers

with multiple streams of income which allow them to make such investments.

Figure 51, Rest area with bathroom/toilet facility in a hillside farm in Minahan Norte.


The upkeep of agroforestry farms in General Nakar varied from site to site. Certain
areas within the farm with more sensitive crops and trees might receive more attention and
regular maintenance. It was common to find weeds and various understory vegetation in
and around the agroforestry farms. A tribal leader who owned and operated one of the
farms in Minahan Norte shared that the regular upkeep of farms could be complicated and
expensive as the owners themselves age through the years. The tribal leader/farmer also
indicated that consecutive typhoons and flooding in Quezon have made it hard for them to
recover from losses and maintain proper upkeep of the farm at the same time due to the
rising costs of labor and other maintenance costs. The DOT officials revealed that an active
farm tourism destination must have a good level of organization within the farm and

tidiness.

Figure 52. Recent clearing and weeding operations in Minahan Norte.


The resulting scores for internal tourism potential criteria of CFV sites in General
Nakar indicated excellent potential for farm tourism for all sites due to a strong natural
resource base wherein the farms were embedded. However, farm tourism owners and DOT
officials pointed out that further farm development and investments were necessary to
streamline and prepare farms in Gencral Nakar for farm tourism transition and tourism-
related activities. The LGU tourism officer indicated that the diverse farm landscapes in
General Nakar, as shown in Figure 53, offer many opportunities to develop and expand
farm tourism in the region with proper support from the local, provincial, and national

government.

Figure 53. Agroforestry farms in the uplands cultivate a variety of crops and trees.

In terms of overall external tourism potential criteria, Magsikap ranked the highest.

Magsikap scored the highest on potential accessibility (PA), safety and security (SS), and


linkage with other tourist sites (LT). In contrast, Minahan Norte and San Marcelino scored
significantly lower with minor differences. Access to most areas and farms of the CFV
barangays in General Nakar was quite difficult due to the road conditions and slope. Road
construction was ongoing in several areas of General Nakar during the data-gathering
phase.

The LGU tourism officer of General Nakar interviewed indicated that farm-to-
market roads in the mountainous areas were already in the pipeline and were expected to
be completed in a few years. Presently, road access through the CFV sites depended on
rough paved earth or gravel roads that go through the region's rolling terrain, as shown in
Figure 54. Unfortunately, the quality of these paved roads varied from site to site, and

newly paved roads were commonly littered with large rocks along the sides.

Figure 54, Paved gravel roads leading to the CFV sites.


Refined gravel roads could be found on major access points going to the uplands.
These roads have been compacted and smoothened out through the years, The potential
accessibility of Magsikap was scored the highest among the three CFV sites due to its
location and proximity to the major access roads and town center. Minahan Norte was
ranked second, and San Marcclino ranked last in PA because of its distance from the town
center and major access roads. These access roads go through the rolling terrain and
become difficult to traverse during the rainy months as it becomes slippery and muddy

(Figure 55).

Figure 5S. Refined paved gravel road in Magsikap and San Marcelino.


According to the DOT officials interviewed, potential accessibility went hand in
hand with linkage to other tourist sites due to interconnectivity. The key expert shared that
the level of accessibility and proximity of tourist services and tourist spots in General
Nakar and its neighboring areas would affect its ease of tourism promotions in the region.
Furthermore, the density of tourist sites in General Nakar was considered high because of
the Real-Infanta-Nakar tourism interconnection, termed as REINA, that jointly promoted
tourism destinations. Presently, the tourism industry in Infanta and Real Quezon was better
than General Nakar.

As discussed by the LGU tourism officer, tourism sites in the REINA region got
exposure from the combined efforts of the respective LGUs and the DOT. Potential farm
destinations in General Nakar, according to farm tourism owners/managers, would require
heavy support from the local and provincial governments to jump-start its promotion. In
general, the PA and LT of CFV sites in Quezon were positive except for road conditions
that need to be improved significantly in barangays located further away from the town
center and major roads. Travel time from the town center to any of the three study sites
would take about 45-90mins depending on the type of vehicle and road conditions.

Safety and security in all CFV sites in General Nakar were scored relatively high
by key informants. According to the farmers interviewed, rebel groups in the region had
since surrendered and refocused their efforts on farming, thus eradicating much of the
armed conflict in the upland region decades ago. The LGU tourism officer also indicated
that the crime rate was low in the region and rarely had issues with tourists getting

victimized by criminals. In fact, vehicular accidents were rare in the area. However, road


safety still needed to be improved, as pointed out by the DOT officials. They mentioned

that appropriate road infrastructure and well-planned roads could benefit PA, LT, and SS.

La Libertad, Negros Oriental

The final scores of study sites in La Libertad, Negros Oriental is shown in Table
39/. Elecia scored the highest total score at 86.735 followed by Talaon (79.751),
Nasunggan (77.864), and Aya (74.603). Based on the internal potential criteria scoring of
key informants, Elecia scored the highest on landscape value (LV), scientific value (SV),
farm activities (FA), and farm biodiversity (FB) compared to the rest of the study sites in
Negros. In terms of entertainment value (EV), Elecia was tied with Aya with an average
score of 1.001. Tourism seasonality (TS) scores were the same for all sites in La Libertad,
while the size of destination (SD) scores was the same for Elecia and Talaon (0.926) and

Aya and Nasunggan (0.436).

Table 39. Final scores of study sites in La Libertad, Negros Oriental.

KI/ SITE AYA ELECIA NASUNGGAN _ TALAON
Tourism Officer LGU 1 10.526 12.722 11.549 11.633
Tourism Officer LGU 2 10.175 11.423 10.706 11.033

DOT Official 1 11.981 13.073 12.521 12.605
DOT Official 2 9.203 11.399 11.231 11.315
Owner Manager | 9.713 11.582 11.174 11.501
Owner Manager 2 11.678 13.874 10.517 11.171
Key Expert 1 11.327 12.662 10.166 10.493

TOTAL 74.603 86.735 77.864 79.751



Table 40, Averaged criteria scores given by 7 key informants on the farm tourism potential
of study sites in La Libertad, Negros Oriental.

Site/Criteria_ LV EV SV FA FB SD__—iTS LT PA SS

Aya 1425 1.001 1.022 0.702 1.335 0.436 0.689 1.124 0.768 2.177
Elecia 1.900 1.011.387 0.760 1.602 0.926 0.689 1.124 0.768 2.177

Nasunggan 1.140 0.847 0.730 0.702 0801 0.436 0.689 1.8265 1.536 2.345
Talaon 0.950 0.847 0.730 0.702 0.801 0926 0.689 1.8265 1.536 2.345

Landscape value was observed to be consistently high for all sites in La Libertad.
DOT officials interviewed cited the appealing and exciting landscapes that were observed
in all four upland farming villages. The rolling terrain of the uplands in La Libertad was
generally steeper and much harder to traverse. The study sites visited had less natural forest
cover and had many upland farms embedded into the landscape. Partially degraded and
eroded portions of the mountainous landscape were common, with patches of secondary

forests and a mosaic of farms that made up most upland farming villages. Farm tourism

‘owners/managers and the key expert indicated that upland villages such as Elecia and
Talaon could easily be promoted due to the beautiful scenery that was befitting of a farm

tourism destination, as shown in Figure 56.

Figure 56, Terracing in the upland villages of Talaon (left) and Elecia (right)


The attractive farm scenery in the uplands of La Libertad could be attributed to the
numerous conservation farming technologies and development that had taken place
through the years. According to the DOT officials and LGU tourism officer, transforming
the partially degraded landscape through sustainable farming methods had given rise to the
upland villages’ unique scenery and high scientific value compared to neighboring regions.
The development of these upland farming villages took years and much support from the
local, provincial, and national government, as shared by the municipal agriculture officer
of La Libertad. Diverse and sustainable farming practices and technologies could be easily
seen in all four sites (Figure 57-60). These gave rise to multiple products and services for
potential tourists. Farm tourism owners/managers indicated that the high level of farm
biodiversity in the study sites helped in improving the entertainment value of the

destination.

Figure 57. Agroforestry farms in Nasunggan cultivate a variety of crops.

Figure 59. Terracing, contour hedgerows, and rockwall technologies in Aya.




Figure 60. Terracing and rockwall in agroforestry rice farms in Elecia.

According to the farm tourism owners/manager and the DOT officials, the farming
villages in the uplands of La Libertad were unique not only in the Visayas region but also
in the entire country. Family farms were situated across the landscape, and diverse
livestock could easily be observed in the villages. The LGU officer cited that the level of
support to farmers improved through the years, leading to enhanced farm and upland
development in the study sites. Maintaining sustainable farming methods has heavily
improved the internal tourism potential of La Libertad’s uplands, as revealed by the
municipal agriculture officer. DOT officials added that potential farm tourism sites in the
uplands of La Libertad could be assured of the variety of attractions and services stemming
from the diverse agroforestry farms. The key expert interviewed pointed out that Flecia’s
extensive rice terraces could be promoted similar to the rice terraces of Banaue, and the

high LV and FB would benefit the rest of the internal criteria.


In terms of the size of the destination, Elecia and Talaon were the largest. However,
the type and kinds of geologic formations in the study sites also controlled the extent of
farming done along the slopes. These slopes had eroded parts that could become common,
especially in the Aya, where it was usually observed. Patches of farms found along the
slopes usually employed various technologies to maintain their farm, manage erosion, and
protect their land. According to the LGU tourism officer, these technologies and activities
could be showcased to potential tourists accompanied by hands-on activities like planting
rice, transplanting seedlings, and harvesting vegetables. The key expert pointed out that
group activities and guided tours could be efficiently planned for the upland farms,
especially in Elecia (Figure 61), due to the suitable farm and upland development level in
the area that could easily cater to tourists. However, the barangay captain interviewed
suggested that more training would be necessary before finally opening up their farms to

accept tourists.

Sittias

Figure 61. Multiple-use farm houses in Elecia can be utilized for tourism activities.


Tourism seasonality in La Libertad was expected to affect the uplands, especially
during the rainy months. However, the LGU tourism officer noted that La Libertad’s
uplands could be first trialed during the summer months and become a seasonal tourism
offering only. The tourism owners/managers interviewed also pointed out that selecting the
best timing to open up and accept tourists depended on the number of farm products,
attractions, and activities offered in that specific period. Other considerations such as ease
of travel, lodging, and local weather and climate must also be assessed. As shown in Figure
62, agroforestry farms provideda degree of environmental resiliency and improve the

overall recreational potential of the upland study sites in Negros Oriental.

Figure 62. A close-up of agroforestry farms in Talaon.


Internal tourism potential scores for study sites in La Libertad showed that the
farming villages had a great potential for tourism due to effective farm development, a
strong agricultural resource base, and the high suitability of sites for farm activities and
outdoor recreation/entertainment. Farm owners/managers interviewed indicated that the
presence of diverse kinds of livestock in the farming villages (Figure 63) would further
improve the suitability of the farms for tourism purposes. They added that farm animals
became an attraction in many destinations due to their appeal to kids and families, thereby

improving farm acti

-s and entertainment value at the same time.

Figure 63. A diverse livestock can become a principal or alternative attraction in farms.

The mosaic of agroforestry farms in La Libertad and the extent of farm
development, resource base, and support from the LGU made the sites very suitable for

farm tourism activ

in the future. Crops and trees grown throughout the year varied


according to the farmers interviewed, and this would affect the kinds of potential activities,
attractions, and outdoor recreation planned. Basic infrastructures were also observed in the
farming villages and barangay multipurpose halls and farm houses, which could also be
utilized for tourism purposes. Essential utilities were available, including electricity and
piped water in the main residential areas of the upland farming communities.

The assessment of external tourism potential criteria scores of study sites in La
Libertad indicated that in terms of linkage to other tourism sites (LT) and potential
accessibility (PA), Nasunggan and Talaon scored better than Aya and Elecia. The LGU
tourism officer mentioned that Nasunggan and Talaon were easily accessible from the town
center and near major farm-to-market roads compared to the two other sites. The road
conditions in La Libertad were not considered to be extensively developed at present.
Gravel and dirt roads were still prevalent even in the lowlands, and the quality of the road
conditions, coupled with bad weather, would undoubtedly affect accessibility, safety, and

interconnectivity.

Figure 64, Dirt and gravel roads in Talaon.


In other areas, cemented roads were observed on major market roads connecting
barangays as shown in Figure 65. The LGU tourism officer shared that road construction
plans in La Libertad were distributed based on prioritization. This trend has led to the
variation of road types around the area wherein dirt, gravel, and cement roads were all
utilized in certain locations. In some areas, these gravel and dirt roads were also narrow
and could only fit one vehicle at a time. Additionally, many roads needed repair and
improvement due to depreciation. The DOT officials pointed out the safety issues in these

locations that need to be considered when transporting tourists to the uplands.

Figure 65. Cemented roads in La Libertad vary in quality, construction, and extent.


The travel time from the town center of La Libertad to any of the upland sites would
take about 60-120mins on the average. During heavy rains and cold months, a thick fog
enveloped the upland route to the barangays. There were also many narrow road points
and blind spots that become a safety issue. The LGU tourism officer pointed out that
transport services in these destinations must be familiar with safely traveling and driving
through these choke points, especially when carrying any passengers or tourists.
Additionally, better transport services might be needed, specifically for tourist travel to the
upland areas of La Libertad as it would require more safety features and larger carrying
capacity, as cited by the LGU tourism officer.

Linkage to other tourism sites in the region was good for all four study sites due to
the proximity of many destinations that require land and/or sea travel. Cebu Island and
other parts of Negros were very accessible from La Libertad. The LGU tourism officer
shared that a steady flow of tourists from Dumaguete and Cebu visit the town regularly due
to the ease of travel via sea ferry, buses, and private vehicles. The nearest airport is in
Dumaguete City and would take about 2-3 hours travel time by private vehicle or bus.
Tourism attractions across the Negros Oriental region were diverse and accessible from La
Libertad and other neighboring towns. Travel to other tourism sites in the Negros Island is
usually done by land and affected by the municipalities’ varying road conditions and
weather, as pointed out by the LGU tourism officer. The journey across the undulating
landscape in the uplands of La Libertad will take potential tourists through a mosaic of

farms and trees along the mountain slopes, as shown in Figure 66.


Figure 66. Diverse farm landscapes observed while traveling across La Libertad’s uplands.

Safety and security (SS) of the four study sites scored high with minor differences.
According to the LGU tourism officer, the crime rate was very low in their municipality,
and it was rare for tourists to be victimized by any form of crime. However, the DOT
officials interviewed mentioned that rebel activity has not diminished in the Negros Island.
Recent Philippine news agency reports cited Hinoba-an, Guihulngan City, Siaton,

Cauayan, and Talisay City as recent spots for rebel group activities and sightings, These


conflict areas were generally located up north in the Negros Island. The municipal
agricultural officer indicated that La Libertad is free from these kinds of rebel activity
mainly due to the dominant agricultural livelihood coupled with extensive farm
development and support from the LGU, preventing its local citizens from joining these
armed groups.

Weather and climate significantly affect the PA and SS of La Libertad due to the
increased risk of falling rocks and eroding chunks of soil onto the roads along the mountain
slopes. As a result, travel during heavy rains is not recommended, as mentioned by the
LGU tourism officer. However, according to the municipal agricultural officer, farm-to-
market road projects were already approved, and they expect that they will help improve

interconnectivity.

Assessment of Farm Tourism Potential of Study Sites

The overall ranking and score of each barangay study site are shown in Figure 67.
Elecia ranked first with a significantly high score of 86.735 compared to Talaon (79.751)
and Nasunggan (77.864), which ranked second and third, respectively. San Marcelino and
Magsikap were ranked fourth and fifth with close scores of 76.211 and 76.139. Lastly, Aya
and Minahan Norte ranked sixth and seventh (last) with scores of 74.603 and 73.739. Based
on the resulting rank and score from the AHP, Elecia scored over 60% of the possible

maximum score of 140, making the CFV site the most suitable farm tourism destination

out of the seven study sites. On the other hand, Aya and Minahan Norte occupied the
bottom two ranks, indicating that these sites were not the best destinations for farm tourism
ventures. The rank indicated the present status and assessment of the sites at the time of

the data-gathering phase of the study from October 2020 to February 2021.

Elecia 86.735
Talaon 79.151
Nasunggan 71.864
‘San Marcelino 76211

‘Magsikap 76.139

Aya 74.603
‘Minahan Norte 73.739

65 70 15 80 85 90

Figure 67. Final farm tourism potential scores and ranking of CFV barangay study sites.

The final scores indicated that study sites in La Libertad were more suitable for
farm tourism than General Nakar, as indicated by the higher average final scores. Based on
all the key informant interviews, La Libertad study sites scored significantly higher than
CFV sites in Quezon primarily due to the extent, diversity, and level of farm development
and technologies implemented across the upland villages. The extent of farm development
was easily observed in the landscape of the entire region of La Libertad and its farming
villages compared to General Nakar (Figure 68). Extensive farm development has led to

high ratings in farm biodiversity and landscape/scenic values of La Libertad that have


cascaded and positively influenced the rest of the internal tourism criteria such as

entertainment value, farm activities, and scientific value,

MAGSIKAP MINAHAN NORTE

Figure 68. Satellite view of General Nakar (top) and La Libertad (bottom) study sites.

Agroforestry technologies and other sustainable farming practices dominated the
upland region in La Libertad. The extent of these farm developments could be observed
from a satellite view of the area. Unlike General Nakar, the uplands of La Libertad did not
have extensive natural forests. Instead, a combination of partially degraded lands and
logged-over forests with embedded farms characterize the upland region of La Libertad.
Farms in the uplands vary in size, crops, livestock, and the farming technologies they

implement, However, most farming villages such as Elecia have extensive terracing,


rockwall, and contour farming systems compared to other study sites in La Libertad (Figure
69). On the other hand, farming villages in General Nakar far exceed La Libertad in terms
of extensive natural forest cover and having less degraded and logged over lands. Thick
crowns of trees and vegetation covered most farms and villages and created a homogenous
mountain landscape that was not befitting of a farm tourism destination compared with La
Libertad.

The landscape and high natural resource base of General Nakar, Quezon was
suitable for other forms of tourism such as extreme sports and other forms of outdoor
recreation. However, in terms of farm tourism, study sites in Quezon need further farm
development and investments to improve each site's farm biodiversity and scenic value and
create a more conducive environment for tourism in the upland villages.

Farming villages in the uplands of La Libertad have a considerable advantage over
General Nakar as they can easily create several farm tourism-related attractions and
activities that will blend well in the region. Furthermore, the high level of scientific value
of study sites in La Libertad makes it a unique attraction that is easy to promote and
maintain, given the widespread adoption of agroforestry technologies and conservation
farming practices. The farmers in La Libertad enjoy a strong level of support from their
LGU, which only enhances their suitability for future farm tourism ventures. Unlike in La
Libertad, most farms in General Nakar lag behind in diversity, level of agroforestry

development, and upkeep.


Google Earth

Figure 69. Satellite and actual view of a section of farms in Elecia, La Libertad.

Study sites in General Nakar have a slight advantage over La Libertad in terms of

external tourism potential, mainly due to the location of these municipalities. General


Nakar, being in Luzon, is easily accessible to surrounding towns and provinces. At the
same time, La Libertad will primarily depend on local tourists on the island of Negros and
those coming from Cebu and other parts of the Visayas and Mindanao region. Based on
the interview of key informants, the external tourism potential of General Nakar and La
Libertad is about the same, and the overall potential of the destinations relies heavily on
the internal criteria. LGU tourism officers interviewed pointed out the similarities in terms
of PA and SS of both study areas and how each site can be linked to other tourism spots in
its region. Negros and Quezon both have local beaches and resorts that attract tourists.

According to DOT officials, issues relating to external tourism potential and
interconnectivity could be handled and resolved by proper planning and execution of road
construction projects. These solutions include farm-to-market roads in the uplands and
lowlands and the coordination and partnership between tourism operators, local tourism
organizations, and the LGU. Tourism owners/managers added that the quality of the
potential destination has more to do with the internal tourism criteria because it is the basis
and foundation of all future farm activities and attractions.

DOT officials interviewed shared that the suitability of La Libertad should enable
them to develop a community-based farm tourism strategy to showcase their farm
resources to tourists. The majority of the key informants shared that General Nakar needs
to further develop its farms in the uplands and strengthen agroforestry development and

farm resources in order to mature into a suitable farm tourism destination in the future.


Issues and Concerns on Farm Tourism in CFV Sites

The Farm Tourism Development Act of 2016 was enacted as part of the
government's efforts to promote and improve farm tourism. However, government support
in farm tourism through R.A. 10816 or the Farm Tourism Development Act of 2016 has
not been fully implemented up to the present. The government has failed to address critical
issues such as low public awareness of farm tourism and its benefits, a lack of
understanding of farm tourism among relevant government agencies, limited marketing
initiatives by local government units, and the poor streamlining of policies, and inefficient
coordination between DOT, and other government institutions.

To promote the effective delivery of government support services to upland farming,
communities, local and national government agencies must efficiently share resources and
information on farming and tourism. The LGUs must consider developing private and
public partnerships and expanding institutional linkages in their respective locality and
region. This goal can be achieved through government-academe-industry partnerships that
will harness knowledge and technology transfer to aid the adoption of conservation farming
and tourism innovations, thus, yielding more significant results.

Interviews with CFV farmers highlighted the importance of financial assistance in
diversifying their farms and adopting innovations. Both La Libertad and General Nakar
would require financial support and subsidies to small-scale farmers in order to capitalize
on developing their farms and improving potential farm tourism attractions. The

development and marketing of farm tours to tourists and educational institutions as


potential field trip activities in both Quezon and Negros Oriental can help push the interest
to these farm tourism destinations in their respective regions. Utilizing the government-
academe-industry partnerships in promoting upland farm tourism destinations can generate
faster information diffusion and generate more opportunities for farmers to promote value-
added products directly to consumers and tourists. Existing upland farming community
sites with good farm tourism potential must work to provide the basic needs of tourists and
comply with DOT accreditation requirements that will be critical at the start of any
marketing and promotions campaign.

A community-based approach to farm tourism development is recommended for
Quezon and Negros Oriental study sites and other similar upland farming villages.
Agroforestry technologies and conservation farming practices introduced by external
agents in the upland communities must be inclusive of pre-existing local and indigenous
resource management systems before farm tourism transition. This should be supported by
institutionalizing local ordinances and policies that improve the sustainability of upland
farming systems and natural resources.

The study of the farm tourism potentials of CFV sites in Quezon and Negros
Oriental highlighted the importance of key internal and external tourism criteria that will
help government and private institutions to develop strategies to support future agroforestry
farm development and farm tourism ventures. Furthermore, understanding the most critical
variables in farm tourism potential will enable managers and decision-makers to gain a
clear picture of the upland communities’ potential contribution to the growth of farm

tourism.


Limitations of the Study

The analysis of the determinants of agroforestry system adoption was limited to the
9 technologies/practices explicitly listed in the survey instrument and the parameters used
from the survey data. The analysis was conducted based on the current state of the farms
and the farmer-respondents. The choice of other technologies not included in the list of 9

practices was not explored.

CHAPTER V

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Summary

The study aimed to determine the adoption of agroforestry systems and the
assessment of the tourism potential of selected CFV pilot site barangays in the Philippines.
It was conducted in selected barangays of General Nakar, Quezon, and La Libertad,
Negros Oriental, from October 2020 to February 2021. Quantitative and qualitative
research methods were implemented, including farm household surveys, focus group
discussions (FGD), and key informant interviews (KII). To analyze the data, descriptive
statistics and Stata were used.

A total of 460 farmers served as respondents of the farm household survey, while a
total of 93 farmers participated in all the FGD sessions in both study sites. Key informant
interviews for the first phase of the study included two farmer-leaders, two officers from
the municipal agriculture office, and two LGU officials. The second phase of the study
utilized seven key informants with relevant expertise and experience in farming, farm
tourism, and tourism growth in assessing the tourism potential criteria and rating the study

sites. These key informants were: (1) a tourism officer from General Nakar LGU, (2) a


tourism officer from La Libertad LGU, (3) an official from DOT-CALABARZON, (4) an
official from the DOT Farm Tourism National Program, (5) an owner/manager of a farm
tourism location in Luzon, (6) an owner/manager of a farm tourism location in
Visayas/Mindanao, (7) and a key expert on farm tourism and hospitality. In addition, farm
tourism-related questions for farmer respondents were included on the final page of the
survey instrument.

FGDs and interviews yielded essential data that reinforced survey results,
supported findings, and shed light on other farming community issues and concerns. In
addition, farm visits and site surveys conducted in the study sites validated the farming
villages’ biophysical and socioeconomic conditions, cultural environment, and
infrastructure.

The first phase of the study focused on the determinants of agroforestry system
adoption and its estimation. In contrast, the second phase focused on the tourism potential
of the study sites and the willingness of farmers to venture into farm tourism.

The biophysical conditions of both study sites differ. The three barangays in the
municipality of General Nakar were located in hilly regions of the area and have an
elevation that ranges from 24 to 66 meters above sea level. These barangays are Magsikap,
San Marcelino, and Minahan Norte. The soil was clay to loam in the CFV areas. Type II
(no pronounced dry season with a very pronounced peak rainy period from December to
February) and Type IV (rainfall is spread more or less evenly throughout the year) were

two forms of climate in the region. The selected CFV barangays belong to Type II with


annual rainfall ranging from 2,100 to 6,600 mm with an average temperature of 26.8
degrees Celsius.

La Libertad has three barangays included in the initial years of CFV
implementation. These barangays were Aya, Elecia, and Nasunggan. A fourth barangay,
Talaon, which sits in the middle of the initial CFV sites, was also included. The four
barangays range from 600 to 800 m above sea level. Large parts of these sites have slopes
above 18% prone to flood, leading to heavy soil erosion and landslides. The area has a
Type II climate, with annual rainfall ranging from 750 to 2,300 mm and temperatures
ranging from 20 to 35 degrees Celsius all year.

Soil conditions vary in terms of soil fertility and depth. Farms located on steep to
moderate slopes have marginal farm conditions and have little to no access to irrigation.
Most areas of the study sites have rolling terrain and is dependent on rainfall for crop
irrigation. Farm households are also varied in terms of household and socioeconomic
characteristics. Results of the survey indicate that farmers have an average family size of
5 per household. Likewise, 20 relatives or families are living in the same village or
barangay and only 2 relatives, on the average, are classified as connections because of their
leadership position. The age of farmers is 46 years old with 7 years of education on the
average.

The average size of land of farmer respondents is 3 hectares with an average
distance of 23 kilometers and 24 kilometers to the agri-extension office and main market
trade post, respectively. On the average, a farmer has an asset value of Php 23,166.41 that

includes farm equipment, household furniture, gadgets, and vehicle. Meanwhile, Php


10,294.01 is the average household expenditure on food, utilities, education, house
maintenance, health services, and other household expenses. The mean plot size of 2.81
hectares indicates that the land of most farmer respondents is classified as smallholder
farms. Likewise, the plot distance from the farmer’s house is 0.92 kilometers on the
average.

Adopted agroforestry technologies and conservation farming practices of farmer
respondents show that there is a huge significant difference between the number of adopted
practices in La Libertad and General Nakar. Results indicate that farmer respondents in La
Libertad implemented a higher number of agroforestry practices compared to General
Nakar. The top five technologies in La Libertad are livestock raising, contour composting,
contour hedgerow, rockwall, and terracing. Meanwhile, in General Nakar, the top five
technologies implemented are boundary planting, contour composting, livestock raising,
organic farming, and multistorey cropping system.

The multivariate probit analysis of the determinants of adoption of agroforestry
systems shows 19 variables that are classified into 6 categories. These categories are
biophysical and household characteristics, institutional structures and policies, social
capital and networks, conservation farming and agroforestry technologies, and
endowments. Biophysical and household characteristics influenced the suitability of the
farming household to practices and technologies that they can manage based on soil
conditions of the farm, age of farmer, level of education, expenditure, access to fertilizers,

and presence of pests and disease in the farm.


Institutional structures and policies such as tenure and extension services and
community social networks create stronger community ties that provide a form of security
and insurance to the farmer and technical and credit support system. Conservation farming
and agroforestry technologies are further influenced by farm endowments which can vary
from farm to farm. These determinants are number of livestock, farm distance to market
and agri-extension office, farm size, and plot distance to farmer’s residence. The synergies
across the categories of determinants are highlighted in the adoption model, which has a
favorable impact on technology selection. The vital responsibilities of external change
agents in favorably impacting and promoting the adoption and diffusion of agroforestry
systems are highlighted by important synergies such as social networks, institutional
structures, and policies.

The farm tourism assessment conducted finalized the weights of internal and
external criteria through AHP. Assessment and rating of tourism potential utilized the final
criteria weights in scoring and assessing the sites. Each barangay study site's overall
ranking and score indicate Elecia ranked first with a significantly high score of 86.735
compared to Talaon (79.751) and Nasunggan (77.864), which ranked second and third,
respectively. San Marcelino and Magsikap are ranked fourth and fifth with close scores of
76.211 and 76.139. Lastly, Aya and Minahan Norte ranked sixth and seventh (last) with
scores of 74.603 and 73.739. The final scores indicate that study sites in La Libertad are
more suitable for farm tourism than General Nakar, as indicated by the higher average final

scores, Based on all the key informant interviews, La Libertad study sites scored


significantly higher than CFV sites in Quezon primarily due to the extent, diversity, and
level of farm development and technologies implemented across the upland villages.

Extensive farm development has led to high ratings in farm biodiversity and
landscape/scenic values of La Libertad that have cascaded and positively influenced the
rest of the internal tourism criteria such as entertainment value, farm activities, and
scientific value. DOT officials interviewed shared that the suitability of La Libertad should
enable them to develop a community-based farm tourism strategy to showcase their farm
resources to tourists. The majority of the key informants shared that General Nakar needs
to further develop its farms in the uplands and strengthen agroforestry development and
farm resources to mature into a suitable farm tourism destination in the future.

The farm tourism portion of the survey instrument indicated a mix of results that
provide insight into the awareness and perspectives of farmer-respondents on farm tourism.
Farm tourism awareness in General Nakar is relatively higher than La Libertad, and most
of the respondents in General Nakar are undecided in terms of farming and tourism
integration, unlike in La Libertad, wherein most farmers believe in the possibility. The
present status of each farmer’s land was assessed in the survey. Most farmers in General
Nakar who were undecided of the integration were also undecided when asked about their
perception if their farm is a good candidate for future farm tourism venture. Meanwhile,
La Libertad expressed confidence in their farms as they answered positively in this matter.
At the same time, 44% of surveyed farmers in General Nakar stated that their farms are not

a good candidate for farm tourism.


Most farmer-respondents in La Libertad agreed that their community would benefit
from the influx of tourists due to farm tourism, while in General Nakar most farmers were
undecided on the matter. On the other hand, farmers in both study sites agreed that farm
tourism benefits environmental protection. The majority of farmers in La Libertad and
General Nakar expressed their willingness to share their knowledge on farming with
potential tourists and visitors. In La Libertad and General Nakar, farmer-respondents were
interested in joining training and seminars to learn more about farm tourism. However,
results indicate that willingness to make investments was inversely proportional to those
who expressed willingness to join trainings. The disconnect in some of the responses
indicate that most of the farmer-respondents need to be enlightened and advised on the
aspects of farm tourism. A deeper understanding of farm tourism’s value-added aspect will
grow once the farmers fully understand, through training and IEC, what farm tourism is,
how they can take part in it, and what kind of skills and resources will it require. The
support of the LGU is crucial in addressing the knowledge gap on farm tourism and
providing resources for tourism development and research.

Tourism development in General Nakar is slow but is expected to improve in the
next few years, especially upon the completion of interconnecting roads and implementing
the Metro REINA tourism development plan and more investments to improve
accommodation, facilities, and transportation as DOT-accredited and designated tourist
vehicles, In addition, tourism influx has been increasing in the past years due to the linkages
of General Nakar with motorbike groups, 4x4 off-road enthusiasts, and various outdoor

and extreme sports advocates.


In La Libertad, tourism development is not a priority. However, farm tourism could
provide a way to integrate upland farming with tourists, but it will require investments and
effective marketing and promotion. As a predominantly agricultural town, La Libertad will
benefit from farm tourism and help push its own products. Modern amenities for tourists
are still lacking, but essential services are provided, such as ATMs, remittance centers, and
lodging. Tourism demand is expected to grow in the near future as Dumaguete is poised to
follow Cebu’s urbanization, which is expected to generate a steady influx of tourists for

Negros Oriental.

Conclusions

‘The Conservation Farming Village project in 2008 was successful in promoting a
multilevel technology promotion mechanism that will enhance the skills of local extension
staff and change agents through tripartite collaboration among SUC, LGU, and the farmers.
The establishment of model farms showcased conservation farming, and agroforestry
technologies helped impart technical knowledge and skills to farmer-volunteers, CFV
adopters, and extension staff. Over 10 years had passed since the project's implementation.
Several follow-up projects and site-specific changes could affect the rates of adoption and
continued use of agroforestry systems in the CFV pilot sites. The study examined the
determinants of the adoption of agroforestry systems and their effect on diffusion and

transfer of technology in upland farming villages of the Philippines utilizing the selected


CFV pilot sites as cases. In addition, the farm tourism potential of selected CFV pilot sites
was assessed, including the willingness of farmers to venture into a farm tourism enterprise.

The continued existence of successful CFVs in pilot sites offers a new frontier of
development that can open up the gateway further to enhance the productivity of farms and
suitable agribusiness ventures. Existing CFV pilot sites can further add value to their farms
through the inclusion of farm tourism or agri-tourism. Agroforestry system adoption,
through the CFV, creates multifunctional landscapes with recreational benefits. The
recreational multifunctionality of sustainable upland farming villages improves the site’s
tourism potential, thereby creating an opportunity to transition into a farm tourism
destination and further add value to the land.

The results of the multivariate probit analysis of survey data show that there are 19
variables that are determinants of agroforestry system adoption in the CFV study sites.
These determinants are grouped into 6 categories namely: biophysical and household
characteristics, endowments, institutional structures and policies, social networks, and
conservation farming and agroforestry technologies. Based on the determinants, the level
of agroforestry system adoption was estimated for General Nakar and La Libertad study
sites through average treatment estimation in Stata. The results show that La Libertad has
a higher rate of adoption due to the significant P-value of 0.004 (95% confidence interval).
This indicates that the determinants of agroforestry systems, together with 2 or more
combinations of conservation farming and agroforestry technologies with a tree component
positively influence the adoption of agroforestry systems in La Libertad. On the other hand,

the estimation of adoption in General Nakar resulted in an insignificant P-value of 0.186,


indicating that the agroforestry system's adoption level is low in the area based on the
determinants/criteria used.

Biophysical and household characteristics were significant in influencing the
suitability of the farm household for site-specific conservation farming and agroforestry
technologies. Institutional structure and policy variables that determine the adoption of
agroforestry systems are tenure and skill of extension agents/civil servants. These variables
shape the farmer's decisions in making investments in long and/or short gestation
technologies and cropping systems. The presence of social networks, and their
collaboration with eternal agents and institutional structures and policies, promote deeper
community ties that provide insurance and supportive roles and enhance the local
governance of the community through the institutionalization of the CFV initiative and
‘empowerment of farmers. Furthermore, endowments and social networks (farmer's groups,
relatives, traders, and connections in the community) facilitate community traditions and
influence the accessibility of the farm, and market-outlet integration of farm produce.

The interrelationships among the determinants and the choice of technologies and
practices shape agroforestry systems' long-term adoption and sustainability in upland
farming communities. Moreover, the results highlight the importance of extemal change
agents and a robust social network in imparting technical knowledge and skills on
sustainable farming systems to upland communities and the LGU.

The assessment of the farm tourism potential of CFV barangay study sites yielded
the following ranking: !* — Elecia, 2"! ~ Talaon, 3" — Nasunggan, 4"" — San Marcelino, 5**

—Magsikap, 6" — Aya, and 7"—Minahan Norte. Key informants utilized the scoring criteria


previously determined through AHP. The final scores and rank indicate that study sites in
La Libertad are more suitable for farm tourism than General Nakar primarily due to the
extensive farm development that has led to high ratings in farm biodiversity and
landscape/scenic values that have cascaded and positively influenced the rest of the internal
tourism criteria such as entertainment value, farm activities, and scientific value. On the
other hand, General Nakar needs to further develop its farms in the uplands and strengthen
agroforestry development and farm resources in order to mature into a suitable farm
tourism destination in the future.

The assessment of the tourism potentials of General Nakar and La Libertad study
sites highlighted the importance of developing the internal potential of upland farming
communities through sustainable farming systems such as agroforestry to develop
multifunctional landscapes with high recreational value. Through enhanced recreational
multifunctionality of the agroforestry landscape, the tourism potential of the upland village
is improved and thereby becomes suitable for a possible transition into a farm tourism
destination. The value-added feature of farm tourism to existing upland farming villages
offer numerous opportunities and a path to sustainability.

The final portion of the survey instrument implemented in the CFV study sites was
aimed at examining the perspectives and awareness of farmers on farm tourism and
assessing their willingness to venture in a farm tourism enterprise. Results indicate that
farmers in La Libertad were generally more supportive and receptive to farm tourism, as
shown in most of their positive responses. On the other hand, farmers in General Nakar

were mostly undecided and neutral on farm tourism and investing in it. The overall results


indicate that farmer-respondents in both study sites will significantly benefit from IEC and
workshops on farm tourism to expand their knowledge and perspective.

The study concluded that the adoption and sustainability of agroforestry systems in
upland farming villages with marginal lands is positively influenced by six categories of
determinants, especially social networks, local institutions, and service providers that form
a supportive role to farmers through subsidies, credit/technical assistance, and market
integration. Moreover, the resulting widespread and continued adoption of agroforestry
systems in upland villages positively influences the site’s tourism potential, thereby

creating a suitable value-added opportunity in the form of farm tourism.


LITERATURE CITED

AARONS, G. A., HURLBURT, M., AND HORWITZ, S. 2011. Advancing a conceptual
model of evidence-based practice implementation in public service sectors.
Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services Research,
38(1): 4-23.

ABUKHZAM, M. AND LEE, A. 2010. Workforce Attitude on Technology Adoption and
Diffusion. The Built and Human Environment Review, 3: 60-71.

ADESINA, A. A. and J. CHIANU. 2002. Determinants of farmers’ adoption and
adaptation of alley farming technology in Nigeria. Agroforestry Systems, 55: 99—
112.

AJZEN, |., and FISHBEIN, M. 1977. Attitude-behavior relations: A theoretical analysis
and review of empirical research, Psychological bulletin, 84(5): 888,

AKER, J.C. 2007.Social Networks and Household Welfare in Tanzania: Working Together
to Get out of Poverty; University of California-Berkely: Berkeley, CA, USA.

ALZAHRANI; M.E. AND GOODWIN, R.D. 2012. Towards a UTAUTbased Model for
the study of E-Government Citizen Acceptance in Saudi Arabia. World Academy
of Science, Engineering and Technology, 64: 8-14.

AMACHER, G.S., CRUZ, W., GREBNER, D., AND HYDE, W.F. 1998. Environmental
Motivations for Migration: Population Pressure, Poverty, and Deforestation in the
Philippines. Land Economics. Vol. 74, No. 1 (Feb., 1998), pp. 92-101.

ANAMIKA, P. 2013. Applications of remote sensing and GIS in tourism potential
evaluation. International Journal of Remote Sensing and GIS, 2(1), 11-20.

ANDERSON, G. 2007. The living heritage survey of the designated buffer zone of the
Ukhahlamba Drakensberg world heritage site. Unpublished Report. Howick,
Ezemvelo KZN Wildlife. Retrieved from: www.sahra.org.za.


ANDERECK, K., and VOGT, C. 2000. The relationship between residents’ attitudes
toward tourism and tourism development options. Journal of Travel Research,
39(4), 27636.

AQUINO, E., NOCON-SHIMOGUCHI, N., AND INAIZUMI H. 2018. Significant
Contribution of Farmer First in Farmer-Trainer for Environmentally-Friendly
Agriculture and Rural Development. International Journal of Environmental and
Rural Development (2018) 9-1.

ARRIAZA, M., J. F. CANAS-ORTEGA, J. A. CANAS- MADUENO, and P. RUIZ-
AVILES. (2004). “Assessing the Visual Quality of Rural Landscapes.” Landscape
and Urban Planning, 69 (1): 115-25.

AYELE, ZELEKE EWNETU. 2008. Smallholder Farmers’ Decision Making in Farm Tree
Growing in the Highlands of Ethiopia. PhD Dissertation, Oregon State University.

AZNAR, O., MARSAT J.B., and RAMBONILAZA, T. 2007. “Tourism and Landscapes
within Multifunctional Rural Areas: the French Case.” In Multifunctional Land
Use: Meeting Future Demands for Landscape Goods and Service, edited by Ulo
Mander, Hubert Wiggering, and Katharina Helming.

BAILEY, D. B., JR., and PALSHA, S. A. 1992. Qualities of the stages of concern
questionnaire and implications for educational innovations. Journal of Educational
Research, 85: 226-232.

BANNISTER, M. E. AND P. K. R. NAIR. 2003. Agroforestry adoption in Haiti: the
importance of household and farm characteristics. Agroforestry Systems, 57: 149—
157.

BARBIERI, C. 2010. “An Important-Performance Analysis of the Motivation behind
Agritourism and Other Farm Enterprise Developments in Canada.” Journal of Rural
and Community Development, 5 (1/2): 1-20.

BARBIERI, C. 2013. “Assessing the Sustainability of Agritourism in the US: A
Comparison between Agritourism and Other Farm Entrepreneurial Ventures.”
Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 21 (3): 252-70.


BARBIERI, C. and EDWARD, M. 2009. “Why Is Diversification an Attractive Farm
Adjustment Strategy? Insights from Texas Farmers.

BARBIERI, C., and TEW, C. 2016. Perceived impact of agritourism on farm economic
standing, sales and profits.

BINA J. 2008. Evaluating Tourist Potential in the Czech Municipalities (in Czech).
Retrieved from www.uur.cz/images/publikace/uur/2002/2002-01/01.pdf

BINNS, T. AND NEL, T. 2002. Tourism as a local development strategy in South Africa,
‘The Geographic Journal, 168(3), 235-47.

BOYNE, GEORGE A. 2002. Public and private management: What's the difference?
Journal of Management Studies, 39 (1): 97-122.

BRIEDENHANN, J., AND BUTTS, S. 2006. Application of the Delphi technique to rural
tourism project evaluation. Current Issues in Tourism, 9(2), 171-190.

BULLOCK, R., MITHOFER, D., AND VIHEMAKI, H. 2013. Sustainable agricultural
intensification: the role of cardamom agroforestry in the East Usambaras, Tanzania.
International journal of agricultural sustainability, 12 (2), 109-129.

CARTER, J. 1995. Socio-economic factors influencing alley farming adoptability. Natural
Resource Perspectives. Overseas Development Institute London. 3 (June).
Supplement A.

CAYABYAB, M. 2013. Agriculture: The decline of the poor man’s sector Economy
Online.

CHE, D., VEECK A., and VEECK G. 2005. “Sustaining Production and Strengthening the
Agritourism Product: Linkages among Michigan Agritourism Destinations.”
Agriculture and Human Values, 22 (2): 225-34.


CHOO, H., AND JAMAL, T. 2009. Tourism on organic farms in South Korea: a new form
of ecotourism. Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 17(4), 431-454.

COOPER, R., and KLEINSCHMIDT, E. 1990. New products: The key factors in success.
Chicago American Marketing Association.

CONSTANTIN, M., DANIELA-LUMINIA, C., AND MIHAELA, G. 2009. Tourism
Potential and the Diminishing of Regional Disparities in Romania. Economy and
Business Administration, 2, 151.

CRUZ, M.C.J., ZOSA-FERANIL, I, GOCE, C.L. 1988. Population Pressure and
Migration: Implications for Upland Development in the Philippines. Journal of
Philippine Development 26, Volume 15, No 1, 1988.

CRUZ, R.V.O., CARANDANG, W.M., AND GALAPIA, G.A. 2014. Conservation
farming village (CFV) programme for protecting uplands and building resilient
communities. APN Science Bulletin. Volume 4, 49-54.

CRUZ, R.V.O., CARANDANG, V.Q., AND DE LUNA, C.C. 2014. Enhancing the LGU
{local government unit] capacity for implementing conservation farming villages
as a strategy for climate change adaptation and upland development. Asia-Pacific
Network for Global Change Research.

CRUZ, R.V.O., CARANDANG, V.Q., CARANDANG, W.M, DE LUNA, C.C., AND
GALAPIA, G.A. 2012. Four training courses on Conservation Farming Village
participated by representatives from Local Government Units of 13 provinces in
the Philippines. Project report, CBA2012-12NSY-Cruz.

DAMANPOUR, F., and SCHNEIDER, M. 2009. Characteristics of innovation and
innovation adoption in public organizations: Assessing the role of managers.
Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 19(3): 495-522.

DAS R., and BAUER S. 2012. Bio-economic analysis of soil conservation technologies
in the mid-hill region of Nepal. Soil Tillage Res 121:38-48.


DAVIS, F.D., BAGOZZI, R.P., WARSHAW, P.R. 1989.User acceptance of computer
technology: A comparison of two theoretical models. Management Science, 35(8):
982-1003.

DEL CASTILLO, R.A., DALMACIO, R.V., MARIANO, S.M., AND CABAHUG, R.D.
2001. Setting the directions of education programs and human resources in
Agroforestry: Results of the study on the demand and placement of agroforestry
graduates in the Philippines. UPLB Institute of Agroforestry, Southeast Asian
Network for Agroforestry Education.

DENG, J., KING, B., AND BAUER, T. 2002. Evaluating natural attractions for tourism.
Annals of tourism research, 29(2), 422-438.

DENG, J., QIANG, S., WALKER, G. J., AND ZHANG, Y. 2003. Assessment on and
perception of visitors' environmental impacts of nature tourism: a case study of
Zhangjiajie National Forest Park, China. Journal of sustainable tourism, 11(6), 529-
548.

DENMAN, R., AND DENMAN, J. 1990. A study of farm tourism in the West Country.
Exeter: West Country Tourist Board.

DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES. 1996. Basic
Community Organizing Handbook for Community-Based Forest Management
Programs. Visayas Avenue, Diliman, Quezon City, Philippines. ISBN 971-8836-
18-0

DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 123-89. 1989. Community Forestry Program.
Retrieved from http:/www.denr.gov.ph

DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM, 2015. National Tourism Development Plan. Retrieved
from http://www.tourism.gov.ph/NTDP.aspx

DO, H., LUEDELING, E. & WHITNEY, C. 2020. Decision analysis of agroforestry
options reveals adoption risks for resource-poor farmers. Agron. Sustain. Dev. 40,
20.


DOBBS, R. L. 2004. Impact of training on faculty and administrators in an interactive
television environment. Quarterly Review of Distance Education, 5: 183-194.

DONKOR, E., OWUSU-SEKYERE, E., OWUSU, V., and JORDAAN, H. 2016. Impact
of agricultural extension service on adoption of chemical fertilizer: Implications for
rice productivity and development in Ghana. NJAS Wageningen J. Life Sci. 79,
41-49.

DONKOR, E., OWUSU-SEKYERE, E., OWUSU, V., and OGUNDEJI, A. 2018. "The
Adoption of Farm Innovations among Rice Producers in Norther Ghana:
Implications for Sustainable Rice Supply," Agriculture, MDPI, Open Access
Journal, vol. 8(8), pages 1-13.

DONOHOE, H. M., AND NEEDHAM, R. D. 2009. Moving best practice forward: Delphi
characteristics, advantages, potential problems, and solutions. International Journal
of Tourism Research, 11(5), 415-437.

DUKE, J. M., AND AULL-HYDE, R. 2002. Identifying public preferences for land
preservation using the analytic hierarchy process. Ecological Economics, 42(1-2),
131-145.

DUNNING, JB., DANIELSON B., and PULLIAM HR. 1992. “Ecological Processes That
Affect Populations in Complex Landscapes.” Oikos, 65 (1): 169-75.

EDINAM K. GLOVER, HASSAN B. AHMED, MAWUTOR K. GLOVER. 2013
Analysis of Socio-Economic Conditions Influencing Adoption of Agroforestry
Practices, International Journal of Agriculture and Forestry, Vol. 3 No. 4. pp. 178-
184.

ELAURIA, M.M., MANILAY, A.A., ABRIGO, G.N., MEDINA, S.M., AND DE LOS
REYES, R.B. 2017. Socio-Economic And Environmental Impacts Of The
Conservation Farming Village Project in Upland Communities Of La Libertad,
Negros Oriental, Philippines. J. ISSAAS Vol. 23, No. 2: 45-56 (2017).


& AITCHISON, C. 2008. The role of food tourism in sustaining regional
identity: a case study of Cornwall, South West England. Journal of Sustainable
Tourism, 16(2), 150€167

FEDER G. AND UMALI D.L. 1993. The adoption of agricultural innovations: A review.
Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 43: 215-219.

FISHER, D. 2006. The potential for rural heritage tourism in the Clarence valley of
northem new south Wales. Australian Geographer, 37(3).

FISHER, R., 2013. A gentleman's handshake: the role of social capital and trust in
transforming information into usable knowledge. J. Rural. Stud. 31, 13-22.

FLANIGAN, S., BLACKSTOCK, K., AND HUNTER, C. 2015. Generating public and
private benefits through understanding what drives different types of agritourism.
Journal of Rural Studies, 41, 129-141.

FOREST MANAGEMENT BUREAU. 2012. Philippine Forestry Statistics, 2012.
Retrieved from www.denr.gov.ph

FOREST MANAGEMENT BUREAU. 2016. Philippine Forestry Statistics, 2016.
Retrieved from www.denr.gov.ph

FORTENBACKER, D. AND K. ALAVE. 2014, Upland Agriculture in the Philippines:
Potentials and Challenges. Deutsche Gesselschaft fur Internationale
Zusammenarbeit (GIZ).

FRATER, J. M. 1983. Farm tourism in England: Planning, funding, promotion and some
lessons from Europe. Tourism Management, 4(3), 167}179.

FREEMAN, C., AND SOETE, L. 1997. The economics of industrial innovation.
Routledge, Taylor and Francis Group, London, United Kingdom.


GABRIELSSON, S., RAMASAR, V., 2012. Widows: agents of change in a climate of
water uncertainty. Journal of Cleaner Production 32. in press.

GAO, JIE & BARBIERI, CARLA & VALDIVIA, CORINNE. 2014. Agricultural
Landscape Preferences: Implications for Agritourism Development. Journal of
Travel Research.

GARLAND, A., BICKMAN, L., AND CHORPITA, B. 2010. Change what? Identifying
quality improvement targets by investigating usual mental health care.
Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services Research,
37(1): 15-26.

GARRITY, D. 2012. Agroforestry and the Future of Global Land Use. World Agroforestry
Centre (ICRAF), Advances in Agroforestry 9.

GARRITY, D. KUMMER, D. AND GUIANG, E. 1993. Sustainable Agriculture and the
Environment in the Humid Tropics. Washington, DC: The National Academies

Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/1985.

GARRITY, D.P., 2004. Agroforestry and the achievement of the millennium development
goals. Agroforestry Systems 61, 5el7.

GHIMIRE, R., HUANG, W., and SHRESTHA, R.B. 2015. Factors affecting adoption of
improved rice varieties among rural farm households in Central Nepal. Rice Sci.
22, 35-43.

GIBREEL, T.M., 2013. Crop commercialization and adoption of gum-arabic agroforestry
and their effect on farming system in western Sudan. Agroforestry systems, 87 (2),
311-318.

GRALA, R., TYNDALL J, and MIZE, C. 2010. “Impact of Field Windbreaks on Visual
Appearance of Agricultural Lands.” Agroforestry Systems, 80 (3): 411-22


GREENHALGH, T., ROBERT, G., MACFARLANE, F., BATE, P., AND
KYRIAKIDOU, O. 2004. Diffusion of innovations in service organizations
Systematic review and recommendations. Milbank Quarterly, 82(4): 581-629.

HALL, G. E. 1974. The concerns-based adoption model: A developmental
conceptualization of the adoption process within educational institutions. Austin:
Research and Development Center for Teacher Education, University of Texas.

HALL, G., AND LOUCKS, S. 1978. Teacher concerns as a basis for facilitating and
personalizing staff development. Teachers College Record, 80(1): 36-53.

HARDY, M., DZIBA, L., KILIAN, W., TOLMAY, J., 2012. Rainfed farming systems in
South Africa. Rainfed Farming Systems

HAZELL, P. 1995. Managing Agricultural Intensification, International Food Policy
Research Institute, Washington, DC.

HOANG, H. T., TRUONG, Q. H., NGUYEN, A. T., AND HENS, L. 2018. Multicriteria
Evaluation of Tourism Potential in the Central Highlands of Vietnam: Combining
Geographic Information System (GIS), Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) and
Principal Component Analysis (PCA). Sustainability, 10(9), 3097

HSU, T. K., TSAI, Y. F., AND WU, H. H. 2009. The preference analysis for tourist choice
of destination: A case study of Taiwan. Tourism management, 30(2), 288-297.

HUFFMAN, WALLACE E. 2001. “Human Capital: Education and Agriculture.” In
Handbook of Agricultural Economics 1B, ed. Bruce L. Gardner andGordon C.
Rausser. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.

ILBERY, B., BOWLER, I., CLARK, G., CROCKETT, A. AND SHAW, A. 1998. Farm-
based tourism as an alternative farm enterprise: a case study ftom the northern
Pennines, England. Regional Studies, 32 (4), 355-364.

INTERNATIONAL TRADE CENTRE 2010. Inclusive Tourism: Linking Agriculture to
Tourism Market. Geneva: ITC, 2010. xiii, 69 pages (Technical paper)


IORIO, M. and CORSALE, A. 2010 Rural Tourism and Livelihood Strategies in Romania.
Journal of Rural Studies, 26(2), pp. 152-62.

ISLAM K., FUJIWARA T., SATO N., and HYAKUMURA K. (2018) Evolving and
strengthening the cooperative approach for agroforestry farmers in Bangladesh:
lessons leamed from the Shimogo Cooperative in Japan. Sustainability 10:617.

JERNECK, A. and OLSSON, L. 2013. More than trees! Understanding the agroforestry
adoption gap in subsistence agriculture: Insights from narrative walks in Kenya.
Journal of Rural Studies. Elsevier.

KAYNAK, E., and KARA, A. 2012. Assessing tourism market potential in a dynamic
emerging economy. Asia Pacific Journal of Marketing and Logistics.

KIM, H., CHUNG, Y., NISHII, K., AND JUNG, B. D. 2011. The effect of accessibility
improvement on tourist excursion behaviors. KSCE Journal of Civil Engineering,
15(8), 1443-1448.

KING K.FS. 1987. The history of agroforestry. In: Steppler H.A. and Nair P.K.R. (eds)
Agroforestry: A Decade of Development. ICRAF, Nairobi, Kenya. pp. I-11

KIRSTEN, M. AND ROGERSON, C. 2010. Tourism, business linkages and small
enterprise development in South Africa. Development Souther Africa, 19(1): 29—
59.

KLINE, S., AND ROSENBERG, N. 1986. An overview of innovation. In R. Landau, and
N. Rosenberg (Eds.), The positive sum strategy: Hamessing technology for
economic growth. Washington, DC, National Academy Press, pp. 277-300.

LAGO, N. A. A. 2017. Tourism Demand and Agriculture Supply: Basis for Agritourism
Development in Quezon Province. Asia Pacific Journal of Multidisciplinary
Research, 5(3), 1-9.

LANDICHO, L.D. 2016. Development Pathways Towards Sustainable Upland Farming
‘Communities in the Philippines. Unpublished PhD Dissertation, University of the
Philippines Los Bafios.


LEE, Y.H., HSIEH, Y.C., AND HSU, C.N. 2011. Adding Innovation Diffusion Theory to
the Technology Acceptance Model: Supporting Employees! Intentions to use E-
Learning Systems. Educational Technology and Society, 14(4): 124-137.

LUNDGREN, B. O., AND RAINTREE, J. B. 1983. Sustained agroforestry. Agricultural
Research for Development: Potentials and Challenges in Asia. The Hague, The
Netherlands. pp.37-49.

MAHAPATRA, A. K. AND C. P. MITCHEL. 2001. Classifying tree planters and non-
planters in a subsistence farming system using a discriminant analytical approach.
Agroforestry Systems, 52: 41-52.

MARRA M., PANNELL DJ. AND GHADIM A.A. 2003. The economics of risk,
uncertainty and learning in the adoption of new agricultural technologies: where
are we on the learning curve? Agroforestry Systems, 75: 215-234

MARIANO, M. VILLANO, R., and FLEMING, E. 2012. Factors influencing farmers’
adoption of modem rice technologies and good management practices in the
Philippines. Agric. Syst. 110, 41-53.

MATHEWS, J. T. 1991. Moving Toward Eco-development: Generating Environmental
Information for Decisionmakers. World Resources Institute.

MANALO, C. C., AMBOY, S. M., GAMIL, R. V. S., GEROY, A. J. C., AND FESTIJO,
B. T. 2019. Benefits of Agritourism in Batangas Province.

MBOW, C., VAN NOORD, M., LUEDELING, E., NEUFELDT, H., MINANG, P.A.,
AND KOWERO, G. 2014. Agroforestry solutions to address food security and
climate change challenges in Africa. Elseveir, Current Opinion in Environmental
Sustainability, 2014, 6:61-67.

MCGEHEE, N. 2007. An agritourism systems model: a Weberian perspective. Journal of
Sustainable Tourism, 15(2).


MENA, M. M. 2018. Agritourism as a climate change adaptation strategy: Challenges and
Success Factors. Developing Sustainable and Resilient Rural Communities in the
Midst of Climate Change: A Challenge to Disaster Preparedness and Mitigation
Strategies, 67.

MENDEL, P., MEREDITH, L., SCHOENBAUM, M., SHERBOURNE, C., AND
WELLS, K. 2008. Interventions in organizational and community context: A
framework for building evidence on dissemination and implementation in health
services research. Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health
Services Research, 35(1): 21-37.

MERCER, D. E. 2004. Adoption of agroforestry innovations in the tropics: a review.
Agroforestry Systems, 61(1-3): 311-328.

MERCER, D. E., AND PATTANAYAK, S. K. 2003. Agroforestry adoption by
smallholders. In Forests in a market economy. Springer, Dordrecht. pp. 283-299.

MIAZAKI, T. 1997. Green Tourism and Japan’s Rural Areas. Association of Agriculture
and Forestry Statistics of Japan.

MICHEELS, E.T., NOLAN, J.F., 2016. Examining the effects of absorptive capacity and
social capital on the adoption of agricultural innovations: a Canadian Prairie case
study. Agric. Syst. 145, 127-138.

MIKULEC, J., AND ANTOUSKOVA, M. 2011. Landscape and tourism potential in the
protected landscape areas. Agricultural Economics, 57(6), 272-278.

MILAM, R. T., AND JONES, M. G. 1995. Engineering a Bikeway Master Plan. In 1995
Compendium of Technical Papers. Institute of Transportation Engineers 65th
Annual Meeting. Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE).

MOYO, S. & MAPFUMO, P. 2001. The Economic and Social Context of Technology
Adoption: Agroforestry in Sub-Saharan Africa, IES Special Report Number 7.
Harare, Institute of Environmental Studies.


NAIR, P. R. 1993. An introduction to agroforestry. Kluwer Academic Publishers, The
Netherlands. pp. 5-10.

NAIR, P., 2011. Agroforestry systems and environmental quality: introduction. Journal of
Environmental Quality 40.

NARAYAN, D., CASSIDY, M.F., 2001. A dimensional approach to measuring social
capital: development and validation of a social capital inventory. Curr. Sociol. 49
(2), 59-102.

NORIDA, M., AND ABDUL, S. J. 2014. Development and challenges of agritourism in
Malaysia. Journal of ISSAAS (International Society for Southeast Asian
Agricultural Sciences), 20(1), 131-138.

PANNELL DJ., LLEWELLYN RS., CORBEELS M. 2014. The farm-level economics of
conservation agriculture for resource-poor farmers. Agric Ecosyst Environ 187:52—
64.

PANZANO, P. C., AND ROTH, D. 2006. The decision to adopt evidence-based and other
innovative mental health practices: Risky business? Psychiatric Services, 57(8):
1153-1161.

PATTANAYAK, S.K., MERCER, D.E., SILLS, E.0., YANG, J. AND CASSINGHAM,
K. 2003. ‘Taking stock of agroforestry adoption studies’, Agroforestry Systems,
57(3): 173-186.

PINKY, S. AND KAUR, R. 2014. Prospects and Problems of Agritourism in Punjab State.
International Journal of Advanced Research, 2(9), 66-73.

PHILIPPINE STATISTIC AUTHORITY. 2018. Contribution of Tourism to the Philippine
Economy. Retrieved from _https://psa.gov.ph/contenU/contribution-tourism-
philippine-economy-127-percent-2018.

PLACE, F., AJAYI, O., TORQUEBIAU, E., AND DETLEFSEN, G. 2012.Improved
Policies for Facilitating the Adoption of Agroforestry,” Chapters, in: Martin
Leckson Kaonga (ed.),Agroforestry for Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services -
Science and Practice, IntechOpen.


PULHIN, J.M. 2002. Trends in Forest Policy of the Philippines. Policy Trend Report
2002:29-41.

PULHIN, J.M. 2007. Forest Governance in the Philippines: The evolution of community-
based forest management. Decentralisation and State-Sponsored Community
Forestry in Asia. IGEs, 99-119.

PULHIN, J.M., M. INOUE AND T. ENTERS. 2007. Three Decades of Community-based
Forest Management in the Philippines: Emerging Lessons for Sustainable and
Equitable Forest Management. International Forestry Review 9 (4).

ROSHETKO, J.M., MERCADO JR, A.R., MARTINI, E., AND PRAMESWARI, D. 2017.
Agroforestry in the uplands of Southeast Asia. Policy Brief no. 77. Agroforestry
options for ASEAN series no. 5. Bogor, Indonesia: World Agroforestry Centre
(ICRAF) Southeast Asia Regional Program.

REICHEL, A., LOWENGART, O., AND MILMAN ,A. 2000. Rural tourism in Israel:
Service quality and orientation. Tourism Management, 21, 451-459.

REUBENS, B., MOEREMANS, C., POESEN, J., NYSSEN, J., TEWOLDEBERHAN, S.,
FRANZEL, S., DECKERS, J., ORWA, C., MUYS, B. 201 1. Tree species selection
for land rehabilitation in Ethiopia: from fragmented knowledge to an integrated
multi-criteria decision approach. Agroforestry Systems 82.

ROGERS, E. M. 2003. Diffusion of innovations (Sth ed.). New York: Free Press.

ROGERS, E.M. 1983. Diffusion of Innovations, 3rd Edition. The Free Press, New York.
pp. 367.

ROMAN, M. 2015. Agritourism farms owners’ competence in running their economic
activities. Polish Journal of Management Studies, 11(1), 136-146.

RUTTAN V.W. 1996. What happened to technology adoption—diffusion research?
Sociologia Ruralis 36: 51-73.


SALAM M.A., NOGUCHI T. AND KOIKE M. 2000. Understanding why farmers plant
trees in the homestead agroforestry in Bangladesh. Agroforest Syst 50: 77-93.

SANCHEZ P.A. 1995. Science in agroforestry. Agroforestry Systems, 30: 5— 55.

SANCHEZ, P., BASHIR, J., NIANG, A.I. AND CHERYL, A. 1998. Soil fertility, small-
farm intensification and the environment in Africa, paper presented at the annual
meeting of the American Agricultural Economics Association, 31 July - 1 August,
1998, Salt Lake City.

SARKAR J. 1998. Technological diffusion: alternative theories and historical evidence.
Journal of Economic Survey, 12: 131-176.

SCHERR S.J. 2000. A downward spiral: Research evidence on the relationship between
poverty and natural resource degradation. Food Policy, 25: 479-498.

SCHMOOKLER, J. 1966. Economic sources of inventive activity. In N. Rosenberg (Ed.),
The economics of technological change. Harmondsworth, Penguin Books., pp. 275-
305.

SEARCA. 2012, Agritourism in the Philippines - untapped potential.

SEGURA-DELOS ANGELES, M. 1985. Economic and Social Impact Analysis of an
Upland Development Project in Nueva Ecija, Philippines. Journal of Philippine
Development. Philippine Institute for Development Studies. 22(2):324-394.

SHARMA, N. P. 1992. Managing the world’s forests: looking for balance between
conservation and development. Kendall Hunt. Washington D.C., USA.

SHOHAN, R., TOLEUULY, A., & ASSADOVA, Z. K. 2012. Tourist potential and
prospects of tourism industry of Kazakhstan. Education and Science Without
Borders, 3(5).


SCHULTZ, R. C., T. M. ISENHART, J. P. COLLETTI, W. W. SIMPKINS, R. P.
UDAWATTA, and P. L. SCHULTZ. 2009. “Riparian and Upland Buffer
Practices.” In North American Agroforesty: An Integrated Science and Practice,
edited by H. E. “Gene” Garrett, Madison, WI: America Society of Agronomy, pp.
163-217.

SIEBERT, S.F., 1987. Land use intensification in tropical uplands: effects on vegetation,
soil fertility and erosion. For. Ecol. Manage., 21: 37-56.

SMITH, V., AND LONG, V. 2000. Farm tourism. In: Jafari, J., (Eds.). Encyclopedia of
tourism (pp. 222-223). New York: Routledge.

TAIWO, A.A. AND DOWNE A.G. 2013. The theory of user acceptance and use of
technology (UTAUT): a meta-analytic review of empirical findings. Jounal of
Theoretical and Applied Information Technology, 49(1): 48-58.

TAYLOR, R.E. 1992. Pros and cons of the Delphi technique and suggested relationship to
management sciences. Decision Science in the Public Sector, Felicity Press, North
Whitefield, ME.

THANGATA, P.H. AND ALAVALAPATI, J.R.R.. 2003. Agroforestry adoption in
southern Malawi: the case of mixed intercropping of Gliricidia sepium and maize.
Agricultural systems, 78 (1), 5771.

THE RISE OF AGRI-TOURISM IN THE PHILIPPINES. 2013. Spire Research and
Consulting Pte Ltd.

TOLENTINO, L.L., AND LANDICHO, L.D. 2011. Promoting Sustainable Development
via Agroforestry Education: Lessons and Experiences from the Philippines. Journal
of Developments in Sustainable Agriculture.

TORRES, R., and MOMSEN, J. H. 2004. Challenges and potential for linking tourism and
agriculture to achieve pro-poor tourism objectives. Progress in Development
Studies, 4(4), 294e318.


TYNDALL, J., and COLLETTI, J. 2007. “Mitigating Swine Odor with Strategically
Designed Shelterbelt Systems: A Review.” Agroforestry Systems, 69 (1): 45-65

UDAWATITA, R.P., KRSTANSKY, J.J., HENDERSON, G.S., AND GARRETT, H.E.
2002. Agroforestry Practices, Runoff, and Nutrient Loss: A Paired Watershed
Comparison. Journal of Environmental Quality, 31:1214~1225.

UNITED NATIONS. SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT KNOWLEDGE PLATFORM;
Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UNDESA): New York, NY, USA,
2015; Available online: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdgs

VANSLEMBROUCK, I., and HUYLENBROECK, G. 2005. Landscape Amenities:
Economic Assessment of Agricultural Landscapes. Dordrecht, the Netherlands:
Springer.

VALENTIN, C., AGUS, F., ALAMBAN, R., BOOSANER, A., BRICQUET, JP.,
CHAPLOT, V., DE GUZMAN, T., DE ROUW, A., JANEAU, JL., ORANGE D.,
PHACHOMPHONH, K., DO DUY PHAI, PODWOJEWSKI, P., RIBOLZI, O.,
SILVERA, N., SUBAGYONO, K., THIEBAUX JP., TRAN DUC TOAN, AND.
VADARI, T. 2008. Runoff and sediment losses ftom 27 upland catchments in
Southeast Asia: Impact of rapid land use changes and conservation practices.
Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment. Volume 128, Issue 4.

VALENTIN, C., POESE, J., AND YONG LI. 2005. Gully erosion: Impacts, factors and
control. Elsevier Catena 63 (2005) 132-153.

VENKATESH, V., MORRIS, M.G., DAVIS, G.B., AND DAVIS, F.D. 2003. User
acceptance of information technology: Toward a unified view. MIS Quarterly.
27(3): 425-478.

WALLACE, J.S., YOUNG, A., AND ONG. C.K. 2005. The potential of agroforestry for
sustainable land and water management. International Hydrology Series: Forests,
Water and People in the Humid Tropics. 26-652.


WALKER, RICHARD M. 2008. An empirical evaluation of innovation types and
organizational and environmental characteristics: Towards a configuration
approach, Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 18 (4): 591-615.

WILSON, A. 2000. National Delphi study on public health functions in Australia. National
Public Health Partnership.

WONGLIMPIYARAT, J., AND YUBERK, N. 2005. In support of innovation
management and Roger's Innovation Diffusion theory. Government Information
Quarterly, 22(3): 411-422.

WOOLCOCK, M., NARAYAN, D., 2000. Social capital: implications for development
theory, research, and policy. World Bank Res. Obs. 15 (2), 225-249.

WOOLCOCK, M. 2001. The place of social capital in understanding social and economic
outcomes. Can. J. Policy Res.

WU, F. G., LEE, Y. J., AND LIN, M. C. 2004. Using the fuzzy analytic hierarchy process
on optimum spatial allocation. International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics,

33(6), 553-569.

YANG, Z., CAI, J., AND SLIUZAS, R. 2010. Agro-tourism enterprises as a form of multi-
functional urban agriculture for peri-urban development in China. Habitat
Intemational, 34(4), 374-385.

ZIMMER, P., AND GRASSMANN, S. 1996. Evaluating a territory's touristic potential.
AEIDL.
