USE OF PLANT GROWTH REGULATORS TO INDUCE TOLERANCE, PROMOTE GROWTH, AND ENHANCE FRUITING QUALITY OF CHILI PEPPER (Capsicum frutescens) IN WATERLOGGED CONDITION

NATHALIE ANGEL DE GUZMAN BENIPAYO

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

MASTER OF SCIENCE in Horticulture

AUGUST 2022

ABSTRACT

Chili pepper is an economically important crop in the Philippines, but its production
are limited by environmental constraints due to its vulnerability to extreme weather
conditions, particularly with intense rain resulting to waterlogging. With this, an
intervention using plant growth regulators, specifically, brassinolide (BL), ethephon
(ETP), and paclobutrazol (PBZ) was attempted in this experiment. The research consisted
of three parts: the preliminary screening, the plant growth regulator treatment, and the
community survey. The preliminary screening showed that the hybrid Pinatubo variety
posed some level of tolerance to prolonged periods of waterlogging as compared to the
Taiwan variety, which started from two (2) weeks; four (4) weeks; to six (6) weeks; and a
7 days recovery period in between. Thus, the Pinatubo variety was used for the plant growth
regulator treatment. With the application of different PGRs, the morphological traits
observed indicate that chili pepper plants may have elicited a defense mechanism against
waterlogging stress. This is evident with the number of parameters that showed significant
differences including plant height, leaf weight, root weight, fruit length and average weight
of fruits per plant. Among these parameters, the BL treatment and the ETP treated pepper
plants would have a value that is close to that of the control. Most of these parameters
significantly differs with waterlogged only plants, such as the root length and number of
leaves and flowers. While there may be some inconsistencies to fully differentiate the
treatments, the waterlogged only plants appeared to be heavily affected by waterlogging
condition, as compared to the control and other PGR treatments. As for the community
survey, the perception of farmers from upland and lowland area in the province of Cavite
was assessed, showing that while the occurrence of flooding may not be as frequent as the
occurrence of drought, many farmers are still worried about the intense and heavy rain
which can greatly impact their production and yield, especially for vulnerable crops.

Keywords: PGR treatment, waterlogging tolerance, fruiting quality, vulnerability


CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION

Background of the Study

Environmental stresses proved to be among the limiting factors for crop
productivity. Measures to not only alleviate these stresses but as well elicit a mechanism
in plants to counteract their negative effects is also becoming a major focus of plant
physiological research. It has been well established that plant resistance mechanism is
mainly induced by mediating networks of secondary metabolites such as hormones and
other organic compounds. However, complete understanding of the elucidation of these
compounds and the specific process of which they are elucidated remains to be the focus

of analysis and experimentation.

Growing chili pepper (Capsicum frutescens) is considered to be one challenging
yet rewarding venture as the difficulty of growing chili pepper at a large scale continues to
draw limitations with its productivity, thus affecting its economic value. Abiotic stresses
caused by soil salinity, drought, and even high temperature are among the challenges that

growers of chili pepper need to address.

Waterlogging is considered among the major obstacles to agricultural productivity
as plants that grow under waterlogged condition suffer considerable losses. Under natural
or extreme environmental conditions, plants often get exposed to transient or even

permanent waterlogging. Flooding induces a number of alterations in important soil

physio-chemical properties like soil pH, redox potential and oxygen level. Furthermore,
oxygen deficient conditions undeniably hamper or limit over all plant growth and

development (Muhammad et al., 2012).

As plants are subjected to numerous stresses during their development therefore
limiting their productivity, plant hormones are part of a modern approach currently being
used to induce stress tolerance in a variety of plants. Brassinosteroids (commonly known
as BR) are a group of phytohormones that regulate a wide range of biological processes
leading to tolerance of various stresses in plants. As natural steroid hormones, BRs are
involved in various plant growth and development processes such as cell elongation, pollen
tube growth, and xylem differentiation (Clouse and Sasse, 1998). They have also been
Teported to counteract the negative effects of abiotic stresses in plants brought about by

salinity, heat, and water stress.

Ethylene is well established to be the main regulatory hormone that allows plants
to overcome both waterlogging and post-waterlogging stress. Ethylene is produced in both
submerged root and shoot tissues from its precursor 1-aminocyclopropane-l-carboxylic
acid (ACC). Ethephon (ETP) which was the donor source of ethylene proved to have a
beneficial effect in mitigating waterlogging stress. Moreover, ETP has been widely used
in horticultural crops to improve lodging resistance, ripen fruit and stimulates flowering

(Gent & McAvoy, 2000).

Significance of the Study

Waterlogging (WL) is considered to be one major impediment to sustainable
agriculture especially in growing solanaceous crops like chili pepper which is susceptible
to flooding stress. WL negatively affects plant growth by reducing the amount of oxygen
supplied to submerged tissues. In the advent of using plant growth regulators, hormones
are becoming well established in mitigating stress and inducing plant tolerance to both
biotic and abiotic stress. This study provides insight to the potential use of Brassinolide
(BL), Ethephon (ETP), and Paclobutrazol (PBZ) in participating to a signal cascade
network that determine plants’ adaptability to abiotic stress conditions. The results of these
findings will be helpful to chili pepper growers in this region as they identify new and
sustainable crop management strategies with an inclination to maximize their yields and
profits. Moreover, the perceptibility of both upland and lowland farmers to climatic stress
serves as an avenue to improve current practices with other means of interventions such as

use of PGR in crop production.

Objectives of the Study

Generally, the study was conducted to examine the effect of Brassinolide (BL),
Ethepon (ETP), and Jasmonic Acid (JA), and combined JA and EBL application on the
growth parameters of two varieties of chili pepper or “Siling Labuyo” (Capsicum

frutescens) grown under waterlogging condition.

Specifically, it aimed to:

1. Compare the morphological and agronomic responses of native and hybrid variety
(Pinatubo F1) chili pepper to waterlogging stress;

2. Assess the effect of the exogenous application of Brassinolide, Ethephon, and
Paclobutrazol in inducing stress tolerance in chili pepper against waterlogging and
hypoxic condition; and

3. Determine the farmers’ socio-economic characteristics and their perceptions of

their farms’ susceptibility to flooding and other environmental threats.

Scope and Limitation of the Study

The study was limited to red chili pepper production using the most preferred
variety of farmers in Cavite, which is the Pinatubo F1 hybrid in comparison to the native
variety. Three hormones: Brassinolide, Ethephon, Paclobutrazol were assessed on their

mitigating effect as chili peppers were subject to waterlogging conditions.

CHAPTER II

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

Red Chili Pepper Production Trends and Demand

The Chili Pepper Industry

Economic Importance of Chili Pepper. According to the Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO, 2020), the Philippines is a growing producer of pepper (Solanaceae)
which plots at around 15 MT/ha as of 2017. The two major categories of pepper grown
in the country are yellow bell peppers (Capsicum annum) and red chili pepper (Capsicum
‘frutescens) which is commonly called “Labuyo”. Considered as a high value crop, Siling
labuyo plant grows from 0.3 to 1.2 meters high and consists of smooth ovate and flat
leaves grow at about 6 to 7 cm in length. Fruits are known for their fiery red color and
strong hot flavor even the smallest fruit with less than an inch long. The young fruits are

green in color and have developed from whitish green flowers that are self-pollinating.

Value Chain Analysis of Chili Pepper. A value chain analysis was conducted at
one major producing region in the country, Lanao del Sur and it focused primarily on
native chili peppers such as the commonly known “bird’s eye”, as it is the dominant chili

pepper cultivated in the municipality of Ditsaan Ramain. The analysis was able to identify

constraints that affect the thriving chili industry in the region. It includes the farmers’
lack of experience in planting chili pepper as they do not consider its potential
contribution in their livelihood. Backyard scale production not only leads to
uncompetitive market but as well as limitation in overall supply chain. Another is the
crop performance monitoring that is focused mainly on national level, making an attempt
to improve farm productivity a least priority for local farmers. The small-scale production
leads to small production volume which often hinders most farmers from participating in

a larger value chain.

Profitable Chili Pepper Varieties. Growing chili pepper especially that of
“Labuyo” cultivar, remains to be a profitable business. The East-West Seed Co. had their
latest cultivar development with their Diango Dos F1. A chili characterized by its light
green color, also known as “Finger Pepper”. Saturating most of the markets, farmers tend
to maximize their earnings by planting them between May and June, but some would also
have increased profits by planting them during off-season, that is around July to August
even with the risks of heavy rainfall (Garde, 2016). Another hybrid with a rising potential
and marketability is the Pinatubo F1 Variety. According to the study by Beato (2017) at
the Laguna State Polytechnic University, when comparing the two hybrid varieties
namely the Pinatubo Fl and the Red Hot Fl, Pinatubo Fl appears to be the most
promising in terms of growth and yield performance. Compared to Red Hot 1, Pinatubo

variety flowered more and displayed vigorous fruit setting.

Common Varieties of Chili Pepper in the Philippines

Most Common Varieties of Chili Pepper Grown. The most common cultivars of
chili pepper grown in the Philippines includes “Siling Labuyo”, “Siling Haba”, FI Cayenne
Pepper, and Eastwest Red Hot Fl. Their differences and characteristics are further listed

below (Arcega, 2019).

a. Siling Labuyo - A smallchili pepper cultivar that developed in
the Philippines after the Columbian Exchange. It belongs_to
the species Capsicum frutescens and is characterized by triangular fruits which
grow pointing upwards. Labuyo is one of two common kinds of local chili
found in the Philippines.

b. Siling haba - A Capsicum annuum cultivar characterized by its green and
fingerlike structure. It is also known as “Siling sigang” as it is commonly used
as an ingredient in one famous Filipino soup dish called “Sinigang”. Fruit is
greenish-yellow narrowing to a tapering tip, up to 6 cm long and 1.5 cm across.
It is spicy hot, often used in local pickles (achara) and for seasoning.

c. Fi Cayenne Pepper - A variety most ideal for processed chili pepper. It dries
quickly to a bright crimson giving out an eye-catching presentation to food. It
is known for its sweet-hot flavor and thin walls. Among farmers, it is considered
a productive cultivar as it benefits them even in post-harvest handling.

d. Red Hot FI - A vigorous plant distinguished to have high yields. It can be

cultivated all year-round and shows high resistance to Phytopthora capcisi

which causes root and fruit rot. Its fruit size ranges from 12 to 13 cm in length,
1.8 cm in width and 17-19 grams weight per fruit. It is very much pungent and
is now commonly used by growers in the southern region of the country.

Pinatubo F1 Hybrid - This hot pepper variety is said to be among the most
prolific. Its fruits can be used as fresh or for processing into different kinds of
products. It is twice as hot as the Thai Hot pepper, and is now being sold and
accepted by major food processors in the country for the production of various
hot sauces. The Pinatubo F! variety is said to have 180,000 to 200,000 Scoville

heat units (Yap, 2019).

s a Major Abiotic Stressor, and Phytohormones
gating the Effect of Flooded Condition

Waterlogging as Major Abiotic Stress
In Red Chili Pepper Production

Threats Caused by Waterlogging. Water is one of the most important abiotic
factors that dictates the overall survival of a plant. Its excess and lack could hamper the
physicochemical development within any plant species. Perhaps this is one the main threats
of climate change. Considering the sudden shift in a normal climatic cycle in a given place,
changes may create an adverse effect as plants normally grown in a cool, moist
environment and timeframe would suddenly be subjected to unexpected lack of
precipitation and high temperature, and vice versa. Such as in the case of chili pepper, when
waterlogging is considered to be one problematic scheme of nature mediated by prolonged
and excess rainfall. Waterlogging happens whenever the soil is so wet leaving the soil
saturated that there is no sufficient oxygen in the pore space for plant roots to adequately
respite. This could also lead other gases, such as carbon dioxide and ethylene, to
accumulate in the root zone which is also detrimental to root growth, affecting root
architecture. According to the study conducted by Siaga (2019) and colleagues, chili
pepper production during the last decade is met by unpredictable distribution and intensity
of rainfall especially those mainly produced in the wetland. In Indonesia, wetland
production of chili pepper is said to be heavily affected by untimely-water saturated

thizosphere (WSR) occurrences. The problem attributed to a highly waterlogged soil is the

it
hypoxic condition that causes reduced respiration. This will later result in chaotic crop
metabolism (Yamauchi et al., 2018). This is the underlying cause of why WSR could
inhibit growth and reduce yield in most terrestrial crops. In soils with a severely reduced
z, the availability of nutrients for plants is strongly decreased. Reduced oxygen levels in
the soils allows anaerobic microorganisms to dominate, creating conditions in the
thizosphere where the concentrations of Fe*?, Mn‘, H2 S, sulfides, lactic acid, and butyric
acid, among others, increase to toxic levels (Larcher, 2003). The susceptibility map (Figure
2) illustrates the areas in Cavite (Region IV-A), that are susceptible to flooding.

Figure 1. Flood Hazard Map in the Province of Cavite (Mines and Geosciences
Bureau, n.d)

Physiological Effect of Waterlogging in Plants

Hypoxic Condition’s Detrimental Effect to Chili Peppers. A 2014 study by the
National University of Colombia tackled the effect of waterlogging stress on the growth,
development and symptomatology of Physalis peruviana L. plants. Since it is the most
important organ with direct contact with water, the root zone is predominantly affected by
oxygen stress. The plant would then show signs of yellowing, epinasty, necrosis and
untimely abscission of the leaves in the 8 day of waterlogged condition. In the case of
chili pepper, Dai et al. (2011) studied the responses of five pepper species: Capsicum
annuum L. (CA), C. baccatum L. (CB), C. chinense Jacquin L. (CC), C. frutescens L. (CF)
and C. pubescens Ruiz & Pavon (CP) as well as a wild pepper C. baccatum var. baccatum
(CBY) to waterlogging stress. The results showed that flooding treatment dramatically
decreased photosynthetic pigment content, net photosynthetic rate (PN) and stomatal
conductance (gs). It also increased proline content and water-use efficiency (WUE). At a
period of not more than 8 days, it was suggested that pepper exhibited weak resistance to

waterlogging stress.

Yield Losses Attributed to Waterlogging. Prolonged flooding conditions may result
in crop losses up to <10 % but may even reach >40% if the severity has not been mitigated
(Bange et al., 2004; Hodgson and Chan, 1982). This is attributed to a disturbance in the
physiological functioning which in turn negatively affects the vegetative and reproductive
growth of plants. In this account, Kozlowski and Pallardy (1997) reported that the first

symptom of flooding damage is stomatal closure, affecting not only gas exchange but as


well as causing a decrease in the passive absorption of water, which by then is also
influenced by anaerobic conditions in the rhizosphere. If such a condition has not been
addressed by cultural management techniques, one can expect a decrease in transpiration
which would lead to leaf wilting and early senescence, then finally resulting in foliar
abscission (Ashraf, 2012). In addition, when flooding extends to submergence of the shoot,
photosynthesis becomes severely restricted by a deficiency of external carbon dioxide and by

shading.

Total submergence can also interfere with flowering and pollination which are essential
for completion of a plant's reproductive cycle (Jackson and Colmer, 2005). If flooding persists
for a day or two, leaf stomata closes and chlorophyll degradation would result in yellowing.
This reduces the ability of leaves to capture light and therefore leads to a decline in
photosynthetic rate (Kuai et al., 2014; Yan et al., 2018). Moreover, waterlogging in the soil
removes air from soil pores, resulting in blocked gas exchange between soil and
atmosphere; at the same time, the oxygen diffusion rate in water is lowered. Consequently,
‘oxygen availability in waterlogged soil is greatly restricted, therefore suppressing roots
respiration, decreasing root activity, and energy shortage (van Veen et al., 2014). However,
plants can temporarily maintain energy production to some extent during hypoxic condition
through the process of glycolysis and ethanol fermentation. Yet prolonged duration of
waterlogging and anaerobic respiration ultimately leads to the accumulation of toxic
metabolites such as lactic acid, ethanol, and aldehydes etc. which will eventually lead to

cell death and plant senescence (Xu et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2017).


Evolutionary Adaptation to Flooded Condition. Furthermore, waterlogging stress
is also considered to have a major effect in several plant’s evolution. According to Jackson
and Colmer (2005) responses of plants leading to evolution have resulted in a wide range
of biochemical, molecular and morphological adaptations that allow growth and favorable
reproductive conditions under episodic or permanently flooded growing environments that
are highly damaging to the majority of plant species. They also noted that even seemingly
poor adapted species possessed some short-term resilience that is important for their overall
success in various habitats.

Ethylene Mitigating Adverse Effect
Of Waterlogging Condition

Evaluation of the Use of Ethylene and Other Hormones to Counteract
Waterlogging. Kim et al. (2018) investigated the key factors that hinder soybean
productivity in a global scale. Highlighted among these factors is the waterlogging stress
condition that limits growth in plants and therefore hindering their overall survival. Various
papers have already dealt with the physical manifestation of WL stress in plants such as
reduced PS; imbalance in phytohormones; reduced nutrient uptakes by which water
disturbance affects the transport of assimilates in the root system; premature senescence
hence reduced yield. Yet the underlying physiological mechanism still opens a wide avenue
for research and crop improvement endeavors. In order to understand this, researchers have
tried to use different hormones such as ethephon (ETP) a known donor source of ethylene,
abscisic acid, gibberellins, indole-3-acetic acid, kinetin, jasmonic acid, and salicylic acid.

Through the exogenous applications of these hormones, the beneficial effect of ethylene in


the form of ETP has been confirmed. Results showed that ETP application mitigated WL
stress and was able to significantly improve the photosynthesis pigment, as well as increase
the contents of endogenous GAs compared to untreated plants. Also, ETP treatments
significantly activated the amino acid contents during WL stress in Soybean (Kim et al.,
2018).

Adaptive Mechanism Induced by Ethylene. Several reviews have pointed out the
adaptive mechanism of plants when they are subjected to a flooded growing condition.
Particularly the acclimation to hypoxia by which the oxygen is insufficient, plant
morphology would drastically change starting in their intercellular formation by
developing aerenchyma cells in plant roots, which will then trigger a number of signal
regulators such as nitric oxide (NO), reactive oxygen species (ROS), and phytohormones,
specifically ethylene (ETH) (Voesenek and Serres, 2015). Ethylene is assumed to be
significantly associated with the formation of aerenchyma cells, yet this depends on the
level and duration of the flooding stress (Sasidharan and Voesenek, 2015). Moreover, as
waterlogging proved to be more problematic than submergence, mechanisms to survive
have to push the physicochemical processes within any plant species. In the case of
soybean, ethylene played a role in signaling numerous physiological networks to activate
other endogenous phytchormones and antioxidant enzymes. At such condition, the
interaction of ethylene with other hormones i.e., JA, SA have positively influenced
morphological adaptations of soybeans to counteract the effect of WL stress by facilitating
development of adventitious roots and promote the formation of aerenchyma cells in roots

(Kim et al., 2018).


Jasmonic Acid and Ethylene. It has been established that the interaction between
JA and ET plays an important role in the proliferation of the root system and aerenchyma
under waterlogging stress, and that spraying methyl jasmonate on the leaves increased
content of ET, which proves to be beneficial in relieving and in mitigating the negative

effects of waterlogging stress in plants (Hudgins and Franceschi, 2004).

waterlogging stress
Morphological and @ Formation of aerenchyma. joARindten © Leat respiration
‘Anatomical © AberarioROL Etyene ¢Aecatenaton Gerling pr gh
‘Adaptation © Elongation of apical menstems [0 Femmentaton
© Gas fm development
‘Abscile Secunsaton 10, Saye aid omasen
nae 4 ama asap
ee eter asmoniC |g inguctonstess related proteins
ie (© Sugar biosynthesis acid ae mel pee
Respiratory pore robin
‘Adstaion —_|@lnccon of ebaralemenaton © Caos varaot ton

(© Restret shoot elongaton

Augmented anton eraymes
© Emanced endogenous
© Entanceascavengg of ham Melatonin maton eve!
ROS © imense metaboic aces

Anxidant Eneymes
Figure 2. Schematic representation of plant response to waterlogging stress and
hormonal effects resistance in plants (Pan et al., 2020)

Brassinosteroid Mitigates Adverse Effect
Of Waterlogged Condition


Mitigating Response Mediated by Brassinosteroid against WL. (BR) is a naturally
occurring steroid in plants and can induce resistance to a variety of biological and abiotic
stresses therefore promoting over all plant development (Huang et al., 2020; Nazir et al.,
2021). Kang et al. (2009) reported how the exogenous application of 24-epi-brassinolide
(EBL) promotes the transfer of carbohydrates from leaves to roots of cucumber seedlings
under hypoxic stress. This enhances the activity of glycolytic enzymes in the roots, and
promotes the antioxidant enzymes activity while it reduced ROS production. Such
mechanism improved the resistance of the seedlings to waterlogged condition. Meanwhile,
EBL improved the enzyme activity related to cell wall degradation by promoting ET
production in cucumber seedlings (Xu et al., 2018). It further promoted the expansion and
loosening of cucumber hypocotyl and formation of ARs, thus improved the oxygen supply

status of the plant and enhanced further its tolerance over hypoxic stress (Pan, 2020).

Interaction of BR with Other Endogenous Hormones. Cotton plants observed
under waterlogged conditions proved that hypoxic condition causes a substantial change in
endogenous hormone metabolism. It also shows how interactions among these hormones,
specifically Jasmonic Acid and Salicylic Acid facilitate tolerance mechanisms by signaling
networks which therefore promotes continuous development in the advent of a lack of
oxygen in the root system (Nguyen et al., 2018). Zhang et al. (2019) further suggested that
these three hormones were the ones involved in waterlogging response, evident with the
many differentially expressed genes associated with JA, SA, and BR that were up-regulated

in stressed cotton species. Therefore, changes in concentration of endogenous hormones


and their interactions play important roles in the quiescent strategy of cotton adaptation (Li
et al., 2021). In the same study, the exogenous application of BR is proven to improve the
metabolism of cotton plants, improving foliage and therefore facilitating the PS despite the
onslaught of hypoxic stress condition. Recent studies on different plant growth regulators,
their precursors and even inhibitors, and their role in alleviating flooding stress are

presented in Table 1.

Table 1. Recent studies on phytohormones and plant growth regulator-mediated
waterlogging tolerance in plants (Pan et al., 2020).

Plant/erop Exogenous
species  Phytohormones Experimental Functional References
or PGR Conditions Response
Concentration
Applied
Solanum 500 WMAVG — Four-week-old = AVG inhibited —_-Vidozeet al.,
Iycopersicum plants were the AR 2010

flooded, and formation
the aerial part

was sprayed

with 500 M

AVG 12 h

before the start

of flooding.


Table 1. Continued...

Plant/crop Exogenous
species Phytohormones —_ Experimental Functional References
or PGR Conditions Response
Concentration
Applied
Cucumis 1 mg/L 1- 13-day-old Enhanced AR Qietal.,
sativus MCP or 10 seedlings were formation and 2019
uM ACC pretreated with 1- recovered plant
MCP for 24 h; growth under
14-day-old waterlogging
seedlings were
subjected to
waterlogging up
to 2.cm above the
surface of the
substrate.
Glycine max 50, 100,0r200 During the V2 Induced the Kimetal.,
»M stage and the occurrence of 2018
ethephon water level was ARs and
maintained at increased the
10-15 cm above root surface area
the soil surface
for 10 days
G. max 1 uM ABA Primary leaves Inhibited the — Shimamura
had fully cellular etal., 2014
expanded (10-11 development
days after of aerenchyma

sowing), and the
level of water or
ABA solution
was maintained
at 3 cm above
the sand surface


Table 1. Continued...


jant/erop Exogenous
species Phytohormones Experimental Functional —_ References
or PGR Conditions Response
Concentration
Applied
Solanum 100 uM and 1 10- to 12-week- ABA arrested the Dawood et
dulcamara mM ABA old plants were AR development al. 2016
submerged up to resulting in
15 cm above the increased
soil in glass sensitivity
containers
G. max 5, 10, and 50 Two-day-old Improved Komatsu et
uM ABA plants were —_ soybean al., 2013
flooded, and at 4 survival
cm of water compared with
above the quartz _waterlogging
sand surface treatment
alone.
s. 1 mM NPA Four-week-old Inhibited AR —-Vidozet
lycopersicum plants were growth after. ak, 2010
flooded up tothe flooding.
first node above
the cotyledons
C. sativus 10 mg/LNAA or — 3-week-stage NPA Qietal.,
10 »M NPA seedlings water — compromised 2020
levels were the of AR
raised 2 cm — growth

above the soil
surface for 7
days.


Table 1. Continued...


Plant/crop Exogenous
species Phytohormones —_ Experimental Functional —_References
or PGR Conditions Response
Concentration
Applied
G. max 50 uM JA Seedlings Promoted plant Kamal and
were growth under Komatsu,
transferred to. waterlogging gut
glass tube by inducing
and covered stress-related
it with plastic proteins
cap for
waterlogging
stress.
C. salvus 2.1nMEBR —_ Waterloggin Increased the | Maand
g stress along ethylene and Guo, 2014
EBR production and
application homeostasis
was given to under
plants for 7 waterlogging
days. stress in plant

roots


Table 1. Continued..


Plant/crop Exogenous
species Phytohormones —_ Experimental Functional References
or PGR Conditions Response
Concentration
Applied
Ma/us 50, 100, 200, 400, After the Plant possessed Zheng et
baccata and 600 1»MMT seedlings better aerobic al. 2017
developed to respiration to
have four avoid
leaves, treated _waterlogging-
with MT by induced
spraying or damage.
irrigation
Medicago 100 »M MT Foliar spray of Improved the  ZhangR. et
salva MT was production of I. 2019
performed | day — endogenous

after
waterlogging
stress. Six- to
seven-leaf
stages were
exposed to
waterlogging by
maintaining 1
cm above the
soil surface and
last for 10 days.

melatonin and
production of
AR.



Paclobutrazol Alleviate Plants’ Response
To Waterlogging Stress

Paclobutrazol improves physiological tolerance of waterlogged crops.
Paclobutrazol is a member of the triazole family, and according to Voesenek et al. (2003),
it has been extensively involved in abiotic and biotic stresses in plant as a multi-protectant.
Several findings indicate that PBZ treated plants before tend to develop darker sets of
foliage due to increased chlorophyll as well as soluble sugar content (Yadav &
Hemantaranjan, 2016; Abolfazl et al. 2013). In study conducted by Yadav and
Hemantaranjan (2016), PBZ treatment further induced tolerance to tolerant genotypes
subjected to flooding stress. The physiological mechanism unfolded is the consistent and
uniform supply of soluble sugars through enhancing content of chlorophyll which resulted
to higher photosynthetic rate as well as continuation of ATP formation by oxidative
respiration as facilitated by hydrolysis of starch reserves. Moreover, Yadav and
Hemantaranjan (2016) have observed that the level of antioxidants enzymes, specifically
the APX and SOD, were higher in tolerant genotypes than those subjected to flooding stress
alone. PBZ was effective in mitigating the effect of flooding stress in mungbean,
particularly when pre-seed soaked and foliar applied. PBZ have also played a key role in
alleviating response to waterlogging in wheat seeds (Triticum aestivum L.). Through PBZ
application, it was inferred that the physiological effect of WL such as loss of membrane
integrity, increase in leakages due to photo inhibitory damage, and decrease in both

chlorophyll a and b was subsequently reduced


Other Adaptive Mechanisms of Plants
In response to Waterlogging Stress

Photosynthetic Adaptation. In most terrestrial plants, photosynthetic pigments are
prime dictator of photosynthetic processes, hence any change in the pigment content will
directly affect PS rate in plants (Pan, 2021). In the event of waterlogging, enzyme activities
related to photosynthesis were inhibited, the reason is that during hypoxic condition,
stomatal conductance of leaves decline, stomatal resistance and closure rises, while the
absorption of CO: is reduced (Li et al., 2020). Both CO and light are necessary for
photosynthesis to occur, and if waterlogged condition remain unaddressed, PS activities
will be compromised i.e., the chlorophyll synthesis ability of leaves decreased, leading to
leaf senescence and yellowing. The formation of new leaves was blocked, and this will

eventually lead to death of plant tissues (Voesenek et al., 2006).

Physiological Response to Waterlogging. Yet in order to mitigate the adverse
effect of waterlogging to physiological functioning of plants, the enzyme rubisco catalyzes
the first step of both the photosynthetic carbon cycle and photorespiration, and this played
a crucial role in the regulation of PS rate. In the case of cotton (Gossypium hirsutum L.)
that was subjected to 24 h waterlogging stress, the expression of rubisco and rubisco
activase genes was down-regulated. This caused a reduction in net photosynthetic rate as
well as in the sucrose conversion rate, pressing a limit in the initial rubisco activity, and

therefore mitigated the boll weight decline in the case of waterlogged cotton (Pan, 2021).


Reactive Oxygen Species and Antioxidant Production. As plants have to deal with
a variety of environmental stresses whether it be biotic and abiotic nature, this could result
in an enhanced production of Reactive Oxygen Species. According to Xu et al. (2021),
ROS are a normal product of plant cell metabolism. In the case of waterlogging stress,
insufficient O2 will lead as well to an increase in intracellular ROS in plants (Bailey-Serres
and Chang, 2005). Even though excessive ROS could pose some harm to plants, it can also
act as signaling molecules in plant cells during stressful conditions, Xu et al. (2021) point
out that plant NADPH oxidase is a key enzyme in the production of ROS and plays a vital
role in ROS-mediated signal transduction. They further add that the expression of NADPH
oxidase-related gene Airboh D, a gene associated with ROS production, is induced by
waterlogging and could positively regulate the production of HzO? as well as the increase
of ADHI gene expression in Arabidopsis (Sun et al., 2018). Hence, this shows a promising
mechanism of how a delicate balance of ROS is regulated by an efficient functioning of a
number of indigenous defense network called antioxidant system, which comprises of
enzymatic and non-enzymatic components (Ahanger et al., 2017). Altogether, ROS with
the cascade of signaling molecules may help improve the capacity of plants to thrive even

when dealing with waterlogging stress by reducing the heavy impact of oxidative stress.

Morphological and Anatomical Modifications. Ashraf (2012) made an
observation as to how waterlogging stress could stimulate a number of morphological and
anatomical changes in plants i.e., the presence of hypertrophied lenticels which has been a

common anatomical change that has been observed in woody species subjected to flooding


stress. It has also been observed that radical cell division and expansion near stem base
would result in a hypertrophic growth. Several studies indicate that lenticels are often
thought to be involved in the downward diffusion of O2, and the other compounds produced
as by-products of anaerobic metabolism such as ethanol, CO2 and CH,. However, the actual
and full understanding of the physiological role of lenticels is still yet to be explored, but
their presence is often linked to mechanisms leading to waterlogging tolerance in plants
(Parelle et al., 2006). Furthermore, the formation of adventitious roots potentially replacing
the basal roots is considered as one of the potential morphological adaptations acquired by
plants during flooding stress (Malik et al., 2001; Ashraf, 2012). These specialized roots
maintain and regulate the continuous supply of water and minerals given a situation that
the basal root system would fail to do so. Changes in the root system not only corresponds
with the lack of water supply but as well as a change in the nutrient absorption. Hence,
adaptive mechanism to counteract this effect particularly in the plant organ that is most
heavily affected, is not just a product of mitigating response but as well as in the scope of
evolution which will make the root architecture more adaptive, and therefore allows the

plant to survive even in an extreme environment.

Management Practices in Crop Production in Flooded Soils

Effect of Waterlogging to Crop Productivity. An important abiotic stress,
waterlogging affects crop productivity in the global scale. Now also considered as an

adverse effect of Climate change, it proves to be one of the most damaging environmental


stresses in plants apart from drought and heat stress. It affects an estimate of 17 million km
of land area annually and recent studies reported that waterlogging in soil is indeed an

extreme weather disturbance that increasingly affects crop production (Kaur et al., 2019).

Effect of Waterlogging to Soil Physical Structure. Waterlogged soil affecting the
plant-rooting zone is influenced by several factors including climate, zone of saturation
which controls the amount of water entering the soil, the amount of water moving through
or over the surface of the soil, and use of soil water by the plant itself and other organisms.
Yet according to Kunkel (2003), the major reason for the increase in flooding or
waterlogging is accounted to the increase in the frequency of extreme precipitation events

and multiple wet days.

Other Management Practices. Some widely observed management practices that
supports crop productivity and reduce N losses under flooded soil conditions includes:
early or late planting; use of flood-tolerant crop varieties, and cover crops; adaptive nutrient
management practices (e.g., enhanced efficiency fertilizers (EEFs), N amendment
application (Dawar et al., 2011); use of adaptive water management practices such as
improved drainage and soil medium ratio adjustment. Drainage can remove excess water
from the soil, which improves plant root growth, plant emergence, plant stands, workability
of the soil, and consequently, results in higher crop yields (Meinhardt, & Smoot, 2012).
These practices may be used alone or in combination to mitigate the adverse of effect of

waterlogging and still be able to maximize crop production (Kaur et al., 2019).


Understanding the Impact of Weather
Causing WL in Farming Communities

Community Needs Assessment

Conducting Online Community Survey and KII Assessment Tool. Many areas in
Luzon are prone to flooding conditions brought about by weather disturbances and climatic
variations, This creates a challenging situation specially to farming communities.
However, this study was limited to areas in Cavite, as part of Region IV. With this, needs
assessment and climate risk perception survey, on the other hand, were virtually conducted,

so as to acquire more sampling units and quantifiable responses.

Community Needs Assessment Provides a Situation Overview. Community needs
assessment surveys seek to understand the needs of community or group of clientele. It
usually gathers information pertaining to subjects that concem the particular community
or group which aims to resolve problems within or simply become acquainted with
inevitable changes. This could include hundreds of possibilities, new innovations, modern
agricultural techniques and practices, measures to alleviate effects of changing climates,
ways to resolve ethnic conflicts, or simply gather reports with the current system e.g.,
measures to mitigate waterlogging conditions. Community needs assessments are primarily
being done to learn more about what the group or community are in need of directly. A

good survey could supplement the observations and anecdotes within the very community

when they speak about their struggles and their day-to-day experiences. It could also
provide great details and precision when taking data from a larger number or
representatives. Moreover, questions from a survey can be designed to be more particular
and hence be a suitable avenue for respondents to account their opinions or personal takes
about problems without having to publicly declare it. Problems that are not previously
perceived as important may be brought into light and thus may be addressed before it
evolves to a more complicated dilemma. Community surveys are also a good way to
document needs that are not yet recognized, pending to be addressed, and those that has

been successfully dealt with.

Key Informant Interview (KII) Assessment Tool

The Advantage of employing KII Assessment Tool. KIl is particularly used to
identify the specific individual or group of people to be targeted by the assessment. The
communities to be selected for the assessment have to meet a certain criterion before they
are classified as key informants. An example for this is a KII Assessment tool for
community members engaged in agricultural and fishing activities created by an NGO, the
Catholic Relief Services, where they classified the respondents to be of those personally
engaged in farming; small scale farm producer; at least having one woman as a respondent;
at least two respondents within the community are engaged in household gardening; and at

least one respondent should come from vulnerable groups. This not only allows the


assessment to acquire a more particular data, but as well as create more credibility within

the scope of information being gathered.

Key Informant Interviews. Furthermore, KI components are qualitative in-depth
interviews with people who know what is going on in the community. The purpose of key
informant interviews is to gather information from members or individuals that are directly
affected by any situations within their localities, including community leaders,
professionals, or residents who are assumed to have first-hand knowledge and experiences
about their own communities. These community experts, with their relevant knowledge
and understanding, can provide insight on the nature of problems and thus give

recommendations for possible solutions.

CHAPTER III

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Time and Location of the Study

The study was conducted at a net house located in Brgy. Buna Cerca, Indang Cavite.
Preparation of the study area such as sowing, sieving and sterilization of planting medium,
and establishment of waterlogging treatment commenced at the 4" week of May to 3°
week of June 2021. Transplanting was done 2-4 weeks after emergence. Preliminary
screening (Study |) was conducted from July to September, and the plant growth regulator
treatment (Study 2) was conducted in January to April 2021. Online community survey
was conducted online from September to December 2021, while the key informant

interview (KI) was conducted from May to April, 2022.
Preliminary Screening

The pot experiment was established under nursery conditions. The chili pepper
(Pinatubo F1) and native chili pepper seeds (Taiwan) were obtained from an accredited
agricultural supplier and were sown in a seedling tray using sterilized medium (Garden
Soil, Vermicast, CRH) in ratio of 2:1:1, respectively. The seedlings were transplanted four

(4) weeks after emergence

Experimental Design

The pot experiment was conducted in a net house and laid out in CRD with 4
treatments, having 10 replications of sample plants per treatment from each variety. The
experiment consisted of two parts: preliminary screening, which aimed to test the two
varieties (non-hybrid and hybrid) in terms of their adaptability to extreme waterlogged
conditions; and the plant growth regulator treatment, which aimed to assess the effect of
plant growth regulator application in inducing tolerance to waterlogging stress. Data
gathered were analyzed using PROC UNIVARIATE procedure of SAS On Demand for
Academics (SAS Institute Inc., 2014) to evaluate significant differences among treatments,

periods, and replications.

Crop Establishment of Chili Pepper in Nursery

Eighty (80) plants were established in a nursery. Uniform-sized seedlings of
Pinatubo F1 cultivar and Taiwan (non-hybrid) chili pepper variety were transplanted to
each pot with a size of 10 x 10x 17 inches. Similar to the experiment conducted by Zhang
etal. (2011), all pots of the treatment were filled with water to 3-5 cm above the soil surface
at the seedling stage with three leaves, which were maintained for 5 days. After the initial
waterlogging treatment, seedlings were allowed to grow in a normal condition to facilitate

growth.


Waterlogging Treatments of Chili Pepper

Similar to the study of Misra et al. (2020) on the assessment of waterlogging
treatment in plants, the ground of the net house measuring 5x5 in meters was covered with
polyethylene mulch, where waterlogging treatment was established. This would limit the
absorption of water in the soil. Holes in the bases of each pot were covered so as to prevent
drainage of water after transplanting. Waterlogging condition was maintained at the
seedling growing stage for 5 days (Silva et al., 2020) where the pot’s surface water was
maintained at 5 cm. After 5 days, excess water was drained to allow plants to recover for
7 days. Initial data for waterlogged treated plants were collected after the recovery period.
At 14 days after transplanting, all peppers were over-watered again to full saturation
referring to the 4 treatments including the control found in Table 2, with 7 days recovery

period after each treatment (Zhang et al., 2011).

Table 2. Schedule of waterlogging treatment for two varieties of chili pepper

Treatments Variety 1 Variety 2

TO Control
Tl 2 Weeks WL Treatment

12 4 Weeks WL Treatment Pinatubo FI Taiwan (non-hybrid)
(Hybrid)
T3 6 Weeks WL Treatment

"WL — Warerlogsing


Plant Growth Regulator Treatment of Waterlogged Chili Pepper

The effect of exogenous application of phytohormones were assessed. Fifty (50)
pots were established in the same net house using the variety that performed well during
the preliminary screening. These chili pepper plants were subjected to waterlogging
treatment, this time using a controlled sprinkler system, followed by an application of three
different hormones, namely: brassinolide, ethephon, and paclobutrazol.
Treatment of Chili Peppers with
Brassinolide (BL) under WL

To assess the effect of Brassinolide (BL) on improving the growth of chili peppers
under waterlogged condition, foliar spray was prepared using distilled water to dilute the
BR at the ratio of 1:1000 ml (BR and distilled water, respectively), 250 ml was foliar-
applied once at the on-set of waterlogging stress at seedling stage (Ping et al., 2019). The

treatments were as follows:

Table 3. Rate of application of PGR treatment following waterlogging treatment.

‘Treatment Rate of Application

Controt

Ti —Waterlogging Only

T2~Brassinolide 1:1000 ml (BL:DW)
T3—Ethephon 100 aM
T4~ Paclobutrazol 2.5 ml 997.5 mi

RT micrometer
"nM" nanometer


Treatment of Chili pepper with Ethephon
(ETP) under Waterlogged Condition

Waterlogging treatments was similar to all sampling units. To observe the effect of
ETP application in mitigating the adverse effect of waterlogged condition in Chili Pepper,
100 uM ETP treatment (Kim et al., 2018) were prepared for spray application at the on-set
of waterlogging stress at seedling stage. This is the rate at which ETP improved the fruiting
quality of grapes (Plants treated were covered with plastics for 1 hour so as to prevent
evaporation and breakdown that could lead to losses even before it is absorbed by the plant.
Ethephon breaks down into ethylene quicker as pH increases therefore the spray solution

pH should be maintained between 4 and 5 (Lopez and Walters, 2017).

Treatment of Chili Pepper with
Paclobutrazol (PBZ)

To evaluate the effect of Paclobutrazol in inducing tolerance over waterlogged soil,
BL concentration of 2.5 ml was prepared and added to 997.5 ml (IL). This was selected on
the basis of its effectiveness as compared to other trial concentrations based on recent
studies and recommended rate of application. Similar waterlogging set-up was observed in

all treatments.


Fruit Quality Index

Fruit quality index was measured in terms of fruit length in mm, average fruit
weight per plant, and average weight of one (1) chili pepper that was randomly selected

from all the sampling units of different PGR treatments.
Statistical Analysis

All collected were checked for outliers and normality using the PROC
UNIVARIATE procedure of SAS On Demand for Academics (SAS Institute Inc., 2014).
All data were subjected to Levene's test for homogeneity of variance. For Study |, all the
collected data were subjected to a two-way ANOVA using PROC GLM procedure of SAS
OnDemand for Academics (SAS Institute Inc., 2014) with the chili variety and
waterlogging as source of fixed effects. For study 2, all the collected data were subjected
to a one-way ANOVA using PROC GLM procedure of SAS On Demand for Academics
(SAS Institute Inc., 2014) with the plant hormones as source of fixed effects. Statistical
differences were declared significant when the p-value is <0.05. Data with declared
significant differences were subjected to mean comparison using Tukey's Honest

Significant Difference (HSD) test.


Morphological and Other Parameters

1. Plant Height and Physi

| Evaluation — Plant height are measured from the base
of the plant up to the highest shoot tip. Morphological and physical attributes of
WL treated chili pepper and the control are assessed following the modified
physical observation scale by Yang et al. (2020). The physical qualities are rated

by 1-7 points, and documented on the basis of the level of waterlog induced injury.

Level 1: Normal growth; no symptoms of physiological or morphological stress.
Level 2: One or Two (2) leaves had become brown and withered;

Level 3: Three (3) or Four (4) leaves had become brown, withered, and abscised;
Level 4: Five (5) or Six (6) leaves had become brown, withered, and abscised;
Level 5: More than six (6) leaves had become brown, withered, and abscised;

Level 6: More than six (6) leaves had become brown, withered, and abscised; no
any sign of flowering has occurred

Level 7: Prominent mechanical injury resulting to death of plant tissues.

2. Shoot Fresh Weight, Leaf Dry Weight, and Stem Dry Weight - Usually, the
water content of an organ is given as a percentage of the dry weight or of the fresh
weight. Water evaporation highly influences the changes on this parameter, hence
shoot fresh and shoot dry weight should be able to provide a reliable overview of

the biomass index of a plant.

3. Root Length and Root Weight - Roots allow a plant to absorb water and nutrients

from the surrounding soil, and a healthy root system is key to a healthy plant. Thus,


a root length is crucial in assessing the overall health of chili pepper plants. Control
group of plants will provide a "normal" root phenotype of each of the two varieties.
Combined data from the root:shoot ratio, as well as direct observation were used as
basis in evaluating tolerance of plants under waterlogged condition as they are
treated with plant growth regulators. Destructive sampling are performed to

measure root length and weight at 7 days after treatment.

}. Number of Leaves and Leaf Surface Area - Leaves are one of the most important
organs in the plant system. They not only determine the capacity of the plant to
survive by capturing light energy to convert it into chemical energy, they also
express its adaptability to its environment, either through expansion or reduction in
size. In this study, leaf surface area (LSA) was measured using Petiole. It is a
mobile application that provides a measure of the leaf surface area by scanning it
through the camera of a mobile device with a use of a calibrating pad. Meanwhile,
the number of leaves indicate the physiological age of the plant. It also provides
basis as to how plants were able to adapt to short-term and long-term changes in
their surroundings. It is conducted by counting the number of leaves on each plant,

including as well the tips of new or emerging leaves.

. First to flower and Number of Flowers - Flowering is an important attribute of a
plant’s ability to reproduce and cope with its environment. For instance, the flower
induction of a heavily affected chili pepper is expected to exhibit delay and thus

will affect the over-all capacity to undergo fruit setting stage. That is, if no


intervention has been employed, such as adaptive management techniques, and
even use of chemicals and growth regulators. To assess the response of chili pepper
plants to the adverse effect of prolonged waterlogging, 1*' to flower and number of

flowers are among the parameters evaluated.


Community Survey and Key Informant Interview

KII Assessment Tool

Key informant interview is an in-depth interview that collects information from
individual experts (Brown, 2013). This was conducted in the limitation of a face-to-face
visit, key informants consisting of community leaders, cooperative members, farmers and
others are communicated with through personal visit, telephone calls, and emails. KIls
aimed to collect information from a wide range of people which may consist of community
leaders, residents, farmers, professionals, and other individuals who has great knowledge
of the community they are a part of. This provided insight relative to the problems, root

causes and a recommendation that can address such problems.

For the sake of this study, information gathered mainly focused on their perception
towards the effect of extreme weather conditions which causes flooding. The survey was
able to determine the vulnerability of farmers, including those having chili peppers as their
main commodity, to weather disturbances as well as their preparedness, current adaptive
measures, and gather information over the use of alternatives e.g., use of plant growth

regulators.

Community Assessment Using Survey Questionnaire

Farming communities that are seemingly vulnerable to the effects of extreme
weather conditions were assessed using a survey questionnaire with 80 respondents. The

respondents were expected to provide data about their farming conditions, existing


problems, perception of their vulnerability to flooding, current measures to alleviate the
adverse effect of flooding, and other adaptive practices to mitigate the effect of flooding to
crop production. This would attest to the firsthand experiences of our farmers, hence the
importance of developing new methods, and other means to create a more tolerant and
sustainable farming approach that can bring about security and long-term solution. The

survey questionnaires are crafted as shown in Appendix A.


Assessment of Growth
P; eters:

Preliminary Screening Waterlogging Tea ara se
(Hybrid vs Non Hybrid |—>] Treatment (2 Weeks,3 |—>| _ LDW. SFW, SDW,
variety) Weeks, 5-6 Weeks) hate tO nowt

Root volume ete.

F —
Assessment of Growth
Survey (Online, Farm Phytohormone Parameters:

Visits; KII Assessment |—>) treatment on the most |») LDW, SFW, SDW,
Tools tolerant Variety LSA, Ist to Flower,

Root volume etc.

EBL can
counteract the
tfeet ar WH
Ethephon can “| Combined Action of
a * EBL and JA
> mediates tolerance
mechanism on
ead waterlogged chili

Paclobutrazol
‘can increase
envival

‘pepper plants.

Figure 3. Methodological framework of the study

CHAPTER IV

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Study I: Preliminary Screening

Effect of Waterlogging to the Plant
Height of Two Chili Pepper Varieties

Comparison of plant height of hybrid vs. non hybrid chili pepper. At 7 to 14 days
after transplanting (DAT), there was no significant difference observed yet in terms of plant
height for the two chili pepper varieties subjected to different periods of waterlogging
(WL). However, at 28 DAT, the Pinatubo FI hybrid variety showed a higher increment for
the control, followed by 2 weeks waterlogged treated plants, and then declining at 4 to 6
weeks waterlogging. A similar pattern was observed with Taiwan, a non-hybrid, chili
pepper variety. However, it showed a more apparent decline as compared to the hybrid

variety.

At 42 DAT, there was a rapid increase in height for both varieties, which may be
attributed to the log phase wherein a drastic change in growth and development is expected
to occur. However, the Pinatubo hybrid appeared to be taller in comparison to the non-
hybrid Taiwan. The control for the hybrid variety gained the highest mean value, followed
by plants subjected to waterlogging treatment for 2 weeks. Plants waterlogged for 4-6

weeks have consistently declined.


At 56 DAT, the control for Pinatubo showed a higher mean and thus a consistent
growth. This was followed by the chili pepper plants subjected to 2 weeks WL. As

expected, a much lower value was recorded for those plants subjected to prolonged periods

of waterlogging.
Table 4. Plant height (in cm) of two varieties of chili pepper under different waterlogging
periods.
Days after Pinatubo Hybrid Talwan sem Po
Transplanting —WE9 WL? Wid WL6 WLO WL? WL4 Wie VAR OWL

7 17.67 17.53% 18.49" 18.217 13.83 13.49% 12.91% 13.44% 0.47 <0001 0.9936
4 32.54 28.66" 26.38a" 21.13% 25.19" 21.33" 22.02 = 18.17% 0.79 <.0001—<.0001
2B 38.30 31.33% 27.05b* 22.69" 30.56" 23.84 24.22b 18.94" 0.92 0.0002 <.0001
4a 49.44" 37.26 -27.53c 23.416 38,767 28.29% 25.135 19.43 1.26 = <.0001 <,0001
56 56.82° 40.95 28.14° —-25.65° 45.68" 30.90" 27.02 19.99 1.51 <.0001 <.0001

Not: Means ia the same row with different superscripts dle signiicany(P<0.05), SEMstandard ero of mean, VARvarety, WL=waterlogging
periods WLO-cooto. no induced waterlogsing: WL2. WLA, WLo-induced watrlogging for 2, 4, and 6 week, respectively.

There was a significant difference between the two varieties as they were similarly
subjected to different periods of waterlogging treatment. As observed in Table 1, the
Pinatubo hybrid variety appeared to be taller than the Taiwan non hybrid. However, both
of the varieties showed hampered growth, except for the control. This observation is crucial
in evaluating how one variety can withstand the stressful condition brought by flooding

and thus are still able to proliferate even with such limitations.

A study by Beato (2016) on growth performance and yield of hot pepper varieties
fertilized with fermented plant materials, showed that the Pinatubo hybrid variety has an

average height of 59 to 62 cm and performs well in terms of yield as long as the optimum


growing conditions are provided. Similar to the native Siling Labuyo, the Taiwan variety

has an average height of 76-80 cm and a highly branching habit.

A study conducted by Ou et al. (2011) showed how waterlogging can create a
disruption to pepper plant’s growth and development by reducing photosynthetic rate
caused by reduced CO: fixation ability of the chloroplast and other chemical changes in
the PSII. Thus, production and absorption of assimilates were altered causing reduced plant

growth relatively manifested through the height of the plant.

Effect of Waterlogging on the Shoot
Fresh Weight and Shoot Dry Weight
Of Two Chili Pepper Varieties

Comparison of shoot fresh weight and shoot dry weight of hybrid vs. non hybrid
chili pepper. Values for 7 and 14 days after transplanting (DAT) showed that there was
no significant difference observed yet among waterlogged chili pepper plants. At 28 DAT,
there was little difference observed between the two varieties over their acquired shoot
fresh weight (SFW). The control plants for Pinatubo hybrid showed a slightly higher SFW
as compared to the control of Taiwan non-hybrid. However, the SFW values for
waterlogged treated plant showed a relative increase, regardless of the variety. This is due

perhaps to rapid cell expansion and growth.

At 42 DAT, the control’s SFW value of the Pinatubo hybrid was significantly

higher (P<.0001) than the control of Taiwan non-hybrid variety. Meanwhile, the


waterlogged plants from the hybrid variety showed a declining trend, wherein a higher
value was recorded for the 2 weeks-waterlogged plants, followed by the 4 weeks-
waterlogged chili pepper and for 6 weeks-waterlogged pepper. A significantly (P<0.05)
lower values for SFW accounted for the non-hybrid variety throughout all the waterlogging
periods. At 56 DAT, the SFW of the control of the Pinatubo hybrid had consistent and
significantly higher values (P<0.05) of 90.42 g as compared to the Taiwan non-hybrid,
with only 84.66 g. However, a decreasing trend was more apparent for those plants

subjected to different periods of waterlogging, regardless of the variety (Table 3).

For the shoot dry weight (SDW) at 14 DAT, Pinatubo hybrid plants subjected to 2
weeks waterlogging showed a slightly higher value of SDW compared to the control of
both varieties. As for 28 DAT, the Pinatubo hybrid’s control plants showed a higher mean
value than the Taiwan-non hybrid variety. While there may be some inconsistency with the
comparison of the two varieties, the Taiwan non-hybrid were also relatively increasing at

this phase.

At 42 DAT, there was a significant difference (P<.0001) with the control plants
between the Pinatubo hybrid and the non-hybrid variety. The control for Pinatubo acquired
a higher SDW than the non-hybrid variety. As for the chili pepper subjected to 2 weeks
waterlogging, the Pinatubo hybrids showed a slightly higher value, as compared to the non-
hybrid. However, for 4weeks waterlogging treatment, the Taiwan chili pepper gained a
higher SDW than the Pinatubo variety. Nonetheless, at 6 weeks waterlogging, the Pinatubo

variety had a higher mean for SDW as compared to the Taiwan variety. Although a relative


decline is becoming more apparent with prolonged exposure to water saturated

rhizosphere.

At 56 DAT, the control of Pinatubo variety had a significantly higher value
(P<0.05) for the SDW compared to the control of Taiwan variety. Meanwhile, there was
an observable decline with SDW for both varieties as they were subjected to different
waterlogging periods. At 2 weeks waterlogging, the Taiwan variety showed a slightly
higher SDW compared to Pinatubo variety. Meanwhile at 4-6 weeks waterlogging, the

Pinatubo showed a higher SDW than the Taiwan variety.

Usually, the water content of an organ is given as a percentage of the dry weight or
of the fresh weight. However, water evaporation greatly influences the changes in fresh
weight and so the shoot dry weight is often used as the most reliable measure of the total

acquired weight, as in this case, throughout the different periods of waterlogging.

‘A water-saturated rhizosphere, especially for prolonged periods of time can create
a major shift from normal to inhibited growth given the various physiological process that
is affected by the hypoxic condition. Moreover, leaf expansion is correlated with leaf water
content. This is because, high water content increases internal hydraulic pressure which
greatly influences cell enlargement, and thus would result to increased tissue volume.
(Widuri et al., 2017; Ture et al., 2016). Similar study on chili pepper grown under
waterlogged condition showed a great variation with the impact of hypoxia. Mainly, it
reduced total leaf area and total dry weight, however some of the findings with TDW, may

be inconsistent (Siaga et al., 2019).

Sontisadsassxpom 9 pu “pz 405 SuBBOSTEM pHONPLL-GTAL “LM ‘TLM SuBBop9Iem poonpul ou
lemwTAd ‘AroueR=AVA “UeDUU Jo Jo prepusrs=WAS (S0'O>d) SUeDgrNSS JayIP sWusssedns 1uas9[Ip tm mor BUS a4 WH SUEDYY :2I0N

1000> 9590°0 LI'0 9080-2951 AEST FLHE HTT 60% UST "BBP 9s

1000> SLe0 PIO «QOHT QPEL SULT MTE GEL ALT LEE PIE w

ores 11170 6010 OOT,sETT eT STI SH ET 96016 87

y000'0 P0000 HO! «ASO FELD FSBO FSBO —GbL'0 9980 POT F060 +1

6zs10 ss600 _Z00_ —8FO «ISO FO SSO 9S0 790 BHO BO L
TM _UVA SIM YIM ZIM OTM OTM YIM ZIM OTM gunasydsusry,

omy Lid says seq
IEA BEANE, puasH oqnentg

‘spouad SuySZos9yem yuazaytp s9pun saddad ysy> so sauauwa omy so (8) 1B! L1G sooys “9 7IGEL,

‘Apansadsos 54290 9 pue“p “7 30} BuySZ0}:10M AOMPUL-S TAN “IM ‘TTA ButBBoyDIeM poonpar ON,
jueoyyudis sip sdusssadns uss2ytp Yi Mou DUES a4 UH SUEDIN SION,

‘yonuos—71 14 spousd SuSBopaieMa 1H AIouERRAY A “UEDU JO 1049 prepuEsaWaS (S0'O>d

1000> 94200 «SZ POLE ES HH BRIO “9998 “ORI "DO'S *P7'8D “h'06 9s
1000> — ZZ1010 SOT. *OFEZ©«TLI'9E “BETS “LES HBSE EO'EH TLS “SSHL ww
1000 8990-16 SH'ZE | OET HHLZ —BTLE | HLLTOLUTSOPRZ SLE %
LESTO —010010—s=—L9'D. «RUE «THIRST. «NST = BOT HNTIZ BOL S607 vt
98400 $1800 _ ED 60S HTT. OTL LOL ESOL BPTI ELT L
Bn EVAN SIM PIM TIM OTM TM FIM ZIM OTM uu ejdsueay
bd Jaye séeg
anyeard weAIEL pHakH oqmema

spopiad SujS2o199em juas9yyIp 49pun saddad mys jo sapayseA omy Jo (8) 14319M Ysauy JOOHS — *S AGEL,


Comparison of Leaf Surface Area and
Number of Leaves of Waterlogged
Chili Pepper Varieties

Comparison of Leaf Surface Area and Number of Leaves of Hybrid and Non-
Hybrid Chili Pepper. The leaf surface area was measured using Petiole, a mobile
application, to evaluate the plant’s capacity to fully develop its leaves despite the stress
brought about by prolonged water-saturated rhizosphere. The change in both the number
of leaves and leaf surface area expresses the plant’s ability to adapt to its environment

either through expansion or reduction, and shedding.

Table 7. Number of leaves of two varieties of chili pepper under different waterlogging

periods.

Daysatier bo Hybrid cm Povalue
‘Transplanting Wig WL? Wid Wie WLO-Wit—sWid (WE VAR WL
7 1238 13.80" 11.20% 9.80" 789.90" 8.00" 7.80" GAT 0.0007 0.0022
“4 18.60" 17.60" 14.108 13.10" 15.50" 13.00 12.00" 11.30" 047 0.0004 0.0001
8 2330 2240" 1840S 1630 19.5" 18.6 1630S 1440053 0.0012 <0001
2 2456 2430" = 22.40" 20.20" 22.11 21.20" 20.10" 17,30 047 0.0015 0.0008.
56 2788 28.50" 25.70% 2490 26.44 26.10" 2490" 21.50" 0.4B0.0240 0.0040

‘Noe: Means inthe same row with diffrent superscripts ifr significantly

0.05). SEM standard eror of mean. VAR=variety, WL=waterogging petiodsWLO- contol ne
induced waterlogying: WL2, WL4, WL6-induced waterlouying for 2,4, and 6 weeks respectively

At7 days after transplanting, the control of Pinatubo hybrid showed a significantly
higher number of leaves. Whereas the Taiwan variety showed a lower mean for the number
of leaves developed (Table 5). At 14 DAT, the Pinatubo chili pepper plants had a

significantly higher number of leaves (P<0.05) than the Taiwan variety. As for the


waterlogged plants, the former still showed a higher mean value than the latter as they are

subjected to 2-6 weeks waterlogging.

At 28 DAT, there was a significant increase (P<0.05) with the number of leaves for
the control of both varieties, while the waterlogged treated plants showed a decreasing

trend by which the Taiwan variety gained the smallest value.

At 42 DAT, the control for Pinatubo had a significantly higher mean value for the
number of leaves, than the control of the Taiwan variety. At 4-6 weeks waterlogging, the
Pinatubo showed a higher number of leaves (22.40 and 20.20) than the Taiwan variety

(20.10 and 17.30), but are still relatively lower than the control and 2 weeks WL treatment.

A distinct difference between the Pinatubo and Taiwan was observed at 56 DAT
by which the former had a higher number of leaves from 2 weeks waterlogging with 28.50
while the latter's value for the control was 26.44 (p-value: 0.0040). Nonetheless, there was
an observable decline with the number of leaves at different periods of waterlogging,

regardless of the variety.

In a study by Palapala and Nyamolo (2016) waterlogging had evidently caused a
significant reduction in the number of leaves in maize by which premature senescence and
shedding due to hypoxia may be blamed. Add to that, the disruption of assimilates that
should have encouraged the formation of new leaf flushes may have been compromised.
This is probably because of the formation of metabolic toxins compounds being a by-

product of prolonged anaerobic fermentation, by which the waterlogged chili pepper plants


have resorted to in response to abiotic stress. For example, build-up of ethanol, even for a

short period of time of anaerobic respiration, affects enzyme activity (Maricle et al., 2014).

Table 8. Leaf Surface Area (sq. cm) of two varieties of chill pepper under different

waterlogging periods.
Pinatubo Hybrid ‘Taiwan Non-bybrid

Days after SEM
Transplanting WLO | WL2  WL4  WL6  WLO0 WL? WL4  WL6 VAR WL
77.55 10.50% 15.44 15.70" 6.21% 7.43% 1.4I® 11.60" 0.65 0.0052 <.0001
4 2993 3617 3743-3286 32.63 23.38 28.92 23.76 = 1.77 0.0427 0.7763
28 22:80 13.85 19.08 17.01 18.19 14.53 1405 14.13, 0.96 0.1189 0.1686,
2 38.122 2041 — 19.09% 16.65% 31.70" 16.58 14.18" 14.50 1.41 0.0592 <.0001
56 52.87 22.04 16.06 12.30" 53.89" 15.78 16.19 9.15" 2.07 0.2796 <.0001

Note: Meansin the same row with different superscripts difer significantly (Pc0.05). SEM=standard error of mean. VAR=variety, WL=waterlogging periods

‘WLO-control,no induced waterlogging: WL2, WL4, WL6=induced waterlogging for 2, 4, and 6 weeks, respectively.

In terms of the leaf surface area (LSA), the pre-treatment observation at 7 DAT (28
days old seedlings) showed that the Pinatubo variety had higher values than the Taiwan

non-hybrid.

At 14 DAT, the control of the Taiwan variety had a value for LSA higher than
Pinatubo variety. However, the chili pepper plants subjected to 2 weeks waterlogging of
the Pinatubo variety had a higher value as compared to the Taiwan variety. Similarly, the
2-6 weeks waterlogged Pinatubo chili pepper had higher values (37.43 and 32.86) as

compared to the Taiwan waterlogged variety (28.92 and 23.76).

At 28 DAT, there was an observable decline in the LSA for both varieties, but the

Pinatubo showed higher values for LSA with 22.80, 13.85, 19.08, and 17.01. Whereas the


Taiwan variety had recorded values of 18.19, 14.53, 14.05, and 14.13. At 42 DAT,
however, there was a significant difference (P<0.05) observed between the two varicties
wherein the control of the Pinatubo had higher values from the rest of the waterlogged

plants. Nonetheless, a decline in the LSA was apparent for both varieties.

At 56 DAT, a higher leaf surface area accounted for the control of the Taiwan
variety as compared with the Pinatubo variety. As for the different WL treatments, there
was a considerable reduction in LSA for both varieties but the fluctuating values made it
difficult to contrast the two. However, it is noteworthy that the control plants had more

leaves and higher LSA than the waterlogged plants.

The observation is similar to a study by Palapala and Nyamolo (2016) wherein
waterlogging showed to negatively affect the proliferation of leaves causing many to shed
prematurely, starting from the older leaves. Moreover, the consequence of the reduction of
number of leaves and surface area is a reduction of the net light absorbing surface affecting
photosynthesis and overall productivity. If the waterlogging condition remains
unaddressed, it can lead to an irreversible damage to the root system and can potentially

kill the plant.

Collaku and Harrison (2001) studied the tomato plant that is subjected to
waterlogged conditions and they found that WL slowed leaf elongation since it impedes

both the uptake and transport of nutrients within the plant system.


Root Length of Two Waterlogged
Chili Pepper Varieties

Comparison of root length of hybrid vs. non-hybrid chili pepper. To investigate
the effect of waterlogging on the roots system, destructive sampling was employed wherein
five chili pepper plants were randomly selected from each treatment and then later on
uprooted. Each plant was measured for root length in cm with the recorded mean showed

in Table 9,

Table 9. — Root length in cm of two varieties of chili pepper under different waterlogging

periods.
Pinatubo Hybrid Taiwan Non-Hybrid 5 P-value
EM
‘WLO WL2 WL4 WL6 ‘WLO WL2 WL4 WL6 VAR WL

37.70" 33.02" 29.14 21.22" 31.20 28.34" 24.64 = 20.84" 1.32 0.0651 0.0006

Noe: Means in the same row with different superscripts difer significantly (P<0.0S). SEM-standard etor of mean. VAR-varity,
‘WL-waterloging periods WLO-conrol, no induced waterlogging: WL2, WLA, WL6-induced waterioging for 2.4 and 6 weeks, respectively.
The root length of each of the two varieties are significantly different (P<0.05) and
shows an apparent reduction as the plants are subjected to different periods of water-
saturated rhizosphere. The control of the Pinatubo variety appears to be higher than the
Taiwan variety, by which the former has a mean of 37.70 cm, while the latter has 31.20
cm. Moreover, the Pinatubo variety subjected to 2 weeks waterlogged condition have a
longer root length at 33.02 cm, whereas the Taiwan variety measured at 28.34. Similarly,
the Pinatubo variety subjected to 4 weeks waterlogging period showed a longer mean value

of 29.14 m, as compared to the Taiwan chili pepper’s value of 24.64 cm.


Consequently, there is a significant reduction (P<0.05) in the root length for both
varieties subjected to 6 weeks waterlogging period. However, the Pinatubo variety appears

to have longer root length as compared to the Taiwan variety.

In this study, the root length was significantly reduced throughout all periods of
waterlogging by which the chili pepper plants subjected to the longest (6 weeks) WL period
showed to have the shortest length of roots. This is true to both varieties, but the Taiwan

presents a remarkably lower value than the Pinatubo variety.

Ou et al. (2011) investigated the response of different varieties of chili pepper to
waterlogging condition and the result showed that the root number, specifically the
adventitious roots, have increased even under hypoxia. Thus, an increase in root volume
may translate to a reduction in root length due to a massive reallocation of energy to
forming more adventitious roots as these enable the plant to maintain an efficient

absorption and high oxygen diffusion rate.

Morphological Seale between Two
Waterlogged Chili Pepper Varieties

Comparison of morphological scale between hybrid and non-hybrid varieties of
chili pepper. The physical growth response of Pinatubo and Taiwan variety are assessed
through the morphological observation scale by Yang et al. (2020), with each points
assigned with percentage. For level 2 (25%); Level 3 (45%); Level 4 (65%); Level 5 (75%);

Level 6 (85%); Level 7 (95%). Ranging from 2-3 leaves showing signs of wilting and


abscission to death of the plant tissues and malformation of the leaves and branches, as
well as stunted growth.

As observed, the Taiwan non-hybrid variety had a higher number of plant samples
that appears to be heavily succumbed to waterlogging stress, accounting for injury of least
85 to 95%, especially those chili pepper plants subjected to prolonged periods of flooded
condition (Figure 4).

On the other hand, Pinatubo showed a more tolerant characteristic with less number
of plants that are affected by WL by 65 to 95%, particularly those plants that have been
exposed to flooding stress for longer periods of time. As documented, prominent
mechanical injury was more apparent with the Taiwan non-hybrid variety of Chili pepper.
Nonetheless, Pinatubo showed that it may also greatly suffer from waterlogging if the
condition have not been addressed immediately and that if prolonged exposure has become
inevitable. Plant can only tolerate so much of hypoxic condition, even though there are
numerous physiological defense mechanism that are activated to enable the plant to
function still, the damage may certainly become irreversible if no intervention is made.

For years, several crops have been studied to measure their short-term as well as
long-term response to oxygen deficit. With several parameters awaiting thorough
investigation, perhaps the most problematic impact of WL by which no farmer is exempted,
is yield losses. This is certainly alarming since the frequency and intensity of flooding
events is expected to increase on a global scale as a result of climate change (Westra et al.,
2014; IPCC, 2018). As far as food security is concerned, more research should be done to

alleviate the impact of WL stress in vulnerable crops.

Figure 4.


Morphological Scale Morphological Scale

Comparison of morphological scale of waterlogged cl
Level 1: Normal growth; no symptoms of physiological or morphological
stress; Level 2: One or Two (2) leaves had become brown and withered;
Level 3: Three (3) or Four (4) leaves had become brown, withered, and
abscised; Level 4: Five (5) or Six (6) leaves had become brown, withered,
and abscised; Level 5: More than six (6) leaves had become brown,
withered, and abscised; Level 6: More than six (6) leaves had become
brown, withered, and abscised; no sign of flowering; Level 7: Prominent
mechanical injury resulting to death of plant tissues scale of Pinatubo and
Taiwan variety at different periods of waterlogging



Study IT: Use of Plant Growth Regulators

Effect of Waterlogging to the Plant
Height of Chili Pepper Plants
Treated with BL, ETP, and PBZ

Comparison of plant height of waterlogged plants. Similar to the preliminary
screening, the height of waterlogged chili pepper plants treated with different plant growth

regulators were measured, and the resulting mean values are shown in Table 10.

Table 10. Plant height (cm) of chili pepper plants treated with PGRs under
waterlogged condition.

Plant Growth Regulators Treatment

Goliad CON WL EBL ETP rez Pa
Transplanting

7 Tio? 192 218 1936 2050 «0.49 (0.0297
“4 2361-2324 25892297 24900470168
a 3059 28.89 28.46 2642 29.53.51 0.213
2 32282959" 30.18% 26.31% 32S 0.0036
35 426% 30.18 33.24 311s" 31S 083 < 0001
2 5524 30.99 45.53% 43.08 35°37 < 0001
0 63k ae SHR S17 3729" 77 < 0001
56 616 857.6 SAMY 39.11.93 <0001
6 6ROF 33.08 SRIG> 54.99 a9 1.90 < 0001
0 6820" 33.28 R358 4.6.90 <0001

Note: Means inthe same row with diferent superscripts differ significantly (P<0,05), SEM-standard error of mean. WL=waterlogging
periods TO*- no induced waterlogging and no PGR weatment; T1, T2, T3, Té~induced waterlogging for 2-4 weeks, Brassinolide
‘weatment, Ethephon Treatment, and Paclobutrazol, respectively.


At 28 DAT, there is a significant difference (P<0.05) in plant height between the
chili peppers subjected to 2-6 weeks waterlogging which has a 7 days recovery period in
between. The control (no waterlogging) has a higher mean value, which is followed by the
Paclobutrazol (PBZ) treatment, Brassinolide (BL), the waterlogged only plants, and lastly,

the Ethephon (ETP) treated chili peppers.

At 35 DAT, the control plants are significantly taller (P<0.05) than the rest of the
sample unit with a mean value of 42.61 cm. However, there is a noticeable increment with
the height of all the chili peppers which may be attributed to the stage of rapid growth and
cell expansion. Next to the control, the highest mean for plant height was recorded from
the BL treatment. This is followed by the PBZ treatment, the ETP treated plants, and the

waterlogged chili pepper plants without treatment.

A continuous increase in height is still observable at 42 DAT (P<0.05), with the
contro! having the highest value of 55.24 cm, followed by the BL treated plants with 45.53
cm, then the ETP treated plants with 43.08 cm. This is followed by the PBZ treatment
having 35.34 cm, and the waterlogged only pepper plants with a mean value of only 30.99
cm. Similarly, the control has the highest mean value (P<0.05) at 49 DAT followed by the
ETP treated plants, then the BL treatment and the PBZ treated chili pepper. Growth is
significantly impeded at 49 DAT (p-value of <.0001) for the waterlogged chili pepper with

no phytohormone treatment.

At 56 DAT, waterlogging stress has become prominent with the chili pepper plant

that has no phytohormone treatment (T1) having the lowest mean value of 32.83 cm.


Meanwhile, the control appears to have the highest mean for plant height with a
value of 67.62 cm, followed by the BL treated plants with 57.62 cm, the ETP treated plants,

having 54.14 cm, and the PBZ treated chili pepper with 39.15 cm.

At 63 and 70 DAT, there is a significant difference (P<0.05) observed between the
control, the waterlogged chili pepper plants with no treatment, and those waterlogged
plants treated with different plant growth regulators. In this experiment, the control appears
to be the tallest sample unit with mean values of 68.04 cm and 68.20 cm for 63 and 70
DAT. This is followed by the BL treated plants which is 14% shorter than the control.
However at 63 to 70 DAT, BL is relatively higher by 6% than the ETP treated plants. With
the ETP treatment values of 54.99 and 55.18 cm for 63 to 70 DAT, the ETP has increased
in height by 31% compared to PBZ treated chili peppers. Meanwhile, the waterlogged
plants without any treatment have undeniably taken the toll of flooding stress, as
manifested by the stunted growth from 63 to 70 DAT. The PBZ was 27% taller than the
waterlogged only plants, and when compared with the control, plant height of waterlogged

only plants has drastically decreased by 51%.

The physiological response of chili pepper to waterlogging stress may be variable
but one can assume a tolerance mechanism on those waterlogged chili peppers treated with
different plant growth regulators having a measurement that is close to that of the control.
For example, at 70 DAT, the chili pepper plants treated with BL is almost as tall as the

control plants, followed by ETP treated pepper plants.


Brassinolide has a potential to ameliorate the impact of waterlogging stress and this
has been observed particularly in maize plants (Otie et al., 2019). While the damage of WL
stress to crops greatly varies in the different stages of plant growth, change in plant height
overtime is an important parameter to attest whether there is a tolerance mechanism at play
which enable plants to grow and proliferate in spite of the presence of an abiotic stress.
Otie at al. (2019) showed that Brassinolide application have significantly improved the
relative growth rate of maize under waterlogged condition and this may be attributed to
how BR could have influenced cell cycle progression, growth, and even leaf cell formation
(Gonzales-Garcia et al., 2001; Nakaya et al., 2002). Moreover, the 24-epibrassinolide
(EBR) have been able to improve the PS machinery and root systems of soybean plants

under waterlogged condition (Pereira et al., 2020).

The observation is parallel to the study conducted by Kim et al. (2018) where it was
observed that the ETP treated soybean plants were significantly taller than the waterlogging
only treatment. In addition, Shiono et al. (2019) have investigated the effect of WL and the
strategy to induce faster formation of aerenchyma. Aerenchyma cells provide a low-
Tesistance pathway to serve as a passage of oxygen from the shoot to the root apex. With
ETP application, formation of aerenchyma was enhanced at the root tips and it was also
observed that the barley plants have developed more of shorter and shallower roots,
enabling the plant to survive and even delaying some of the morphological manifestation
of WL such as wilting (Shiono et al., 2019). With the reported influence of ethephon

treatment, plants have shown to increase their chlorophyll content and thus able to maintain


the rate of photosynthesis which may have improved the plants’ growth characteristics,

even in a water saturated rhizosphere (Kim et al., 2018).

Effect of Waterlogging to the Leaf Fresh Weight
‘And Leaf Dry Weight of Chili Pepper Plants
Treated with EBL, ETP, and PBZ
Comparison of leaf fresh weight and leaf dry weight. The leaf fresh weight and
the leaf dry weight differs significantly (P<0.05) among the control and the waterlogged

plants treated with plant growth regulators. The results are shown in Tables 11 and 12.

Table 11. Leaf fresh weight (g) chili pepper plants treated with PGRs under
waterlogged Condition

Plant Growth Regulators Treatment

Tani CON WL BL ETP PBZ SEM Pralue
14 TB 119 110 107 108 003 0.6367
28 148 143141 1461.65 0.060.761
42 1941.23 1.93" 2.08 2.10" 0.07 0.0002
56 3.06" Lads 2.37" 2.08" = 1.218 0.13 <0001
70 3.29 1.72 2.50% 2.32" 1.58" 0.15 0.0007

"Note: Means in the same row with different superscripts differ significantly (P<0,0S), SEM=standard eror of mean. WLwaterlogging
periods TO*- no induced waterlogging and no PGR treatment; Tl, T2, T3, Té-induced waterlogging for 2-4 weeks, Brassinolide
{teatment, Ethephon Treatment, and Paclobutrazol, respectively

At 42 DAT, the chili pepper plants treated with PBZ gained a higher LFW with
2.10 g, followed by ETP treated plants, having 2.08 g. The control plants have a slightly

higher LFW than the BL treated plants with mean values of 1.94 g for the former, and 1.93


g, for the latter. The waterlogged only plants appears to have the lowest value for LFW
with only 1.23 g.

However, at 56 DAT, the control has gained the highest LFW with 3.06 g, followed
by the BL treated plants with 2.37 g, and the ETP treated plants with 2.04 g. The
waterlogged only chili peppers have noticeably gained a higher LFW of 1.44 g than the
PBZ treated chili pepper plants having only 1.21 g, which is quite the opposite of the

observation made for 42 DAT.

Similarly, the control gained the highest LFW with the mean value of 3.29 g at 70
DAT. This is 32% higher than the BL treated plants, which has the second highest value
for LFW with 2.50 g. Followed by ETP treated plants with 2.32 g, the BL treatment was
8% higher than ETP. Once again, the waterlogged only plants have gained a higher LFW

of 9% with 1.72 g than the PBZ treated plants with only 1.58 g.

Table 12. Leaf dry weight (g) chili pepper plants treated with PGRs under
waterlogged condition.

Plant Growth Regulator Treatment

SEM
7 ene CON WL BL ETP PBZ P-value
ransplanting

14 0.43 057 (0.52 052 O47 0.02 0.1197

28 037-041 -0.42 -0.32 043 0.02——0.5440



Table 12. Continued...

Plant Growth Regulator Treatment

al CON WE BL oETP PBZ pwvatue
a2 059° 036° 056° 049% 0.39 0.02 0,003
56 0.67 0.33" 0.63" 0.618 047 0.03 <,0001
70 0.95" 0.47% 0.96" 0.80% 0.68" 0.04 <.0001

"Note: Means in the same row with different superscripts differ significantly (Pc0,05). SEM=standard error of mean. WL=waterlogging

periods TO*- no induced waterlogging and no PGR treatment; TI, 12. 73, Tésinduced waterlogging for 2-4 weeks, Brassinolide

treatment, Ethephon Treatment, and Paclobutrazol, respectively,

At 42 DAT, there is a significant difference (P<0.05) from the control and the
waterlogged chili pepper plants that are treated with plant growth regulators with regard to
the LDW. The control has a slightly higher recorded LDW of 0.59 g than the BL treated
plants with 0.56 g. This is followed by the ETP treated plants with 0.49 g, and the PBZ
treated plants with 0.39 g. The waterlogged only chilli pepper plants appear to have the

lowest LDW with 0.33 g.

At 56 DAT, the control plants also have the highest LDW followed by the BL and
the ETP treated plants. Meanwhile, the PBZ treated plants have gained a slightly higher
LDW than the waterlogged only chili pepper plants. At 70 DAT, the BL appears to have
gained a higher LDW of 0.96 g, than the control with a mean value of 0.95 g. This is
followed by the ETP treated plants, having 0.80 g, and the PBZ treated plants with 0.68 g.
The waterlogged only chili peppers showed to have the lowest LDW, with only 0.47 g, and

this is about 51% lower than the control and the BL treated plant.


Leaf fresh weight and leaf dry weight requires minimal sampling and thus were
used for comparison in order to prevent imposing further stress aside from the limitation
of having the plants subjected to a water-saturated rhizosphere for longer periods of time.
‘As observed with the chili pepper subjected to WL only and without any treatments
imposed, WRS limits oxygen diffusion rate, affecting the basic metabolic and
photosynthetic functions within the plant system, causing a reduction in both LFW and

LDW.

Moreover, the BL showed a potential to alleviate the impact of WL stress and have
induced the proliferation of chili pepper plant, With a value close to that of the control, if
not higher, shows a positive correlation with its stress alleviating properties and ability to
induce tolerant mechanism to chili pepper plants under hypoxic condition. Similarly, BL
application was also shown to improve the phenotypic characteristic of maize (Otie et al.,
2019) and may have been a key influence in sustaining growth and tissue development

even under hypoxia,

The ETP also showed a promising effect to the physiological response of chili
pepper plants under flooded conditions. According to Kim et al. (2018), the ETP
application under WL stress showed to have improved photosynthetic pigments in

soybeans and has enabled the plant to withstand the prolonged periods of flooding stress.

Comparison of Leaf Surface Area and
Number of Leaves of Chili Pepper Plants
Treated with EBL, ETP, and PBZ


Comparison of number of leaves and leaf surface area. A significant difference
(P<0.05) among the sampling unit was observed in terms of the number of leaves and the
leaf surface area (LSA). Similar to the preliminary screening, the LSA of waterlogged chili
pepper plants were measured using the mobile app, Petiole. The results are shown in Tables

13 and 14.

At 14 DAT, the BL treated plants appear to have the highest mean (P<0.05) value
for the number of leaves, with 19.10. While the control has the lowest mean value recorded.
The EBL treated chili pepper plants are followed by the PBZ treatment, the ETP treated

plants, and the waterlogged only plants.

A similar observation was recorded at 21 DAT wherein the BL treated plants had
the highest mean for the number of leaves with 25.40. While the control has the lowest
with only 17.70. Once again, the BL treated plants are followed by the PBZ treated chili
peppers with 24.20, the ETP treatment with 23.50, and the waterlogged only plants with

21.70.

At 28 DAT, the control showed to have the highest mean value, followed by the
PBZ treated plants, and the BL treated plants. The ETP treated plants gained a slightly
higher value than the waterlogged only plants. However, no significant different was noted

from all designated treatments.

At 35 DAT, the PBZ treated plants gained the highest number of leaves with a mean

value of 30,80, followed by the BL and the control with 28.90 and 28, respectively. The


waterlogged only plants gained a significantly (P<0.05) low mean value for the number of

leaves among treatments.

Table 13.

Days after
transplanting

ir

Number of leaves chili pepper plants treated with PGRs under
waterlogged condition,

Plant Growth Regulators Treatment

CON WL BL ETP PBZ
8.20 10.60 11.60 10.90 11.50
11.80" 14.60% 19.108 16.40" = 18.30*
17.70 21,70 = 25.40" 23.50 24,20"
27 22.40 25.10 23.60 26.40
28° 17.70° 28.90" 27.50 30.80"
42.50" 15.90" 38.10" 26.40» 34,20"
38.90" 13.60 37.10 29.00 36.60"
44.40" 15.10 40,90" 34.80" 37.50"
53.90" 21.30% 46,60" — 37.10% 40.50%
50.40" 19.40" 42,80 33.30% 38.80

SEM

0.42
0.70
0.73
O71
1.02
1.80
1.70
1.84
2.06
1.96

P-value

0.0565
0.0031
0.0054
0.0790
<.0001
<,0001
<.0001
<,0001
<,0001
<,0001

Note: Means in the same row with different superscripts differ significantly (P<0.05), SEM=standard error of mean. WL=waterlogging

periods TO*- no induced waterlogging and no PGR treatment; T!, T2, T3, Té=induced waterlogging for 2-4 weeks, Brassinolide

‘weatment, Ethephon Treatment, and Paclobutrazo, respectively

There is a significant reduction in the number of leaves (P<0.05) at 42 and 49 DAT,

affecting almost all of the sampling unit, with the PBZ treatment acquiring the lowest

value. However, at 56 DAT, the control showed to have the highest recorded mean with

44.40. Followed by the BL treated plants, the PBZ treated plants and the ETP treatment.

The lowest mean value (P<0.05) was accounted for the waterlogged only pepper plants.


A similar observation is recorded at 63.to 70 DAT, with the control consistently
gaining the highest mean for the number of leaves, with 53.90 and 50.40, respectively. The
control is followed by the BL treated plants having mean values of 46.60 and 42.80, and
the PBZ treated chili pepper plants with 40.50 and 38.80. Then, the ETP treatment with
values of 37.10 and 33.30. The waterlogged only plants have apparently gained the lowest

mean (P<0.05) value for the number of leaves a 63 to 70 DAT, with only 21.30 and 19.40,

respectively.
Table 14. Leaf surface area chili pepper plants treated with PGRs under
waterlogged condition.
Plant Growth Regulators Treatment
SEM

Days after CON WL EBL ETP PBZ P-value
Transplanting
7 6.88 TAS 6.85 117 718 0.23 0.7515
14 10.25 10.86 1.21 1134 12.39 0.39 0.5361
28 16,00" 10.26 18.45" 14.98" 15.14 0.71 0.0036
42 26.58" 14.70” 25.58" 23.85" 21.94 0.94 <.0001
56 32.82" 20.91 31.28 28.44" = 29.90" 1.24 0.0189
70 44.98" 24.75° 34.548 38.44%" 31.16% LS <,0001

Note: Means in the same row with different superscripts differ significantly (P<0,05), SEM=standard eror of mean. WL=waterlogging
periods TO*- no induced waterlogging and no PGR treatment; Tl, T2, T3, Té-induced waterlogging for 2-4 weeks, Brassinolide
treatment, EthephonTreatment, and Paclobutrazol, respectively

A significant difference (P<0.05) was observed with the leaf surface area of the
control vs. the waterlogged plants treated with different PGRs at 28 DAT, a period by

which waterlogging stress should have taken its toll to all the sampling unit. The BL treated


plants showed to have the highest mean for the LSA with 18.45, followed by the control
with 16.00, the PBZ treated plants with 15.14, and the ETP treatment with 14.98. The
waterlogged only chili pepper plants showed the lowest mean (P<0.05) for the LSA with

only 10.26.

At 42 DAT, the control gained a significantly higher (P<0.05) LSA which is
followed by the BL treated plants, the ETP treatment, and the PBZ treated chili peppers.

Meanwhile, the waterlogged only plants gained the lowest mean for the LSA.

Similarly, at 56 to 70 DAT, the control has the highest mean for the LSA. This is
followed by the BL treated plants and the PBZ treated plants. Meanwhile, the ETP treated

plants show a significantly higher LSA value than the control.

According to Goto et al. (2021), soil water stress can affect leaf water potential,
stomatal conductance, and chlorophyll content of chili pepper. This eventually leads to a
reduction of leaf surface area and premature shedding of leaves. In this study, BL treated
plants were able to induce a tolerant mechanism to plant affected by waterlogging stress.
The PBZ also shows a potential to ameliorate stress caused by hypoxic condition as it has
been investigated to enhance the biochemical process and antioxidant defense mechanism
in mungbean (Yadav & Hemantaranjan, 2015). Even with a little inconsistency among the
different treatments, the effect of oxygen deficit stress was certainly prominent with those

chili pepper plants that has been subjected to waterlogging alone.


Comparison of Number of Flowers of
Chili Pepper Plants Treated with
EBL, ETP, and PBZ

Comparison of number of flowers. A significant difference (P<0.05) in the
number of flowers was observed between the control and the chili pepper plants treated

with different plant growth regulators. The results are shown in Table 15.

Table 15. Number of flowers of chili pepper treated with different PGR under
waterlogged condition.

Plant Growth Regulators Treatment

fT > Sere ‘ CON WL BL ETP PBZ sem P-value
4 030" oe o eo 0.03 0.0089
47 1.10 o o o o 0.09 = <.0001
50 1.90* o 150% 1.20% — 0.40" 0.19 0,038
3 2.50" 0.80" 2.20% — 1.60% 0.700.200.0049
56 6.0" 1.90% 5.10" 3.80 = 3.40" 0.36 0.0013
59 7.50% 2.80 = 820° 7.10 4.20 30.52, 0.0012
2 13.50" 3.80 860% = 9,60 = 6.80" 0.760.004
68 18.10" 4.10% 13.30" 15.40" 10.10 1.13 0.0003

Note: Means in the same row with different superscripts differ significantly (P<0.05). SEM=standard eror of mean. WL=waterlogging
periods TO*- no induced waterlogging and no PGR treatment; Tl, T2, T3, Té-induced waterlogging for 2-4 weeks, Brassinolide
‘teatment, Ethephon Treatment, and Paclobutrazol, respectively

The numbers of flowers were initially measured at 44 DAT which is at least 70
days from sowing. This is the period where the chili peppers may be expected to transition

from vegetative stage to reproductive stage.


At 47 DAT, the control appears to be the first to form flowers. While at 50 DAT,
together with the control, the BL, ETP, and PBZ treated plants also begin to form flowers.
‘At 53 DAT, the waterlogged pepper plants without any treatments have also begun to form

flowers while the mean values of the rest of the sampling unit relatively increases.

At 56 DAT, the control has a significantly higher (P<0.05) mean than the
waterlogged only pepper plants. The control is then followed by the BL treated plants, the
ETP treated pepper, and the PBZ treatment. The waterlogged only plants have significantly
gained the lowest mean. Meanwhile, at 59 DAT, the BL treated chili pepper plants showed
a higher number of flower than the control. This is followed by the ETP treated plants, and
the PBZ treatment. While the lowest mean (P<0.05) for floral development was accounted

to the waterlogged only plants.

At 62 DAT, the control has gained the highest mean for the number of flowers
followed by the ETP treated chili pepper plants, and the BL treatment. In addition, the PBZ
treated plants showed a higher mean value compared to the waterlogged only plants. A
similar observation was recorded at 65 DAT, by which the control has consistently gained
the highest mean value for the number of flowers (P<0.05), followed by the ETP treated
plants, the BL treatment, and the PBZ treated chili peppers. Overtime, waterlogging have
reduced the number of flowers for the waterlogged only plants by 77% when compared
with the control plants. Furthermore, the effect of PGRs on waterlogged plants were also
compared with the control plants having experienced no WL. The observation showed that
ETP have shown a reduction in number of flowers by 15%, whereas BL have reduced by

27%, while the PBZ treated plants by 44%. These values are still considerably lower as

a

compared to the waterlogged only plants which may have been extremely aggravated by

the condition.

As the plant transitions from vegetative to reproductive stage, a vast amount of
energy is needed by the plants. Yet with conditions such as oxygen deficiency, the
metabolic activity may be greatly affected and thus create an alteration with the plant’s

reproductive stage, affecting both flowering and fruit setting (Suh et al., 1987).

In this study, the BL and ETP showed a promising effect in alleviating stress in
waterlogged chili peppers as evident with their mean values that is close to the control.
Meanwhile, the effect of hypoxia may be observed with the waterlogged pepper plant
without any treatment as shown by the lowest mean value for the number of flowers.
Several reports indicate that the average number of flowers that a pepper plant can produce

are 10-16, depending on the variety.

Fruiting Quality of Chili Pepper Plants
Treated with EBL, ETP, and PBZ

Comparison of average fruit weight and fruit length. Harvested chili pepper were
randomly selected from each of the sampling unit to acquire the average fruit weight and
length. As for the weight of fruits per plant, there is a significant (P<0.05) difference

observed from the second harvest. The results are shown in Table 16.

At the initial harvest, from 72-75 days after transplanting (DAT), the waterlogged
chili pepper plants treated with Brassinolide (BL) gained the highest value for the weight

of fruits per plant with 90,62 g, Meanwhile, the control has gained 88.52 g, followed by


the PBZ treated pepper plants with 81.91 g, and the ETP treatment with 76.99. Evidently,
the lowest mean for the weight of fruit per plant was recorded on waterlogged only with
55.24 g. While the difference may not be significant, the waterlogged only plants was lower

in fruit weight by 60% than the control and BL treated plants.

Table 16. Average weight of fruits per plant of chili peppers treated with PGRs under
waterlogged condition.

Plant Growth Regulators

SEM
Parameter CON WL BL ETP PBZ P-value
Initial Harvest 88.52 $5.24 90.62 76.99 81.91 4.79 0.3294
Second Harvest 82.47, 10.45, 53.035 74.51, 43.635 7.37 0.0123

"Note: Means in the same row with different superscripts differ significantly (P<0.05), SEI
periods TO*- no induced waterlogging and no PGR treatment; T1, T2, T3, T4=induced waterlogging for 2-4 weeks, Brassinolide

ndard eror of mean, WL=waterlogging

treatment, Ethephon Treatment, and Paclobutrazol, respectively

At the second harvest around 80 DAT, the control has significantly gained (P<0.05)
the highest number of weight of fruits per plant with 82.47 g, followed by ETP treated
plants. It appears that the control was higher by 11% than the ETP treatment which only
has 74.51 g. The BL treatment has declined in terms of average weight of fruits per plant
by 71% from the initial harvest, although it is still higher as compared to the waterlogged
only plants which gained the lowest weight value of 10.45 g. BL treatment was higher by

22% than the PBZ treated chili pepper plants,

Fruiting quality is the most compromised aspect of production if no intervention is
made in the event of flooding. While the difference is not apparent at the initial harvest,

the interaction of BL, ETP, and PBZ with waterlogging showed that the PGRs may have


elicited a response to counteract the negative impact of the abiotic stress, and thus still able

to set fruit, evident with the values close to that of the control.

‘A comparison for the average fruit weight from 10 randomly selected peppers from
each sampling unit is presented in Table 17. However, no significant difference was
accounted for the fruit weight. Meanwhile, a slightly significant difference (p-value:
0.0096) may be observed with the average fruit length of waterlogged chili pepper plants,
which was measured in mm. The result shows that the PBZ treated plants have a slightly
higher mean of 48.49 mm, followed by the EBL treated plants with 44.93 mm, and the
control having 43.18 mm. The ETP treated plants were relatively longer than the
waterlogged only plants, with the former having 39.23 mm and the latter with 31.06 mm,

respectively.

Table 17. Average fruit weight (g) and average fruit length (mm) of one chili pepper
per plant of hybrid variety treated with PGRS under waterlogged

condition.
Plant Growth Regulators Treatment
sem P
Parameter CON WL BL ETP PBZ ale
Ave. Fruit Weight 157 167 —«1:36 147 1.66 0.04 0.6782

Ave. Fruit Length 43.18. 31.06, 44.93. 39.23ane 48.4% = 1.49 0.0096

"Note: Means in the same row with different superscripts differ significantly (P<0,05), SEM~standard error of mean, WL=waterlogging
periods TO*- no induced waterlogging and no PGR treatment; TI, 12, T3, Té-induced waterlogging for 2-4 weeks, Brassinolide
‘weatment,Ethephon Treatment, and Paclobutrazol, respectively

According to Martin (2021) pepper varieties with larger fruits tend to have lower
yields, as compared to chili pepper varieties having an average fruit length of 1.5 to 2

inches. Generally, varieties that tend to have larger fruits often produce lower yields as


compared to the varieties that yield smaller sized fruits. For example, the sweet pepper,
having a larger bell-sized fruit, can only produce 6-8 fruits per plant. While the domestic

type of hot pepper is capable of setting fruits at around 20-50 per plant.

Panda et al. (2020) have shown the effect of short term waterlogging with respect
to flowering and fruit setting in tomato. In susceptible varieties, a reduction of about 50%
in flowering was accounted for WL plants and that 44% of reduction was observed with
only 2 days of imposed flooding stress. This certainly had an influence over the number of

yield that will be acquired, which accounts for about 50-60% reduction.

In this study, it is shown that even under waterlogging stress, fruit development in
terms of length is not heavily affected by the condition, particularly those treated with BL,

ETP, and PBZ, and the control.

Several studies have investigated the effect of PBZ treatment with regards to fruit
setting and quality. With its ability to protect the plant against several types of abiotic
stress, including waterlogging, PBZ was observed to maintain the correct water content,
membrane stability, and photosynthetic activity, photosynthetic pigments, and antioxidant
levels. Thus, promotes higher yield and enhances fruit quality (Yahia et al., 2019). One
way that PBZ influences quality are by influencing the reduction of endogenous ethylene
which prevents senescence in plant tissue. Also, with the potential to improve mineral and

carbohydrate uptake, PBZ is said to be highly involved in flowering and fruit setting.

Brassinolide, on the other hand, shows a great potential as a biodegradable

molecule to alleviate stress and positively influence the metabolic and physiological


process which supports plant growth and development (Pereira et al., 2020). The important
role of BL lies with BR signaling functions that helps promote cell expansion as well as
division. Several reports also indicate how this particular member of steroid hormones can
provide the right physiological condition for the plants to attain the reproductive or fruit-

bearing stage.

Furthermore, Ethephon is among the most widely used PGR for crop production. It
has been investigated through numerous experiments and has relatively showed a positive
effect in alleviating water stress conditions. However, much of the influence ever recorded
for the ETP, as far as fruit quality is concerned, are more on how it was able to improve
the pigmentation or fruit coloration of hot pepper (Hou et al., 2018). In chili pepper, there
is no known effect of ETP that suggests an increase in yield even under hypoxia, but how
it induces abiotic stress tolerance and influences fruit characteristics that make it still

marketable is considered beneficial.

Comparison of Root Length and Root
Weight of Chili Pepper Treated with
EBL, ETP, and PB

Comparison of root length and root weight of waterlogged chili pepper plants.
Root length of chili peppers were measured through destructive sampling. Table 16 shows
a significant difference among the sampling units (P<0.05), with the ETP treated plants
gaining the longest root length, measured as 37.54 cm. This is followed by the control

having 34.24 cm, and the PBZ treated plants with 28.00 em. The BL treated peppers shows


a slightly longer root length of 26.54 than the waterlogged only pepper plants with 22.10
cm.

Table 18 also showed that ETP treated plants have gained the highest root fresh
weight of 24.75 g, that was significantly higher (P<0.05) than the waterlogged only plants,
having only 11.52 g. The ETP was followed by the control plants with 23.03 g, and the
PBZ treated plants, with 16.15 g. Whereas BL treatment have shown a higher value of
14.74, compared to the waterlogged only plants. Similarly, the ETP treated chili peppers
have acquired the highest root dry weight from among the sampling unit and is also
significantly (P<0.05) higher than the waterlogged only plants. The ETP is followed by the
control, the BL and PBZ treated plants, although there was no apparent difference among

the three designated treatments.

Table 18, Root length in (cm), root fresh weight (g), and root dry weight (g) of hybrid chili
Pepper variety treated PGRs under waterlogged condition

Plant Growth Regulators Treatment

SEM P-value
Parameter CON WL BL ETP = PBZ

Ave. Root Length (5) 34.24 22.10" 26.54" 37.54° 28.00% 1.75 0.0234
Root Fresh Weight (5) 23.03% = 11.52" 14.74% 24.75" 16.15% 1.37 0.0018
Root Dry Weight (5) 5.42% = 1.90 3.51% = 7.047 3.13 0.48 (0.0008

[Note: Means in the same row with differen superscripts differ si

fcantly (P<0,05), SEM~standard error of mean, WL=waterlogging periods
‘To*- no induced waterlogging and no PGR treatment; Tl, T2, T3, T4-induced waterlogging for 2-4 weeks, Brassinolide treatment, Ethephon
Teeatment, and Paclobutrazol, respectively

Prolonged O2 deficiency can have an irreversible impact to the root systems, but
the notable effect of ETP application is evident with the recorded average root length for

chili peppers subjected to waterlogging conditions. Shiono et al. (2019) reported that the


pretreatment of barley seedlings with ETP showed a favorable response against

waterlogging through several physiological modifications including root activity

Recent data implicate that the ETP is capable of inducing adaptive mechanism to
flooding stress or hypoxic condition. It influences the formation of aerenchyma as well as
new adventitious roots. It is also a precursor to the activation of fermentation pathways
which enables the plant to maintain an efficient metabolic functions even with oxygen
deficits (Bailey-Serres & Voesenek, 2008). Aerenchyma formation is an important
adaptive response to mitigate the effect of flooded conditions. In the case of barley, the
root systems from ETP treatment application appeared to be shallower and shorter as
compared to the control. Meanwhile, a notable root phenotypic difference between the
control and ETP treated soybeans are observed in the study by Kim et al. (2018) wherein

the exogenous application of ETP resulted in more roots surface area.

Furthermore, even if no significant difference has been accounted for the control,
the PBZ and EBL treatment, their relatively close value implies an adaptive response of
the root system in response to waterlogging. PBZ, for example, are capable of mediating
changes in the balance of endogenous hormones such as gibberellins, ABA, and cytokinins
(Fletcher and Hofstra, 1990) and as a response to waterlogging, the actual manifestation of
PBZ elucidating signal would be a reduced plant growth, reduced internode elongation,

and leaf area.

These findings are able to shed light to the potential of ETP to be used in crop

production that deals with the challenge for extreme climatic variations. However, the

B

challenge in dealing with the flooding mechanism in economically important crops such as
pepper is the vast and seemingly overwhelming quantitative trait locus (QTL) in order to
radically identify the specific metabolic functions and markers that induces tolerance to

hypoxic conditions.

Morphological Scale of Waterlogged
Chili Pepper plants Treated with
PGRs
Comparison of morphological scale. Similar to the preliminary screening the

outward manifestation of the effect of waterlogging is measured through the modified

morphological scale of Yang et al. (2020).

Figure 5 indicates that waterlogging severely damaged several plants, showing
mechanical injuries ranging from 85-95%. This is characterized by stunted growth,
apparent wilting, yellowing of leaves and decay of most of the plant tissues. Meanwhile,
PBZ has a few plants that has been affected by WL by 85-95%, while ETP and BL have
shown some tolerance over the effect of WL and thus incurred damage to only a few plant
samples by 75-85%. The control, as expected, showed to have no mechanical injury that

may be accounted for at an alarming level.


% Level of Morphological Response to Waterlogging

oe | ae

CON WI BL ETP PBZ

Number of Plants

Treatment
Level 1(0) Level 2 (20%) = Level 3 (45%) = Level 4 (65%)

te Level 5 (75 %) mt Level 6 (85 %) m Level 7 (95 %)

Figure 5. Modified morphological scale of waterlogged chili pepper varieties treated
with PGRs, Level 1: Normal growth; no symptoms of physiological or
morphological stress; Level 2: One or Two (2) leaves had become brown
and withered; Level 3: Three (3) or Four (4) leaves had become brown,
withered, and abscised; Level 4: Five (5) or Six (6) leaves had become
brown, withered, and abscised; Level 5: More than six (6) leaves had
become brown, withered, and abscised; Level 6: More than six (6) leaves
had become brown, withered, and abscised; no sign of flowering; Level 7:
Prominent mechanical injury resulting to death of plant tissues

ETP, a known promoter of ethylene -which takes part in a series of defense
mechanisms against abiotic stressors - have shown a potential to alleviate the impact of
WL in red chili peppers. Evident with the lower number of affected plants with lower level
of injury. Add to that, ETP has been used to assess the quality of chili peppers during pre-
harvest ripening and have shown to induce synthesis of capsaicin, hasten ripening, and

even fruiting quality (Yang et al. 2020).

BL, on the other hand, has been able to hamper the severity of waterlogged

conditions in vulnerable crops such as chili pepper. BL treatment have shown a relatively


lower level of injury for affected plants. In Maize, BR application have reduced the
symptoms attributed to waterlogging stress and the beneficial effect encouraged higher
protein contents, dry matter yield, and harvest index on a good performing variety (Otie et
al., 2018). Moreover, PBZ treatment, such as in the case of wheat seedlings, have shown a
hint of potential in ameliorating the impact of hypoxia, reducing physiological constraints

in metabolic function as well as loss of membrane integrity (Webb & Fletcher, 1996).


Study IN: Community Survey

Key Factors Affecting Agricultural
Productivity

In line with the research’s interest, the author wanted to evaluate the different
farming practices that enable farmers to adapt to a changing climate that causes problems
relating to waterlogging/flooding. In particular, the survey aimed to acquire such
information from chili pepper farmers. However, the survey also accommodated the

responses of farmers that grow other crops aside from chili pepper.

The online survey was conducted through Google form and was able to gather 80
respondents representing both upland and lowland Cavite. These respondents are farmers,
land owners, agriculturists, and agro-entrepreneurs who were asked to provide data about
their farming conditions, existing problems, perception of their vulnerability to flooding,
current measures to alleviate the adverse effect of flooding, and other adaptive practices to
mitigate the effect of flooding on crop production. This attested to the first-hand
experiences of the farmers, hence the importance of developing new methods, and other
means to create a more tolerant and sustainable farming approach as far as food security

and finding a long-term solution is concemed.


Conduct of Survey in the
Midst of the Pandemic

Online community survey. Two years of pandemic has created a massive change
in all parts of the globe, a tremendous shift has occurred in terms of conducting
assessments, appraisals, planning, monitoring, and other activities related to community
development and other interventions. Thankfully, there are numerous tools that are
accessible and can be used to conduct certain queries in a remote setting. In this study, the
author utilized several platforms such as the web-based Google Docs Editors suite such as
Google Docs and Google Forms to prepare the questions and make them accessible online.
The questionnaires were distributed online through a link through which a respondent can

have a direct access and thus begin to answer.

Respondents’ Farm Areas and
Cultural Practices

Information acquired. Demographics, tenurial status of the land, etc. were some
of the questions designed to collect information about the respondents and the current status
of their agricultural farms as affected by changing climate, particularly by flooding and
water stress. Figures 5-15 show the respondents’ perception occurrence of flood,
prevalence of such condition, the kind of crops they grow as perceived adaptable to flooded

conditions, the challenges and their various means to adapt to weather extremes.


Results and Visualizations

Occupation and affiliation of respondents. Figure 6 shows the specific
occupation and affiliation of the 80 respondents from both upland and lowland Cavite
whose occupations ranged from being farmers, business owners, watchmen,
farmer/caretaker, retirees, to farm manager. The highest percentage among the respondents
are made up of farmers (56.8%) while there are only a few farm owners interviewed.
Moreover, there are numerous respondents categorized as tenant and caretakers. Based on
the responses, the age group ranges from middle age adult (40-59 years old) to senior adult
(60 years old). Meanwhile, Figure 6 and 7 tells the job description of the respondents as
well as the status of ownership, by which majority (58.5%) indicates that they are farm

owners while others are either tenant, farm workers/ farm manager, or caretakers.

Occupation

Figure 6. Occupation and affiliation of respondents


Status of Ownership

Owner * Non-owner

Figure 7. Ownership of cultivated land

Total land area of farms tended by respondents. n terms of the land area that is
either owned or leased by the respondents, the majority (56.1%) answered that they also
live inside the premises of their farm, while others (42.7%) only visit on a regular basis.
Relatively, 48.8% of the respondents answered that they are farming more than | ha but
less than 3 ha agricultural area. About 21% answered that they grow crops on an area that
is less than 1 ha. Another 21% answered that they grow several crops in more than 3 ha of
land but not more than 5 ha. A few (5 persons) answered that they are farming 5 ha of land

but not more than 10 ha (Figure 8).

Meanwhile, Figure 9 shows the source of soil water that is needed by the plants for
growth and productivity. Upland-based farms mostly rely on rain water (51.2%) for their

plants, hence their commodities are carefully determined as adaptable to a limited water


supply. Example of these crops are pineapple, kaong, coconut, citrus, mango, avocado, and
dragon fruits. Lowland-based farms are often dependent on irrigation (48.8%).
Fortunately, most of the sites visited in the lowland such as those in Maragondon, already
have some installed irrigation facility since their commodities are such as rice and other

vegetables are dependent on the availability of sufficient water supply.

Area of Farms

1s
0 = —
Less than I ha, More than 1 More than 3 haMore than Sha More than 10
hectare but not but not more but not more ha but not
more than 3 than Sha than 10 ha more than 15
ha

ha

Figure 8, Total land area of farms in hectares (ha.)

Farm Irrigation Practices
Rainfed sm lrigated

Figure 9. Source of plant-available soil water


Environmental limitations in crop production. Figure 10 indicates the occurrence
of different environmental threats that can occur and affect agricultural productivity. These
threats are heavily influenced by the prevailing season and any farmer would say that they
can only do so little. As shown in the graph, the occurrence of drought is perceived by the
respondents to be the most problematic, accounting to 82.9%. This is followed by the
intense rain during wet season which can be aggravated by numerous typhoons, hence also
perceived as a limiting factor to production with 72%. Meanwhile, the incidence of pests

and diseases are perceived to occur at 63.4%.

Other environmental conditions that may be deemed problematic are high relative
humidity (22%), which can also influence the occurrence of diseases; low relative humidity
(13.4%), which can affect growth and development; flooding on vulnerable areas (28%)

which may bring about waterlogging; low level of irrigation; and infertile soil (35.4%).

Environmental Threats

Figure 10. Perceived environmental threats to agricultural productivity


Figure 1] indicates the prevalence of the occurrence of the different environmental
constraints to crop production. With this, 52% have answered that drought during summer
is the most prevalent, while 53% have recognized the uncontrollable frequency of intense
rain and heavy rain during the wet season. Low RH (42%) is also an increasing concern,
as well as low irrigation (39%). Meanwhile, 35% have recognized the recurring threat of
pests and diseases, and 34% have also considered the frequent occurrence of flooding. As

mentioned, flooding may predispose some farm areas to waterlogging.

Never mSometimes m Always

Prevalence of Pest and Diseases

Low Irrigation

Low Relative Humidity

Environmental Threats

(AE ree ES
RBRfiee wera
Flooding Condition jiifeesssssssssessssneeees
Be
ERS eee ee

High Relative Humidity
Intense Rain During Wet Season

OES ee

10 20 30 40 50 60
Percentage

Figure 11. Prevalence of the occurrence of the environmental threats

According to the IPCC report (2012), the impact of a changing climate brings about

uncertainty for the availability of water on areas where it is a limiting factor, and the


excessive soil water on areas vulnerable to flooding. The report further points out that this
will impact the amount of precipitation, runoff and snow/ice melt, water quality, and almost
all hydrological systems. It is also likely to influence the frequency and intensity of extreme
events and it’s important to note that the magnitude of weather extreme is greatly felt
already in the agricultural sect.

Moreover, the FAO-UN report in 2015 indicates that the recent analysis spanning
for 10 years (2003 to 2013) of the 78 post-disaster need assessments in 48 developing
countries shows that 25% of all economic losses and damages inflicted by different climate
hazards such as droughts, floods, and storms in developing countries certainly impacts the

sector of agriculture.

Figure 12. Monthly prevalence of environmental threats


Figure 12 shows the prevalence of environmental threats in both lowland and
upland areas. As expected much of the effect of drought is primarily felt in March and
April. Meanwhile, the effect of intense rain is more prominent in July, August, and
September.

Upland-based farms, while they may be reliant on rainfall, are also the ones that are
most vulnerable to intense rain and heavy winds. Low-land based farms, on the other hand,
are vulnerable to both drought and even flooding.

Evidently, other conditions are a mere result of either intense heat causing drought,
or intense rain causing flooding. Intense rain may also be attributed to an increase in
relative humidity, so as drought to a decrease in atmospheric moisture. Moreover, a
humidity level that is too high predisposes the plant to insect infestation and disease
infection.

It’s important to note, however, that many of the respondents are expectant to these
conditions and the time of which they mostly occur. Hence, several cultural practices have
been employed in their farms in order to adapt and mitigate the effect of weather extremes
to productivity. These practices include: crop rotation, mulching, soil preparation,
composting, application of organic fertilizers, choosing adaptable and more resilient
commodity for the season, proper seed selection, rain-fed water management,
establishment of water storing facilities such as catch basins, use of chemical fertilizers,
integrated pest management, use of biological pest control, use of hormones such as Ethrel

and GA, and use of tolerant varieties etc.


Furthermore, when asked whether they plant chili pepper in their farms, 53.7%
responded with “yes” while 43,9% responded ‘’no or none”’. The different varieties they
used are Pinatubo Hybrid, Red Hot Fl, Siling Labuyo, and Siling Bilog. Most of which

can be vulnerable to damage translating to yield losses during the rainy season.

Local vulnerability to flooding. ‘The respondents from both upland and lowland
Cavite provided an overview of the land area that they farm and 78% have indicated that
their farms are not situated on or near an identified flood risk area, 12.2% answered that
their farms are located on or near an identified flood risk area, while 9.8 % are unsure
Furthermore, 62.2% of the respondents said that their farms do not frequently suffer
from flooding while 25.6% said that they do. About 12% of the respondents are unsure as
to whether they often experience flooding. When asked whether they are concemed about
flooding, 51.2% of the respondents have answered ‘yes’, while 43.9% have responded

sno’ (Figure 13).


@ Yes
@No
© Maybe

Q Flood Risk Area @ Flooding Conditions

@ Concemed about the Occurence of Flooding

Figure 13. Vulnerability to flooding in upland and lowland areas

The information on vulnerability of a certain farm area to flooding is crucial for
both large and small-scale farms. However, small-scale farms are more susceptible due to
parameters such as economic, commodity limit, and cost of production, which may hurt
them more than the large-scale farms. This is because, oftentimes, large-scale farms have
the facilities to adapt to weather extremes but only for a short period of time.

Some 28% of the respondents consider their farms as large scale, while 52.4%
consider their farms small-scale. Given the larger percentage of small-scale farms which

are deemed susceptible to flooding, this raises the concer with the occurrence of such


condition given the limitations that must be dealt with as far as crop productivity is

concemed.

@ Yes

© Maybe

Q Small-scale

Figure 14. Category of agricultural production

Farmer’s perception to harsh environmental conditions. Some 53.7% of the
respondents have agreed that harsh environmental conditions due to climate change greatly
affects productivity (Figure 15a). Meanwhile, 36.6% of the respondents have considered
flooding as one of the environmental conditions that can threaten their livelihood (Figure
15b). When faced with environmental threats, 45.1% are undecided as to whether a large-
scale farmer adapts better to climate variability as compared to a small-scale farmer (Figure
15c). Moreover, 31.7% of upland farmers (Figure 15d) are undecided as to whether
typhoons and excessive rains are major climatic risks to production. Similarly, 29.3% from
the lowland area (FigurelSe) are undecided when it comes to flooding as a major risk

source,


o i

i. Bal.
Ball =

Figure 15. Perception of climatic variability and risk

The probable reason for these responses may be attributed to how flooding is often
a neglected environmental condition. Also, there may be some information gaps that
influence the perspective of farmers when it comes to the occurrence of flood. Add to that,
they may be more or less expectant of the situation, and have already been employing some
practices in their farms to mitigate the impact of flooding to production. It is also possible
that most of the respondents may have neglected the fact that failure to recognize an

impending dilemma would often lead to unpreparedness.

Effectiveness of community responses to flooding stress. Respondents were

asked if they perceive that their employed agricultural practices to mitigate the effect of


waterlogging stress are effective, and 32.9% have agreed. Whereas 24.4% of the
respondents are undecided when it comes to receiving sufficient government support which
enables them to address concems regarding agricultural productivity particularly those

brought about by weather extremes

Rate of perception of environmental constraints in some areas in upland and
lowland Cavite. Using the scale of 1-10 in out of 82 responses recorded, 20.7% (Figure
16a) have given a score of 8 to the frequent occurrence of drought. Similarly, 20.7 %
(Figure 16b) have marked 8 to the frequency of typhoons. Likewise, 8 was also given by
19.5% (Figure 16c) of the respondents for the frequency of excessive rains. Some 22%
(Figure 16d) have marked 5 for the frequency of flooded conditions, while 19.5% (Figure
16e) have rated 6 the occurrence of strong winds. Meanwhile, 18.3% (Figure 16f) have
given a score of 8, while 12. 2% have marked the score of 10 for the prevalence of pests
and diseases. Some 19.5% (Figure 16g) of the respondents have given a rating of 10 for
their produce being subject to price variability. Meanwhile, 29.6% of the respondents have

cited that stealing of their produce are also a common occurrence in their communities.

Srey sth Hal. I

Figure 16. _ Risk perception of environmental constraints


Key Informant Interview Held in
Upland and Lowland-based Farm

Key informant interview. Two (2) farmers were identified from upland Cavite,
specifically in Brgy. Lumampong Halaylay, Indang, Cavite, namely, Bryan Mag
Manalastas, 31, a farm business owner, a graduate student, and a current instructor of
agricultural entrepreneurship in Cavite State University; and Danilo Mojica, 54, a farmer
and demo technician in Indang Municipal Office.

Mr. Manalastas is currently tending a farm with a total area of 2 ha. While Mr.
Mojica’s farm nestles in a serene compound that covers half a hectare of land,
approximately 4900 sqm. Both of these farmers grow vegetables such as eggplant, chili
pepper, and okra. Mr. Manalastas’ farm mainly focuses on vegetables, as according to him,
these are more marketable. Meanwhile, Mr. Mojica is quite versatile and also grows fruit
trees like papaya, guyabano, and avocado. He also grows banana, mulberry, and dragon
fruits. However, his target market is not fixed and the majority of his produce are for
household consumption.

The two farmers indicate that while flooding conditions rarely occur, their plants
are susceptible to strong winds and heavy rain, as with most farms in the upland area. For
a vegetable farmer like Mr. Manalastas, heavy rains greatly affect the quality of his produce
and so harvesting may be done a week earlier than scheduled when there is a pending storm.
This problem occurs mainly from May to July. Some of the ways to counteract this is to
employ crop rotation wherein the plants that are not susceptible to heavy rains may be

planted in place of the vulnerable crops. An affective planting calendar guides Mr.


Manalastas and Mr. Mojica, but according to them, the changing climate has been so
apparent in the recent years that planting may seem like a risky game.

Furthermore, two farmers were identified in the lowland area of Brgy, Pantihan,
Maragondon Cavite, namely, Enrico Glean, 57, and Manuel Glean, 42. They are mostly
vegetable farmers but both had an experience with field crops such as rice and corn. With
the current season, they see it fit to focus more on vegetable production such as string
beans, chili pepper, okra, tomato, and squash. Their experience with flooding is rare but
when it happens, a significant damage is incurred. The lowland part of Cavite has been the
heart of palay production in the region. There are many potential areas that may be used as
inbred rice model farms. According to Mr. Glean, the practice of crop rotation is their
friend, it allowed them to strategically choose their crops and prevent their susceptibility
toa changing climate. Moreover, crop improvement, through the effort of their LGU, have
given them an opportunity to plant the best variety which are more tolerant and robust.

Add to that, lowland farmers are said to be often visited by extension workers and
trainers as mandated by their LGU and the Department of Agriculture to cater their needs
and to provided support through seminars, trainings, access to credit, and income
generating projects. These interventions are integral to an improved crop production with
regard to climate smart agriculture.

Table 19 shows the cultural management practices employed by both farmers in the
upland and lowland Cavite. It presents their readiness and even expertise to manage such

conditions given that climate variability is an uncontrollable phenomenon.


Table 19. Cultural Management Practices to Alleviate Impact of Climate Variability

Location

Practices

Upland (Indang, Cavite)

Crop rotation

Sequential planting

Use of tolerant varieties

Use of fertilizer

Mulching

Integrated Pest Management
Drenching

Establishment of catch basin

Lowland (Maragondon, Cavite)

Contour farming

Establishment of irrigation facility
Use of hybrid seeds

Integrated Pest Management
Mulching

Use of organic fertilizers

Planting of windbreakers
Pre-treatment of seedlings


CHAPTER V

SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Summary

Study I, particularly aimed to compare the morphological and agronomic responses
of native and hybrid variety (Pinatubo Fl) of chili pepper in response to waterlogging
stress. It employed four (4) treatments with 10 replications on each variety for a total of
eighty (80) pots. The analyzed data showed that the hybrid Pinatubo variety is a promising
cultivar to be used for planting in the onset of a rainy season. It performs significantly
better in terms of parameters such as including plant height, number of leaves, number of

flowers, and root length. Hence, Pinatubo variety was used in Study I.

Study Il aimed to evaluate the differences in growth parameters as well as fruiting
quality of the Pinatubo variety of chili pepper treated with exogenous application of
Brassinolide (BL), Ethephon (ETP), and Paclobutrazol (PBZ). Most of the parameters
measured showed significant results between the control and treated samples, and these
include plant height, number of leaves, leaf fresh weight, leaf dry weight, number of

flowers, fruit weight and length, and root length. Among these parameters, the BL


treatment and the ETP treated pepper plants have a value that is close to that of the control.
Most of these parameters significantly differ in waterlogged only plants, and these include

root length, and number of leaves and flowers.

In study III, and online community survey and key informant interviews with 80
farmers was conducted in areas that are susceptible to flooding including but not limited to
chili pepper growers. Other respondents are land owners, agriculturists, and agro
entrepreneurs asked to provide data about their farming conditions, problems, perception
of their vulnerability to flooding, cultural practices to alleviate the adverse effect of
flooding, and other adaptive measured to alleviate the impact of flooding to crop

production.

The respondents provided insights on the most common threats that they experience
in the field such as intense heat during summer and intense rain during the wet season
which predispose their crops to various stress conditions, causing irreversible damage and
yield losses. However, many of the respondents are familiar with these conditions.
Consequently, several cultural practices have been employed in their farms in order to
adapt and mitigate the effect of weather extremes to their productivity. These practices
includes: crop rotation, mulching, soil preparation, composting, application of organic
fertilizers, choosing adaptable and more resilient commodity for the season, proper seed
selection, rain-fed water management, establishment of water storing facilities such as
catch basins, use of chemical fertilizers, integrated pest management, use of biological pest

control, use of hormones such as Ethrel and GA, and use of tolerant varieties etc.


Conclusions

Based on the result of the preliminary screening, the Pinatubo hybrid variety can
perform adequately well under optimum and stressful condition such as hypoxia due to
waterlogging. This is evident with the morphological difference observed between the two
varieties showing that the Taiwan non-hybrid was severely affected by waterlogging posed
injuries.

Furthermore, the application of plant growth regulators: BL, ETP, and PBZ
potentially alleviated stress caused by waterlogging. The different growth parameters
assessed showed that these PGR treatments aided the chili peppers as they are subjected to
flooding stress. BL may have positively influenced that plant’s morphological trait in a
water saturated rhizosphere as observed in plant height and number of leaves; while the
ETP treated plants showed a mediating effect with treated samples having longer root
length, denser root systems, and a higher number of flowers. Moreover, PBZ has relatively
acquired the longest fruit length and thus influenced the fruiting quality of waterlogged
chili pepper plants. There is a positive correlation with the exogenous application of BL,
ETP, and PBZ in plants’ adaptive response to waterlogging promoting either an increase
in plant height, reduction in leaf area, formation of adventitious roots, and transition from
juvenile stage to reproductive stage.

Through an online community, farmer's perception on impact of climate variability

was evaluated. The most prevalent threats that they experience which affects crop


production are drought and intense or heavy rain. While the occurrence of flooding is not
as frequent as the drought condition, farmers, particularly in the lowland, are concemed
with flooding. They perceive it as a threat to production and can induce great damage to
economically important crops, such as chili pepper.

Furthermore, it’s important to note that there may be some information gaps since
some of the farmers/respondents are unsure as to whether they are residing in a flood-risk
area. Also, farmers may be more or less expectant of the situation, and have already been
employing cultural practices in their farms to mitigate the impact of flooding to crop
production. Nevertheless, the occurrence of flooding should not be neglected because
failure to recognize an impending dilemma leads to unpreparedness, and thus can incur

greater damage.


Recommendations

Based on the results of the study, the author highly recommends the following:
1) A thorough investigation of the physiological effects of Brassinolide, Ethephon,

and Paclobutrazol may be conducted by exploring parameters such as

antioxidant activity, chlorophyll measurement, as well as enzyme acti
using modem technological advancement;


Root phenotypic characteristics such as root volume may be further investigated
to analyze the effect of phytohormone treatment in response to low oxygen or
hypoxia during flooding stress; and


Compare more varieties of chili pepper to know which may be best
recommended for large scale and small-scale farmers based on market demand
and with regard to climatic variability.

4)

Conduct focus group discussion to understand more complex situations that
affects farming communities with regard to crop production by which technical

and anecdotal information may be derived.


LITERATURE CITED

Abolfazl, L., Mobasheri, S., Bemana, R., Teymori, N. (2013). Role of paclobutrazol on

vegetative and sexual growth of plants. Int. J. Agri. Crop Sci. 5: 958-961.

Ahanger, M. A., Tomar, N.

Tittal, M., Argal, S., & Agarwal, R. M. (2017). Plant growth
under water/salt stress: ROS production; antioxidants and significance of added
potassium under such conditions. Physiology and Molecular Biology of Plants: an
International Journal of Functional Plant Biology, 23(4), 731-744.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s12298-017-0462-7.

Ashraf, M. (2012). Waterlogging stress in plants: A review. African Journal of Agricultural

Research 7. 10.5897/AJARX 11.084.

Bailey-Serres, J., & Chang, R. (2005). Sensing and signaling in response to oxygen
deprivation in plants and other organisms. Ann. Bot. 96, 507-518. doi:

10.1093/aob/mci206.

Bange, M., Milroy, S. & Thongbai, P. (2004). Growth and yield of cotton in response to

waterlogging. Field Crops Research 88, 129-142. 10.1016/j.fer.2003.12.002.

Beato, L. L. (2016). Growth and yield performance of hot pepper (Capsicum frutescens)

fertilized with fermented plant materials. Laguna State Polytechnic University,


Siniloan-Laguna, Retrieved from: —_hittps://calabarzon.neda.gov.ph/wp-

content/uploads/201 6/1 0/Beato-Growth-and-Y iel-Performance-of-Hot-Pepper.pdf.

Benschop, J. J., Mohammed, S., O'Flaherty, M., Heck, A. J., Slijper, M., & Menke, F. L.
(2007). Quantitative phosphoproteomics of early elicitor signaling in
Arabidopsis. Molecular & cellular proteomics: MCP, 6(7), 1198-1214.

https://doi.org/10.1074/mep.M600429-MCP200.

Brown, M. (2013). Focus groups vs. key informant interviews. Marianne Brown Consulting.
Retrieved from: _https://www.sandiegograntwriter.com/focus-groups-vs-key-

informant-interviews-better/.

Community Toolbox. (2021). Conducting needs assessment surveys. Retrieved from:
https://ctb.ku.edwen/table-of-contents/assessmentassessing-community-needs-and-

resources/conducting-needs-assessment-surveys/main.

Dawar, K., Zaman, M., Rowarth, J., Blennerhassett, J. & Tumbull, M. (2011). Urea
hydrolysis and lateral and vertical movement in the soil: Effects of urease inhibitor
and irrigation. Biology and Fertility of Soils, 47, 139-146. 10.1007/s00374-010-

0515-3.

Dawood, T., Yang, X., Visser, E. J., Te Beek, T. A., Kensche, P. R., Cristescu, S. M., et al.
(2016). A co-opted hormonal cascade activates dormant adventitious root primordia
upon flooding in Solanum dulcamara. Plant Physiol. 170, 2351-2364. doi:

10.1104/pp.15.00773


De Castro, N. A., Dagamac, N.H. & Tapia, M. (2019). Responses of Filipino farmers to
harsh weather phenomena: A risk perception and attitude study. Journal of
Agriculture and Rural Development in the Tropics and Subtropics, 120, 205-217.

10.17170/kobra-20191212866.

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (2020). Chili peppers in Lanao del
Sur. FAO-UN. Retrieved from: http://www. fao.org/3/ca7553en/CA7553EN.pdf

Garde, E. (2016). Growing chili, a profitable enterprise. Retrieved from:
https://www.sunstar.com.ph/article/9373 1/Local-News/Growing-chili-a-

profitable-.

Gonzélez-Garcia MP, Vilarrasa-Blasi J, Zhiponova M, Divol F, Mora-Garcia S, Russinova
E, & Cafio-Delgado AI. (201 1) Brassinosteroids control meristem size by promoting
cell cycle progression in Arabidopsis roots. Development. 2011 Mar; 138(5):849-59.

doi: 10.1242/dev.057331. Epub 2011 Jan 26. PMID: 21270057.

Hodgson, A.S. Chan, K.Y. (1982). The effect of short-term waterlogging during furrow
irrigation of cotton in a cracking grey clay. Australian Journal of Agricultural

Research 33, 109-116.

Hodgson, A.S., Holland, J.F., Rayner, P. (1989). Effects of field slope and duration of furrow
irrigation on growth and yield of six grain-legumes on a waterlogging-prone vertisol.
Field Crops Research, —22(3),_-—«'165-180, ISSN (0378-4290,

https://doi.org/10.1016/0378-4290 (89)90090-7.


Hudgins, J.W, Franceschi, V. R. (2004). Methyl jasmonate induced ethylene production is
responsible for conifer phloem defense and reprogramming of stem cambial zone for
traumatic resin duct formation. Plant Physiology, 135 (4), 2134-

2149. DOI: 10.1104/pp.103.037929,

Jackson, M. B. T. D. Colmer. (2005). Response and Adaptation by Plants to Flooding

Stress. Annals of Botany, 96(4), 501-505, https://doi.org/10.1093/aob/mei205

Japan International Cooperation Agency (2013). Questionnaire Survey on Flood Information
Needs in Project for Comprehensive Flood Management Plan for the Chao Phraya

River Basin. Retrieved from: https://openjicareport jica.go.jp/pdf/12127692_09.pdf.

Jha, S.N., Rai, D. R., & Shrama, R. (2012), Physico-chemical quality parameters and overall
quality index of apple during storage. Journal of Food Science and
Technology, 49(5), 594-600. Retrieved from: https://doi.org/10.1007/s13 197-01 1-

0415-2.

Kamal, A. H. M., and Komatsu, S. (2016). Jasmonic acid induced protein response to
biophoton emissions and flooding stress in soybean. J. Proteom. 133, 33-47. d.

10.1016/.jprot.2015.12.004

Kamal, A.H.M., Komatsu, S. (2016). Proteins involved in biophoton emission and flooding-
stress responses in soybean under light and dark conditions. Mol Biol Rep, 43, 73~

89. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11033-015-3940-4,


Kim, Y., Seo, C. W., Khan, A. L., Mun, B. G., Shahzad, R., Ko, J. W., Yun, B. W., Park, S.
K., & Lee, I. J. (2018). Exo-ethylene application mitigates waterlogging stress in
soybean (Glycine max L.).BMC Plant _—_—Biology, 18(1), 254.

https://doi.org/10.1186/s12870-018-1457-4.

Kim, Y., Seo, C.W., Khan, A.L. (2018). Exo-ethylene application mitigates waterlogging
stress in soybean (Glycine max L.). BMC Plant _—_Biol, 18, 254.

https://doi.org/10.1186/s12870-018-1457-4.

Kozlowski, T.T. & Pallardy, S.G. (1997). Physiology of woody plants. Academic Press, San
Diego, CA. Retrieved from:

https://www.uv.mx/personal/tcarmona/files/2019/02/Pallardy-2008.pdf.

Kunkel, KE. (2003). North American trends in extreme precipitation. Natural

Hazards 29, 291-305. Retrieved from: https://doi.org/10.1023/A: 1023694115864.

Larcher, W. (2003). Physiological Plant Ecology. Copyright 2003. Springer-Verlag Berlin

Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-540-435 16-7.

Lopez, R., Walters, K. (2017). Tips for improving the efficacy of ethephon PGR spray
applications. Michigan State University, Department of Horticulture. Retrieved
from:
https://www.canr.msu.edu/news/tips_for_improving_the_efficacy_of_ethephon_pg

_spray_applications.


Ma, Y., and Guo, S. (2014), 24-epibrassinolide improves cucumber photosynthesis under
hypoxia by increasing CO 2 assimilation and photosystem IT

efficiency. Photosynthetica 52, 96-104. doi: 10.1007/s11099-014-0010-4

Maricle, B., White, S.,Meraz, A.,Maforo, N., Biggs, T., Martin, N., and Caudle, K.
(2014). Effect of Ethanol Toxicity on Enzyme Activity in Anaerobic Respiration in
Plants. Transactions of the Kansas Academy of Science, 117(3-4), 237-244, (1

September 2014). https://doi.org/10.1660/062.117.0309.

Mohanty, A., Panda, R., Rout, GR., Muduli, K., & Tripathy P. (2020). Impact of short term
water logging on flowering, fruit setting, yield and yield attributes in tomato
(Solanum lycopersicum L. Mill). Journal of Pharmacognosy und Phytochemistry.

2020; 9(4):760-763.

Nakaya, M., H. Tsukaya, N. Murakami, and M. Kato. 2002. Brassinosteroids control the
proliferation of leaf cells of Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant and Cell Physiology,

43(2):239-44, doi: 10.1093/pep/pcf024.

Nazir, F.,Fariduddin, Q.Hussain, A., & Khan, Tanveer. (2020). Brassinosteroid and
hydrogen peroxide improve photosynthetic machinery, stomatal movement, root
morphology and cell viability and reduce Cu- triggered oxidative burst in tomato,
Ecotoxicology and _—_—Environmental_— Safety, ~—«207.._—=—*111081.

10.1016/j.ecoenv.2020.111081.


Nelson, K.A., Meinhardt C. G., & Smoot, R. L. (2012). Soybean cultivar response to
subsurface drainage and subirrigation in Northeast Missouri. Online. Crop

Management. DOI 10.1094/CM-2012-0320-03-RS.

Nguyen, L., Osanai, Y., Anderson, I, Bange, M., Braunack, M., Tissue, D. & Singh, B.
(2018). Impacts of waterlogging on soil nitrification and ammonia-oxidizing
communities in farming system. Plant and Soil, 426, 1-13. 10.1007/s11104-018-

3584-y.

Otie, V., Ping, A., Udo, I., & Eneji, E. (2019). Brassinolide effects on maize (Zea mays L.)
growth and yield under waterlogged conditions. Journal of Plant Nutrition, .—

16. doi:10.1080/01904167.2019.158422.

Pan, J., Rahat, S., Xuewen, X., & Xuehao, C. (2021). Mechanisms of waterlogging tolerance
in plants: research progress and prospects. Frontiers In Plant Science, 10 February
2021 “Joint International Research Laboratory of Agriculture and Agri-Product
Safety, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou,

Chinal https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2020.627331.

Pan, J., Sharif, R., Xu, X., & Chen, X. (2021). Mechanisms of Waterlogging Tolerance in
Plants: Research Progress and Prospects. Frontiers in Plant Science, 11, 627331.

https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2020.627331.

Mi

Pan, J., Sharif, R., Xu, X., Chen, X. (2021). Mechanisms of waterlogging tolerance in plants:
Research progress and prospects. Frontiers in Plant Science, Volume 11. Retrieved

from: https://www. frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpls.2020.627331.

Parelle, J., Brendel, O., Bodénés, C., Berveiller, D., Dizengremel, P., Jolivet, Y., Dreyer., E. (2006).
Differences in morphological and physiological responses to water-logging between two
sympatric oak species (Quercus petraea [Matt] Liebl., Quercus robur L.). For. Sci. 63(8),
849-859 (2006) DOI: 10.1051/forest:2006068.

Pereira YC, Silva F., Silva B., Cruz F., Marques D., Lobato A. 24-epibrassinolide induces
protection against waterlogging and alleviates impacts on the root structures,
photosynthetic machinery and biomass in soybean. Plant Signal Behav. 2020 Nov 1;
15(11):1805885. doi: 10.1080/15592324.2020. 1805885. Epub 2020 Aug 12. PMID:

32787497; PMCID: PMC7588182.

Qi, X., Li, Q., Ma, X., Qian, C., Wang, H., Ren, N., et al. (2019). Waterlogging-induced
adventitious root formation in cucumber is regulated by ethylene and auxin through
reactive oxygen species signalling. Plant Cell Environ. 42, 1458-1470. doi:

10.111 1/pee.13504

Qi, X. Li, Q, Shen, J., Qian, C., Xu, X., Xu, Q., et al. (2020). Sugar enhances
waterlogging-induced adventitious root formation in cucumber by promoting auxin

transport and signalling. Plant Cell Environ. 43, 1545-1557. doi: 10.111 1/pce.13738


Sande-Bakhuyzen H. L. (1928). Studies upon wheat grown under constant conditions-

I. Plant physiology, 3(1), 1-6. https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.3.1.1.

Shimamura, S., Yoshioka, T., Yamamoto, R., Hiraga, S., Nakamura, T., Shimada, S., et al.
(2014). Role of abscisic acid in flood-induced secondary aerenchyma formation in
soybean (Glycine max) hypocotyls. Plant Prod. Sci. 17, 131-137. doi:

10.1626/pps.17.131

Shiono, K., Ejiri, M., Shimizu, K., & Yamada, S. (2019) Improved waterlogging tolerance
of barley (Hordeum vulgare) by pretreatment with ethephon, Plant Production

Science, 22(2), 285 295, DOI: 10.1080/1343943X.2019,1581579.

Sun, L., Ma, L., He, S., & Hao, F. (2018). AtrbohD functions downstream of ROP2 and
positively regulates waterlogging response in Arabidopsis. Plant Signaling &

Behavior, 13(9), €1513300. https://doi.org/10.1080/15592324.2018.1513300.

Tareq, Z., Moniruzzaman, Md., Sarker,M. S. A., Delwar, M., Sayeed, A., Hasibuzzaman,
A, S. & Islam, S. (2020). Waterlogging stress adversely affects growth and
development of tomato. Asian Journal of Crop, Soil Science and Plant Nutrition.

Vol. 02, Issue 01: 44-50 2. 44-50. 10.18801/ajcsp.020120.07.

UCLA (2005). Key informant interviews. UCLA Center for Health Policy Research Health
DATA Program — Data, Advocacy and Technical Assistance, Retrieved from:
https://Mhealthpolicy.ucla.edu/programs/health-

data/trainings/Documents/tw_cba23.pdf.


Victoria Otie, An Ping, Idorenyin Udo & Egrinya Eneji (2019) Brassinolide effects on maize
(Zea mays L.) growth and yield under waterlogged conditions, Journal of Plant

Nutrition, 42(8), 954-969, DOI: 10.1080/01904167.2019.158422.

Vidoz, M. L., Loreti, E., Mensuali, A., Alpi, A., and Perata, P. (2010). Hormonal interplay
during adventitious root formation in flooded tomato plants. Plant J. 63, 551-562.

doi:

0.1111/).1365-313x.2010.04262.x

Voesenek, L.A.C.., Benschop, J.J., Bou, J., Cox, M.C.H., Vreeburg, R.A.M. and Peeters,
AJ. M. (2003). Interactions between plant hormones regulate submergence-induced
shoot elongation in the flooding tolerant dicot Rumex palustris. Ann. Bot. 9/: 205—

Voesenek, L.A.C.J. & Bailey-Serres, J. (2015). Flood adaptive traits and processes: an

overview. New Phytol, 206: 57-73. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.13209.

Wang, Y., Hou, Y., Qiu, J., Wang, H., Wang, S., Tang, L., Tong, X. and Zhang, J. (2020).
Abscisic acid promotes jasmonic acid biosynthesis via a ‘SAPK10-bZIP72-AOC’
pathway to synergistically inhibit seed germination in rice (Oryza sativa). New

Phytol, 228: 1336-1353. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.16774.

Webb, J.A., Fletcher, R.A. Paclobutrazol protects wheat seedlings from injury due to
waterlogging. Plant Growth Regulator. 8, 201-206 (1996).

https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00024383.


Westra, S., Fowler, H. J., Evans, J. P., Alexander, L. V., Berg, P., Johnson, F., et al. (2014).
Future changes to the intensity and frequency of short duration extreme rainfall. AGU

Advances, Rev. Geophys. 52, 522-555. doi: 10.1002/2014RG 000464.

Xu, YH., Liao, YC., Zhang, Z. ef al. (2016). Jasmonic acid is a crucial signal transducer in
heat shock induced sesquiterpene formation in Aquilaria sinensis. Sci Rep, 6, 21843

(2016). https://doi.org/10.1038/srep21843.

Yadav, D., Hemantaranjan, A. (2017). Mitigating effects of paclobutrazol on flooding stress
damage by shifting biochemical and antioxidant defense mechanisms in mungbean
(Vigna radiata L.) at pre-flowering stage. Legume research, 40, 453-461

doi:

0.18805/Ir.v0i0.7593.

Yang, B., Luo, Y., Tan, Y., Kan, J. (2021). Effects of ethephon on ethephon residue and
quality properties of chili pepper during pre-harvest ripening. J Food Sci

Technol, 58, 2098-2108 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/s13197-020-04719-5.

Yang, J., Guihua, D., Chungin, L., Lin, L., Guangyu, H., Yaling, Z., Changmi, W. (2019).
The crosstalks between jasmonic acid and other plant hormone signaling highlight
the involvement of jasmonic acid as a core component in plant response to biotic and
abiotic stresses. Frontiers in Plant Science, Vol 10. Retrieved from:

URL=https://www. frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpls.2019.01349.


Zhang, Q., Liu, X., Zhang, Z., Liu, N., Li, D., and Hu, L. (2019). Melatonin improved
waterlogging tolerance in alfalfa (Medicago sativa) by reprogramming polyamine

and ethylene metabolism. Front. Plant Sci. 10:44. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2019.00044

Zheng, X., Zhou, J., Tan, D.-X., Wang, N., Wang, L., Shan, D., et al. (2017). Melatonin
improves waterlogging tolerance of Malus baccata (Linn.) Borkh. seedlings by
maintaining aerobic respiration, photosynthesis and ROS migration. Front. Plant

Sci. 8:483. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2017.00483

Zou, X., Hu, C., Zeng, L., Cheng, Y., Xu, M., & Zhang, X. (2014). A Comparison of
Screening Methods to Identify Waterlogging Tolerance in the Field in Brassica
napus L. during Plant ~— Ontogeny. PloS._- One == -9.._—«e89731

10.1371 oumal.pone.0089731.

