
4

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS

Master of Science in Agronomy

ROHILYN BERTILLO EGLE

Synchronism of Leaf Development and Leaf Elongation Rates
of Contrasting Rice (Oryza sativa L.) Genotypes

EDNA A. AGUILAR, Ph.D.
Crop Physiology Division, Crop Science Cluster
University of the Philippines Los Bajfios

April 2014
This thesis can be made available to the general public. YES _| NO
This thesis can be accessed only after consultation with the author and thesis adviser. | YES_| NO
This thesis can be accessed only by those bound by confidentiality agreement. YES | NO

toutive B. EGLE

EDNA A. AGUILAR


SYNCHRONISM OF LEAF DEVELOPMENT AND LEAF ELONGATION
RATES OF CONTRASTING RICE (Oryza sativa L.) GENOTYPES

ROHILYN BERTILLO EGLE

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF THE GRADUATE SCHOOL,
UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES AT LOS BANOS,
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE
REQUIREMENT FOR THE
DEGREE OF

MASTER OF SCIENCE
(Agronomy)

APRIL 2014
INO A A

STI-17-0600

The thesis attached hereto, entitled “Synchronism of Leaf Development and Leaf
Elongation Rates of Contrasting Rice (Oryza sativa L.) Genotypes”, prepared and
submitted by ROHILYN BERTILLO EGLE in partial fulfillment of the requirements

for the degree of MASTER OF SCIENCE (AGRONOMY) is hereby accepted.

ANTONIO C. LAURENA ~~ BENOIT CLERGET
Member, Guidance Committee Co-chair, Guidance Committee
Foy wy r
Date Signed Date Signed

vin XGon.an

Chair, Guidance Committee
1-04 2ory
Date Signed

Accepted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of MASTER
OF SCIENCE (AGRONOMY).

QA
CALIXTO M. PROTACIO .

Director. npr? rap? Oy vid" fquster

Date Signed

JOSE V. CAMACHO, JR
Dean, Graduate School

University ofthe Pa pi 4s Bafios
Date ure

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

The author was born on the 5“ of August 1987 at San Rafael, Ragay, Camarines Sur. She
is the 6" child of Rosita and Gil Egle. She studied BS Agriculture major in Agronomy
with specialization in Crop Production and Management in UP Los Bafios. Her
undergraduate thesis focused on the energy use of sugarcane using various nutrient
supply options under the funding of Luzon Federation of Sugarcane Growers
(LUZONFED, Inc.) and the assistance of National Institute of Molecular Biology and
Biotechnology (BIOTECH-UPLB). She became a member of Gamma Sigma Delta
Honor Society of Agriculture (GSD-HSA), UPLB chapter in the same year. After
college, she worked as a Science Research Analyst in a research and extension program
of the Department of Agriculture - Bureau of Agricultural Research (DA-BAR) and
UPLB entitled “Collaborative Research, Development and Extension Services (CRDES)
for Food Security: The Case of Regions 4A, 4B and 5. The program ended in 2011 and
published a book entitled “Partnership for Food Security” where she was one of the
authors and/or contributors. After her contract, she took graduate studies and entered the
UPLB Graduate School under Master of Science major in Agronomy with specialization
in Crop Physiology, minor in Molecular Biology and Biotechnology in 2011. In 2012,
she became a recipient of a scholarship under the Department of Science and Technology
~ Accelerated Science and Technology Human Resource Development Program (DOST-
ASTHRDP). She was also given privilege to conduct her study as MS Thesis Research
Scholar at International Rice Research Institute in 2013 where she studied the
synchronism of leaf development and leaf elongation rates of contrasting rice genotypes.
In the same year, she was able to publish her undergraduate study in the Philippine

Journal of Crop Science.

ROHILYN B. EGLE

iv

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my UPLB adviser, Dr. Edna Aguilar for
always believing in my capabilities, for your positive suggestions and for accepting me as
your advisee that despite your hectic schedule, you still find time to entertain my needs.
To my IRRI adviser, Dr. Benoit Clerget, thank you for accepting me as your scholar, for
your patience in teaching me basic techniques of data analysis, and for your practical
ideas and constructive criticisms that helped me comprehend the considerations in doing
a research. Thank you for understanding my shortcomings, for devoting most of your
time in helping me in the analysis, for teaching me to work efficiently and for mobilizing
your team just to make sure that data gathering and analysis are easy and fast. To my
minor adviser, Dr. Antonio Laurena, thank you for attending my concems despite your
busy schedule. Thank you for always being so approachable although I often ambush you
for signature and consultation. I thank you for your good comments, suggestions and
appreciation. I also would like to thank Dr. Pompe Sta. Cruz, my former adviser, for
your guidance for 2 years, for being so kind and considerate to me and that I consider you
as my father in UPLB. You have been very positive and confident that I can do the best
despite my self-doubts.

I would like to express my appreciation for the assistance of the whole Crop Eco-
physiology Group from experimental set-up to data analysis. Thank you TitaLeny,
Mang Pete, Kuya Rene, Kuya Luis, Kuya Vic, HL and Tita Nonnie. Special thanks to
Aby for analyzing my data. I also thank Tita Ana and Tito Boy of the Crop Science
Cluster, UPLB for facilitating all my inquiries and concerns.

To my close friends, Jayvee, Arnee, Goldie, Pam, Jav, Joiz and Ate Jap, because of
you I enjoyed my stay here in UPLB. Thank you for your support and words of
encouragement during the critical periods of my MS life. I also thank my JMCIM
brothers and sisters in Christ for inspiration and prayers and who gave me so much
reasons to laugh and enjoy life hence helped divert my heavy mood due to stress in
studies. I want to thank you all for the inspiration and prayers.

To my family especially my Mama and Papa, you have been my inspiration to continue
my studies despite our financial hardships. Thank you for always being there to support
me financially and emotionally. Thanks to my siblings kuya Alex, ate Edna, Ate Bhing,
Ate Gladys, kuya Gilbert and Angelie for being so supportive and proud. To Nanay
Amy, Mel, Andreu and Randy, thank you for the prayers and inspiration, and I am
gratefulthat you treat me as your family.

Most especially, I want to give the glory, honor and praise to Almighty GOD for
blessing me such kind of people whom in one way or another helped me be a better
person and inspired me to move forward. Thank You because You always give me
strength, wisdom, knowledge and understanding to finish this work.

v

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Intellectual Property Rights
Title Page

Approval page
Biographical Sketch
Acknowledgement
Table of Contents

List of Tables

List of Figures

List of Appendix Tables
List of Appendix Figures
Abstract

INTRODUCTION
Conceptual Framework of the Study
Hypothesis of the Study
Objectives of the Study

RELATED LITERATURE AND STUDIES
Phenological Modeling
Crop Duration
Phytomer
Leaf Appearance
Leaf Elongation

Factors Affecting Leaf Appearance and Leaf Elongation Rates

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Preliminary Experiment
Core Experiment
Time and Place of Study
Experiments
Characterization of Leaf Growth of 11 Genotypes

Evaluation of Diurnal Leaf Growth of 4 Contrasting Genotypes

Plant Management
Data Collection
Data Analysis

vi

PAGE

iii
iiv

viii
ix

xiii

10
11
13
18
25

33
34

34
37
38
38
41

RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
Preliminary Experiment
Core Experiment
Climate Data
Characterization of leaf growth of 11 genotypes
Leaf Appearance Rate
Leaf Elongation Rate
Synchronism of Leaf Appearance and Leaf Elongation Rates
Evaluation of Diurnal Leaf Growth of Four Contrasting Genotypes
Correlation of LER and Climatic Parameters

SUMMARY
CONCLUSION
LITERATURE CITED

APPENDICES

vil

PAGE

46
51
56
70
77
81
86
89
92
96

100

TABLE

LIST OF TABLES

Rice genotypes used in the characterization of leaf growth

Lay-out used in the characterization of leaf growth
experiment

Rice genotypes used in diurnal growth evaluation
experiment

Lay-out used in diurnal growth evaluation experiment

Average daily values of climate parameters during the two sowing

dates

Final leaf number and thermal time of the genotypes in the
two sowing dates

Summary of kinetics of leaf appearance of the genotypes
for the two sowing dates

Maximum LER and the corresponding leaf of each genotype
for the two sowing dates

Correlation analysis of leaf elongation rate with the climatic
parameters

viii

PAGE

35

36

37

37

51

57

69

75

87

FIGURE

10

11

13

LIST OF FIGURES

Diagram of conceptual framework of the study
The rate of leaf appearance in rice with the thermal time
The predicted rate of growth of rice leaves under flooded

Application of LVDT in recording leaf elongation and the general
LVDT assembly

Leaf appearance rate of IR 72 across growing days
Maximum leaf elongation rate of IR 72 (mm/°Cd)

Collar distance of the last 6 leaves of IR 72 grown in April 2013

Diumal Leaf elongation rate of leaves 10, 12 and 15 of IR 72
(mm/°Cd) measured in the LVDT

Average air temperature during the experimental period covering
two sowing dates

Average soil temperature during the experimental period covering
two sowing dates

Average relative humidity during the experimental period covering
two sowing dates

Total global radiation during the experimental period covering
two sowing dates

Leaf appearance rate across thermal time of the contrasting
Tice genotypes grown in June and September sowing

PAGE

25

46
47
48

50

54

55

55

58

FIGURE

14

15

17

18

20

21

22

23

24

25

Leaf appearance rate of hybrids sown in June and
September 2013 sowing

Leaf appearance rate of tropical japonicas sown in June and
September 2013 sowing

Leaf appearance rate of early maturing indicas sown in June and
September 2013 sowing

Leaf appearance rate of late maturing indicas sown in June and
September 2013 sowing

Leaf appearance rate of medium maturing indicas sown in June and
September 2013 sowing

General linear model of NSIC Re 222 leaf appearance rate using the
complete data of June and September sowing

Residuals of NSIC Rc 222 leaf appearance model in the June and
September 2013 sowing

General linear model of NSIC Re 222 leaf appearance rate using
probably complete data of June and September sowing

General linear model of Was 203 leaf appearance rate using
probably complete data of June and September sowing

General linear model of IR 72 leaf appearance rate using
probably complete data of June and September sowing

Leaf elongation rate (mm/°Cd) of contrasting rice genotypes
sown in June and September

Leaf elongation rate of hybrid indicas sown in June
and September 2013 sowing

PAGE

60

60

61

61

65

66

66

66

71

72

FIGURE

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

Leaf elongation rate of tropical japonicas sown in June
and September 2013 sowing

Leaf elongation rate of early maturing indicas sown in June
and September 2013 sowing

Leaf elongation rate of late maturing indicas sown in June
and September 2013 sowing

Leaf elongation rate of late maturing indicas sown in June
and September 2013 sowing

Convergence of leaves of leaf appearance and maximum LER
of genotypes in June and September sowing

Leaf elongation rate (in mm/h) of genotypes with respect to time of
day on the June and September sowing

Leaf elongation rate (in mm/°Cd) of genotypes with respect to time
of day on the June and September sowing

xi

PAGE

73

73

74

74

79

83

LIST OF APPENDIX TABLES

APPENDIX

TABLE

la

1b

lc

2a

2b

2c

3a

3b

3c

4a

Leaf appearance of Mestizo 30, IR 72 and IR 780 showing
the standard errors and confidence intervals in June sowing

Leaf appearance of Mestizo 7, Azucena, Hong Zui Zhao
and NSIC Rc 222 showing the standard errors and confidence
intervals in June sowing

Leaf appearance of PSB Rc 18, Sahelika and Was 203 showing
the standard errors and confidence intervals in June sowing

Leaf appearance of Mestizo 30, IR 72 and IR 780 showing
the standard errors and confidence intervals in September sowing

Leaf appearance of Mestizo 7, Azucena, E 5168, Hong Zui Zhao
and NSIC Re 222 showing the standard errors and confidence
intervals in September sowing

Leaf appearance of PSB Rc 18, Sahelika and Was 203 showing
the standard errors and confidence intervals in September sowing

Maximum leaf elongation rate of Mestizo 30, IR 72 and IR 780
showing
the standard errors and confidence intervals in June sowing

Maximum leaf elongation rate of Mestizo 7, Azucena, Hong Zui Zhao
and NSIC Rc 222 showing the standard errors and confidence
intervals in June sowing

Maximum leaf elongation rate of PSB Re 18, Sahelika and Was 203
showing the standard errors and confidence intervals in June sowing

Maximum leaf elongation rate of Mestizo 30, IR 72 and IR 780
showing the standard errors and confidence intervals in September
sowing

xii

PAGE
101

102

103

104

105

106

107

108

109

110

APPENDIX PAGE

TABLE
4b Maximum leaf elongation rate of Mestizo 7, Azucena, E 5168,
Hong Zui Zhao and NSIC Re 222 showing the standard errors and
confidence intervals in September sowing

lil

4c Maximum leaf elongation rate of PSB Rc 18, Sahelika and Was 203 112
the standard errors and confidence intervals in September sowing

Onset of internode elongation of the genotypes in the two sowing
5 dates 113

6 Collar distance of the genotypes of rice in the June 2013 sowing 114

Collar distance of the genotypes of rice in the September 2013
7 sowing 115

xiii

LIST OF APPENDIX FIGURES

APPENDIX

FIGURE

1

Sa

5b

Se

5d

Se

Sf

5g

Sh

Illustration of a grass plant showing developing tiller arrangement of
phytomers

Chronological development of new leaves of cereal crops
The experimental area in BG-10 greenhouse of IRRI
The LVDT setup

General linear model of Mestizo 30 leaf appearance rate using
probably complete data of June and September sowing

General linear model of Mestizo 7 leaf appearance rate using
probably complete data of June and September sowing

General linear model of IR 780 leaf appearance rate using
probably complete data of June and September sowing

General linear model of Azucena leaf appearance rate using
probably complete data of June and September sowing

General linear model of Hong Zui Zhao leaf appearance rate using
probably complete data of June and September sowing

General linear model of E 5168 leaf appearance rate using
probably complete data of June and September sowing

General linear model of PSB Rc 18 leaf appearance rate using
probably complete data of June and September sowing

General linear model of Sahelika leaf appearance rate usingprobably
complete data of June and September sowing

xiv

PAGE

116

117
118
118

119

119

119

120

120

120

121

121

ABSTRACT

EGLE, ROHILYN BERTILLO. University of the Philippines Los Bajios. April
2014. Synchronism of Leaf Development and Leaf Elongation Rates of Contrasting

Rice (Oryza sativaL. )Genotypes.

Major Professors: Dr. Edna A. Aguilar, Chair
Dr. Benoit Clerget, Co-chair

Leaf appearance and leaf elongation rates in rice play essential roles in determining the
plants’ differences in development of their architecture, which is related to their
adaptability to varying environments and coping mechanism with change. This study
aimed to characterize the rates of leaf appearance and elongation of all leaves of the main
tillers of contrasting rice plants, and to determine the relationship that exist between the
two rates. Eleven contrasting rice genotypes were grown in 13-L pots under flooded
conditions in a greenhouse at the International Rice Research Institute in June and
September 2013. In contrast with previous reports of bilinear kinetics of leaf appearance,
the study revealed trilinear kinetics in most varieties across sowing dates because the first
four leaves appeared faster, rendering two inflection points. Leaf elongation rate (LER)
of all genotypes increased linearly with leaf rank until it reached leaves 9 to 14 then it
gradually decreased. Thus, the leaf with maximum LER was the last leaf to appear before
the rate of leaf appearance was reduced. A transition period between the two linear parts

of the leaf appearance curve, covering 3 -4 leaves, was found in genotypes with trilinear

XV

kinetics. The precise methodology employed led to the discovery of transition period
across genotypes and sowing dates, which was not captured in previous studies. This
finding will avoid overestimation in the simulation of leaf area and will improve database
for breeding and crop improvement. Further research on the cellular level is needed to

determine the activity of meristem cell division and elongation.

xvi

INTRODUCTION

Cereals, like rice (Oryza sativa L.), have predictable pattern of leaf development
under optimum growing condition as well as when exposed to varying environments.
This is true across genotypes that vary mainly in terms of rate or duration of specific leaf
developmental events (Parent et al 2009; McMaster, 2005). To fully understand the
response of crops to climate change, further studies on some basic plant processes, e.g.
leaf development, are needed. Leaf development, i.e. leaf appearance and leaf number
accumulation is related to leaf area index and vegetative stage duration (Streck, et. al,
2013). Leaf appearance and leaf elongation rates play an essential role in determining the
plants’ differences in development of their architecture, which is related to their
adaptability to varying environments. Plants adapt to stress by modifying their canopy
architecture hence stability of canopy development in rice is a targeted trait in adaptation
to climate change to maximize biomass production.

Leaf appearance and leaf elongation are the two leaf developmental events that
are important in phenological modeling or the prediction of occurrence of important
developmental events in the stages of rice crop duration, which can be used in adjusting
the development, growth and senescence of individual phytomer components (McMaster,
2005). Specifically, these rates are important for predicting leaf area development of a
crop (Yin and Kropff, 1996). In monocotyledons, the final leaf area is determined mainly
by the rate of elongation of both individual leaf and whole plant. The leaf area relates to

absorption of photosynthetically active radiation for canopy photosynthesis leading to dry

matter production and crop yield. Hence, leaf elongation rate plays an essential role in
determining the plant’s differences in biomass accumulation and yield as affected
genotype and environment. In relation to leaf elongation rate, leaf appearance rate is
crucial in the prediction of final leaf number which is related to the leaf area. Final leaf
number will then be the basis for the prediction of flowering time, considering that
panicle emergence in cereal crops immediately follows the full appearance of the flag
leaf. Further, cereal crops are generally not photoperiod sensitive hence leaf appearance

rate can be used as tool to determine the flowering dates (Streck et al, 2008).

Several studies have successfully predicted leaf area development based on leaf
number. Research works on phenology were combined with phytomer studies using the
concept of plastochron and phyllochron to predict the orderly development of cereals
(McMaster, 2005). Phytomer is the fundamental building block of plant canopies
composed of node, internode, and axillary bud. Phyllochron is the time interval between
the appearances of two successive leaf tips. Plastochron is the time interval between
initiations of successive leaf.

Prediction of phyllochron and plastochron is primarily influenced by temperature
(Yin and Kropff, 1996). Other abiotic factors exert affecton these events only when the
conditions are beyond certain plant thresholds. Christ (1978) as cited by Wiangsamut and
Mendoza (2008) claimed that when the temperature during the night is low, there is less
leaf expansion because the leaves lack the carbohydrate required for the normal process
to occur. Under constant temperature, leaf appearance rate in rice is not constant with

time (calendar days) (Streck et al., 2008). Furthermore, when exposed to normal optimum

condition, differences in phyllochron and plastochron can still be observed due to
variation in genotypes (Clerget andBueno, 2013), and in the timing of sowing (Yin and
Kropff, 1996). Moreover, Clerget and Bueno (2013) reported that the relationship of
plastochron and phyllochron with thermal time fitted in the bilinear or trilinear model
because the whole vegetative phase of rice has unstable rate of leaf appearance. Further,
the transition from the vegetative to reproductive growth stage causes leaf appearance
rate to abruptly decrease (Yin et al., 1995).

Poire, et. al (2010) reported that evaluation of growth in response to time of day
in a 24-hour period showed strong variations in response to short term temperature
fluctuations. The biological process of formation, appearance, elongation and senescence
occurring in a phytomer is of great interest because this is the basic unit of the plant
canopy (McMaster, 2005). While growth is continuously occurring, thus measurement of
leaf elongation is time consuming hence should be monitored in a shortest time interval
for precise estimation of leaf elongation rate. To facilitate this kind of measurement, the
linear variable displacement transducer (LVDT) was developed to automatically record
the leaf elongation in crops. The LVDT is an AC operated tool which uses
electromagnetic coupling to convert a position or linear displacement from a mechanical
reference (zero) into a proportional electrical signal containing direction and distance
information. Leaf elongation can then be measured by transmitting the displacement of
the rod (sensor) attached to the leaf tip. Hence, analysis of day and night elongation rates

was made possible by the continuous elongation measurement by the LVDT.

Previous studies in the area of phenology particularly on the controls on the
timing of flowering had relevant contributions on functional genomics research in cereal
development. Kinetics of leaf appearance and elongation rates has been described in
barley, wheat, corn, sorghum and rice. However, checking the variability of these rates in
contrasting rice genotypes and the synchronism of their dynamics are not yet elucidated.
Given the important role of phyllochron in the prediction of cereal canopy architecture
development, characterization of leaf growth of known contrasting varieties will provide
information towards further understanding the linkage of leaf development with crop
yield, which is a crucial consideration in crop improvement. Moreover, the relationship
of leaf appearance and leaf elongation rates determine the stability of canopy
development in rice genotypes and that provides information on the phenotype that best
suit for a given set of environmental condition hence important in climate change
adaptation strategies. It could also give the crucial specific points in leaf development of
rice where interventions can be applied for the maximization of growth and eventually
yield. Furthermore, precise measurement of diurnal leaf elongation of contrasting rice
genotypes and its correlation with the Philippine climate is needed for verify plant’s

response to small fluctuations in the environment.

Conceptual Framework of the Study

Figure 1 shows the conceptual framework of the study. Different genotypes
grown in controlled condition will have variability in the rate of leaf development and
elongation as affected by temperature and the time of the day. These rates will determine
the vegetative growth duration and the days to flowering of each genotype. The study
will emphasize the kinetics of leaf development and elongation of 11 genotypes under
flooded condition. This study will contribute information on the plant’s leaf growth and

development for crop improvement and adaptation strategies.

Genotypic Variation

4

Controlled Condition

Temperature Leaf Development and Daytime
Leaf Elongation Rate

Days to Flowering <-———————— | Vegetative stage duration

Crop Improvement &
Adaptation

Figure 1.Diagram of conceptual framework of the study.

Hypothesis of the Study

Leaf number is increasing with thermal time with one inflection point showing
bilinear trend as shown in Figure 3. Leaf appearance rate has greater slope at early
vegetative stage than the late vegetative stage. Within the same time interval, more leaves
appear at early stage than during late stage with inflection point at approximately leaf 12%
stage. The inflection point of bilinear leaf appearance kinetics is sharp; hence
phyllochron is reduced by half after the appearance of leaf 12. This abrupt change would
affect leaf growth hence leaf elongation would also be reduced by half or would drop
down at the same moment of the appearance of leaf 12. It means that at that time,
something is happening at the physiological level.

Hence, we hypothesize that the rate of growth of rice leaves will increase as the
plant ages starting from the 1 leaf until somewhere around leaf 11. The rate of growth
of leaves will suddenly drop down about at the time of appearance of the 12" leaf (Figure
2). The decrease in LER is abrupt because there might be a dual effect of reduced cell
division and cell elongation after reaching the maximum. The sudden drop in LER is
related to the sharp change in the leaf appearance rate (Figure 3).The growth rate of the

succeeding leaves will then be stable until the emergence of the flag leaf.

Rate of growth

2 (am/d)
Leaf
Number

1

‘Thermal time (°Cd) Leaf Number
Figure 2.The rate of leaf appearance in Figure 3. The predicted rate of growth of
rice with the thermal time. rice leaves under flooded

Generally, the length of the leaf sheath in cereals is regularly increasing in a linear
trend. With time, longer leaf sheath means that leaf will travel a long way before its tip to
be visible. The time interval of the appearance of two leaves is constant in cereals, such
that the growth of the succeeding leaves is increasing for the tip to emerge from the
sheath at the constant time interval during early vegetative stage. At certain point when
the leaf 12 has emerged, the sheath lengths of the succeeding leaves until the flag leaf are
similar. Hence, the leaves appearing after leaf 12 will grow in a constant rate to maintain

the same interval of leaf appearance.

Objectives of the Study

This study aims to characterize the rate of growth of all leaves from the main tiller

of 11 contrasting rice genotypes grown in flooded condition. Specifically, the objectives

of the study are:

1.

To verify the bilinear relationship of leaf appearance with thermal time among 11
Tice genotypes;

To identify the relationship between the rate of leaf elongation and the leaf rank;
To establish the coincidence of the relationships between 1 and 2;

To precisely evaluate the variability of leaf growth rate in four contrasting
genotypes in precise time interval measurement using the linear variable
displacement transducer (LVDT) in relation with daytime; and

To determine the effects of temperature, global radiation and relative humidity on
the rate of leaf elongation of rice grown under flooded (water ~3 cm above soil

surface) condition.

RELATED LITERATURE AND STUDIES

Phenological Modeling

The process by which plant structures originate and mature as it grows is called
plant development. Throughout the plant life cycle, they constantly produce new tissues
and structures from meristems located at the tips of organs. Throughout the growth
duration of plants, they are subject to interaction with the changing environmental
conditions, and changes in phenology could be regarded as sensitive indicator of climate
change (Zhao et al., 2013). A tool being used for assessing shifts in phenology with
climate is phonological modeling.

Phenological modelling can predict the occurrence of certain important
developmental events, which can then be used to adjust the development, growth and
senescence of individual phytomer components. For instance, internodes do not elongate
until just prior to jointing stage and first internode to begin elongating is in the youngest
forming phytomer on the culm. Phenological models can also be used to predict other
important canopy growth stages, such as anthesis and physiological maturity (McMaster,
2005).This method is capable of capturing and quantifying the potential impacts and
consequences of global climate change and human activity (Zhao et al.. 2013). Hence, the
whole crop duration can be estimated by phonological modeling. The accuracy of
predicting crop phenology is important for modeling of crop growth calendar which

serves as basis for employing field management strategies (Sie et. al, 1998). Temperature,

10

solar radiation, and water availability are assumed to be the key factors that control plant

phenology (Zhao et al., 2013) hence are considered in phonological modelling.

Crop Duration

The growth duration of a rice cultivar determines its agro-ecological and
agronomic fitness (Larijani, et. al, 2011). Photoperiod and temperature are the
environmental factors that influence crop duration. In the early vegetative growth phase,
low water temperatures delay germination and the appearance of the first 2-5 leaves. The
effect of photoperiod on the development rate can be expressed as a modification of the
total thermal time required (Sie et al., 1998a). In tropics, development of short crop
duration and photoperiod-insensitive varieties is of interest. Those characteristics would
enable farmers to sow for two cropping seasons per year with fewer risks on losses due to
extreme temperature conditions. Short crop duration of rice is commonly associated with
photoperiod insensitivity. However, these are independent physiologically and

genetically (Sie et al., 1998a).

Among the varying stages within crop duration, leaf growth and development is
the most crucial because of its central role in photosynthesis, gas exchange and
transpiration. The duration of these processes are affected by several factors, such as
temperature, vapour pressure deficit, planting density, sowing date and genotype. In any

condition, cereal leaves continuously develop and elongate until sufficient number of

11

phytomer units are produced before proceeding to the reproductive stage (McMaster,

2005).

Phytomer

Phytomers are defined as the functional units of a plant arising from the
meristems of root and shoot produced throughout the plant’s vegetative stage. One
phytomer consists of a node where leaf is attached, an internode and an axillary bud
located at the base of the leaf, hence can be considered as the fundamental building block
of plant canopies (Appendix Figure 1). Throughout the plant’s growth duration, a
continuous cycle of phytomer is occurring in order to build specific canopy architecture.
The process follows repeated formation, expansion and senescence. Sequential addition
of phytomer units originating at the shoot apex with the leaf initial constructs the shoot.
Growth and differentiation further occurs in each component of the pkytomer unit
rendering them to be visible (McMaster, 2005). Canopy architecture composed of
successive phytomer units are mechanistically modeled to simulate plant growth and
development as affected by microclimate. The simulation models are used in dynamic
visual presentations for research and educational purposes (Birch, et. al, 2003).

There are usually several active shoot apices within a plant, and rather than
viewing each apex as independently forming, growing and senescing leaves controlled by
the environment (particularly temperature), the apices and leaf life cycle should be
viewed as coordinated processes. Certainly signaling throughout the plant can affect

individual shoot apex functioning (McMaster, 2005).

12

Phytomer is formed upon initiation of leaf phenology, hence timing of phytomer
formation is controlled by the rate of primordial initiation (McMaster, 2005). Only leaf
phenology formed before single ridge growth stage will continue to differentiate and
appear at the rate of the phyllochron, which is also quantified using growing degree-
days.Thus, it takes longer time to form one phytomer in conditions of low temperature

than those exposed to high temperature (Itoh and Sano, 2006).

Vegetative phytomers are developed when leaf size increases acropetally on a
culm and under unstressed conditions leaves begin to senesce by about 6.5 phyllochrons
after formation. Leaf stops further growth and development when the shoot apex has
shifted from its vegetative function to reproductive events which usually occur during
single double ridge. The axillary bud now becomes the ridge formed above the leaf initial
which develops into the spikelet at double ridge (McMaster, 2005).In contrast with the
vegetative phytomers, reproductive phytomers are initiated 3-4 times faster. Another term
for reproductive phytomers is phyllome. This consists of vegetative phytomer
(plastochron), extended leaf blades (phyllochron), reproductive phytomer (spikelets), and
florets. Given a particular condition, senescence of a phytomer component may occur at
any point in time depending on the genotype and the environment to which the plant is
exposed. Among the components of a phytomer, the leaf is the first to undergo
senescence then followed by the internode tissues (McMaster, 2005). Generally, the
processes occurring in each phytomer unit starting from its appearance to elongation are
similar. In contrast, dependent on the genotype, cereals exhibit varied rates of such events

(McMaster, 2005).

13

Leaf Appearance

Phyllochron

The phyllochron is the period of time a leaf is emerged from the apical bud, which
is also called as leaf appearance rate. Scientists used phyllochron since 1996 to describe
the growth and development of cereals such as rice. One course of phyllochron adds one
phytomer unit and the interval can be recorded in both standard measurements of time as
well as thermal time, with units of °C day. The length of phyllochron is approximately 4-
8 days depending on the extent of plant’s exposure to __ stresses
(http://ciifad.comell.edu/sri/phyllochron.html).Hence, the phyllochron is a_ useful
predictor of shoot development from the time of axillary bud differentiation and growth
(McMaster, 2005).

McMaster (2005) identified three processes involving a phyllochron development.
First, leaf initial is formed at the shoot apex through cell division. The cells at the
intercalary meristem of the expanding leaf primordium will then divide. The final stage is
cell growth formed by the intercalary meristem resulting in leaf emergence. A part of the
whole process is affected by temperature and that is specific to the time of cell cycling.
The last part in phyllochron, which is cell growth, is influenced by other factors such as
carbohydrate, water and nutrient availability that depends on the environmental
conditions in which the plant is grown. Hence, the plastochron is more strongly related to

temperature (essentially only cell division) than the phyllochron (which includes cell

14

growth). In relation to thermal time, scientists tried to study and predict the trend of leaf

appearance.

Leaf Number

Leaf number has linear relationship with the growing degree days (thermal units)
from seedling emergence to maturity. Given this relation, the interval between the
openings of two successive leaves (phyllochron) can be estimated inversely. With this, it
can be assumed that there is a fixed phyllocron among environmental conditions (Yin et
al., 1995). However, leaf number is not strongly affected by temperature. Plants exposed
under constant temperature and normal diurnally fluctuating temperatures i.e. warm days
following cool nights) showed small variation in leaf number. On the other hand,
significant variation in leaf number was observed when the diurnal pattern of temperature
was changed. This effect is true when the change has caused a delay in flowering leading
to the formation of more leaves in the main stem (Yin and Kropff, 1995).A study in field-
grown maize found that phyllochron decreased gradually with increasing leaf number
(Yin and Kropff, 1995).

Leaf number is said to be final at the start of panicle initiation in cereal crops. The
rate of change in the final leaf number and the days to flowering is the same suggesting
that the day (Tp) and night temperature (Ty) do not cause any variation on leaf
appearance rate in rice. This means that the difference observed by Yin et al. (1996) on

the effect of Tp and Tw on rice development to flowering is related to leaf development

15

until panicle initiation phase,hence leaf development in rice is not affected by Tp and Ty

(Yin and Kropff, 1995).

Prediction of leaf number. Predicting the leaf number from the main stem is an
important tool to determine the timing of several plant development stages such as
tillering, panicle initiation, booting and anthesis. Slafer (2003) as cited by Larijani, et. al
(2011) reported that time to flowering, predicted by leaf number, is being used in the
prediction of crop yield because it is during the pre-flowering period where the maximum
yield is largely determined. Hence, time to flowering has been an important trait for crop
productivity and adaptation (Yin, et. al. (2005) as cited by Larijani, et. al (2011)) The
amount of photosynthetically active radiation that a plant can absorb is related to plant
canopy architecture and leaf number hence directly related to dry matter production and

crop yield (Streck et al. 2008).

Haun growth scale. The leaf number of cereals can be estimated using the Haun
growth scale taking into consideration the sum of the number of fully expanded leaves
and the ratio of the lamina length of the last visible growing leaf to that of the preceding
leaf. The assumption is that before a leaf tip could fully emerge, the ligule of its

predecessor should come out first (Yin et al., 1995).

16

Kinetics of leaf appearance

Many studies predicted the trend in the increases in phyllochron in cereals
correlated with the growing degree units. Clerget and Bueno (2013) suggested a linear or
bilinear relationship of plastochron and phyllochron with thermal time. It was found out
that phyllochron was not stable during the whole vegetative phase. Since there is a faster
rate of leaf appearance in the first leaves as compared to the succeeding leaves with much
slower in the later leaves, a trilinear model can be used. The rate of appearance of the
first 3-5 leaves is faster than 4-6 leaves, wherein appearance rate gradually decreases
thereby showing the first inflection point. Before panicle initiation, the 2" inflection
point occurs between the appearance of the 9" and 12” leaves (Clerget and Bueno, 2013).
In contrast, other studies reported a sudden decrease in leaf appearance rate at the time of
transition from the vegetative to reproductive growth stage in similar manners under
different environments (Yin et al., 1995; Itoh and Sano, 2006).

In cereals, the phyllochron may vary in rate between the main stem and the tillers,
i.e. the phyllochron may or may not be equal to the length of time taken for one leaf to
grow. The leaf tip appears earlier than the ligule of the preceding leaf (Yin et al., 1995).
Itoh and Sano (2006) stated that leaf appearance rate is at maximum during the time of
floral initiation. A study on maize showed that phyllochron was often constant but the
rate of full leaf expansion decreased with the thermal time from seedling emergence.
Furthennore, given diumally fluctuating conditions, it was verified that time course of

leaf appearance is constant for all genotypes (Yin and Kropff, 1996).

17

Phyllochron and genotypic variation

Plants of the same genotype exhibit variation in phyllochron under different
growing conditions. This variation in rice phyllochron might be controlled by the genes
responsible for growth duration (Itoh and Sano, 2006).

The shape-index value of a study conducted by Itoh and Sano (2006) revealed
significant effects of genotype, environment and some genotype-by-environment
interactions on the phyllochron dynamics in rice. It was assumed that the pattern
observed was due to the differential expression of the heading time genes. However, the
authors implicated that environment and its interaction with the genotype might have
affected the expression leading to the differences in the growth duration (Itoh and Sano,

2006).

Genetic mechanisms controlling the phyllochrons have not yet been fully studied
(McMaster, 2005), although QTLs for both the phyllochron and tillering in rice were
already identified by Miyamoto et al. (2004). Research advances in genomics and
molecular biology could generate relevant information and findings on the genetic
controls on developmental processes since there are still many areas of uncertainty and

variability that need to be explained (McMaster, 2005).

18
Leaf Elongation

Cell division and tissue expansion of epidermal cells occurs in the meristematic
zone which can be found in the proximal zone of the leaf. The zone of tissue elongation is
located further from the leaf insertion point. The process of cell growth occurs when the
cells from the meristematic zone undergo elongation in the elongation zone, followed by
cell maturation in the mature zone conferring the final size of the leaf (Parent et al.,

2009).

Cell enlargement occurs large as a result of vacuolar expansion resulting from
water uptake (Munns, 2000). The rate of water uptake in intact plants is in proportion to
the gradient in water potential between the source of water and the vacuoles of the
enlarging cells and inversely proportional to the resistances along this path including
components due to membrane permeability and xylem resistance (Cutler, 1979). Cell
enlargement is due to the accumulation of solutes in the vacuole and subsequent osmotic
uptake of water. Simultaneously, the cell wall expands and eventually new cell wall
materials are synthesized to fill the cell wall. Continuous expansion requires a continual
accumulation of solutes in the vacuoles of expanding cells (Cutler, 1979). When
perturbed by alteration of water status, elongation rates respond in the direction dictated
by the direction of the change in the water potential gradient and in some proportion to

the magnitude of this change(Cutler, 1979).

If gradients of water potential are the driving force for cell expansion and

elongation, alteration of the gradient should result in alterations of the leaf elongation

19

rate(Cutler, 1979). Elastic properties of cell walls have a large influence on the relation
between protoplast volume and turgor (Dainty, 1972) as cited by (Cutler, 1979). Highly
elastic cells which have low bulk volumetric moduli conserve turgor during dehydration
at the expense of water potential gradients and protoplast volume. On the other hand,
rigid cells which have high volumetric moduli conserve water potential gradients and

protoplast volume at the expense of turgor (Cutler, 1979).

Leaf expansion in rice is controlled by the extensibility of the epidermis (Parent et
al 2009). The base of the leaf tip has a gradient of cell length at early stages of leaf
development. At further distances, cells elongation stops, and cell length will reach the
plateau at about 60 mm from the leaf insertion point (Parent et al 2009). Despite
variability in the cell length, the control of expansion in the sheath and in the blade is in
common (Parent et al., 2009). According to Nelson and Mac Adam (1989) as cited by
Wiangsamut and Mendoza (2008), the production and transport of sucrose to the growing
leaf blade is ultimately the crucial factor that controls leaf elongation rate. Expanded
leaves have enhanced CO) assimilation rates to provide extra carbohydrate for the
elongation of the succeeding leaves. The key enzyme controlling sucrose the major
compound transported) synthesis in the leaves is called sucrose phosphate synthase (SPS)
(Seneweera, et. al, 1995; Wiangsamut and Mendoza, 2008). During early ontogeny, the
major sink of carbohydrate in the plant is the growing leaf for successive development of
leaf area needed in photosynthesis. In this stage, leaf elongation rate is determined by the
synthesis of sucrose with the fact that blade growth is not limited by the phloem transport

of sucrose (Seneweera, et. al, 1995; Wiangsamut and Mendoza, 2008). However, the

20

demand for carbohydrates from the growing blades increases with increasing tiller
number because the growing tillers initially depend their carbohydrates from the shoots

until the full expansion of at least one leaf from that new tiller (Seneweera, et. al, 1995).

Diurnal pattern of leaf elongation

The response to short term temperature alterations seems vary strongly when
growth reactions are investigated during a 24 h day (Poire’ et. al, 2010). Walter and
Schurr (2005) reported that leaf growth is only transiently affected by sudden
environmental fluctuations instead, it follows endogenous pattern of cell division and
elongation.

Wiangsamut and Mendoza (2008) found that inbred varieties such as IR64 and
IR72 have faster day and night leaf elongation rate than SL-8 hybrid genotype suggesting
that these inbreds were able to produce higher amount of carbohydrates in both days and
night periods. Hybrids, like SL-8, have longer leaf blade length which limits the
carbohydrate accumulation in the culm during the tillering stage. More likely, cells tend
to increase in size and number when leaf elongation rate is increased during the night
resulting to a thicker leaf (Wiangsamut and Mendoza 2008). There is high dry matter
accumulation in inbreds due to shorter duration of leaf elongation and faster leaf
elongation rate (M. Sie et al, 1998). At early tillering stage, the diurnal patterns of LER of
the expanding leaves and Sucrose Phosphate Synthase (SPS) activity have clear similarity

because the growing blades are the major sinks. On the other hand, the correlation

21

became absent at mid-tillering stage because tillers are stronger sinks than the growing

blades (Seneweera, et. al, 1995).

In the study of leaf development, it is necessary to identify the zones of cell
division and cell elongation to facilitate sampling procedures that would best represent
the developmental pattern of the leaf. Measurements in these zones are important to
associate physiological studies of local elongation rate with molecular studies related to
growth and development, such as protein content and gene expression. Moreover, the
effects of environmental conditions on the leaf growth can be further analyzed using the

knowledge on these zones (Parent et al., 2009).

Kinetics of leaf elongation

Leaf elongation rate follows three phases according to Parent et al. (2009). First,
before leaf appearance, there is an exponential increase in leaf elongation rate, then
followed by a short and stable elongation rate for about 2-4 days in a given temperature
of 20°C.Subsequenily, elongation rate will decrease progressively for about 8-10 days. In
the case of maize, sorghum and other crop species, development of final leaf length takes
to about I-week period with faster elongation rate and cell length higher than the earlier
periods.

After the leaf appearance, there is a decrease in the leaf elongation rate of leaves 5
and 7. As the elongation rate of leaf 6 rapidly decreases, the rapid growth of leaf 7 starts

to occur rendering the elongation of leaf 5 to stop. The theory of the self-regulating

22

dynamic system, stating that leaf growth depends on the growth of other elongating
leaves, supports the claim that there is a decrease in the rate of leaf elongation of the
currenily expanding leaf when there is a rapid increase in the elongation rate of the

following leaf (Parent et al., 2009).

Leaf elongation period lasts at about 280-370 h after leaf appearance as observed
in seven genotypes. The length and elongation rate of leaf 5 increased exponentially at
early stage reaching the maximum rate when the leaf emerge above the whorl, and slowly
decrease during the first 120 h. There is a further and rapid decrease at about 120 h, while

at 350 h after leaf emergence growih is negligible (Parent et al., 2009).

Steady state period

The steady-state period is the point of interest in the study of leaf growth because
elongation rate is constant and the spatial distributions of leaf elongation rate and cell
length are temporarily invariable, hence any variability in cell division and expansion can
be attributed to environmental cues (Parent et al., 2009). Final leaf length of all leaves of
the plant can be simulated in this period. However, there is difficulty in studying this
period because of the shori duration of the phase, nence whole leaf development is
considered (Parent et al., 2009).

There is a variation in the plastochron and phyllochron among genotypes. Rice
has about 1:1 ratio of plastochron rate and phyllochron rate (McMaster, 2005). The

phyllochron might internally increase depending on the genotype controlling the heading

23

date. Phyllochron dynamics varies with the daylength even in the same genotype. Itoh
and Sano (2006) reported that daylength might be related to increases of the phyllochron

mainly in the late stage of development.

Automatic Leaf Elongation Measurement

The linear variable displacement transducer (LVDT) is a type of electrical
transformer which measures linear displacement from a mechanical reference (zero)
through alternating current (AC) operated electromagnetic coupling between the moving
part and the coil assembly. It converts the position into a proportional electrical signal
containing phase for direction and amplitude for distance information (Measurement
Specialties, Inc.). The LVDT linear position sensors can measure movements as small as
a few millionths of an inch up to several inches, but are also capable of measuring
positions up to +20 inches (+0.5 m) (www.macrosensors.com).

The basic components of LVDT are the coil winding assembly (i. e. primary coil
and two secondary coils) symmetrically spaced on a tubular center, cylindrical case
which encloses the coil winding assembly, and a rod-shaped magnetic core which is free
to move within the coil winding assembly (Coilins Technologies, 2003). The two
secondary windings are typically connected in differentially. The length of the
ferromagnetic coil is a fraction of the coil assembly length. The coil magnetically couples

the primary to the secondary winding turns that are located along the length of the core

24

(Measurement Specialties, Inc.). The LVDT requires AC power of typically 3 Vrms at 3

kHz to operate properly(www.macrosensors.com).

The LVDT works upon excitation of the primary coil with a sine wave voltage.
This process generates a variable magnetic field which induces the secondary sine wave
voltages. The zero (null) position is the core position where the phase angle of the
differential output is 90 degrees (Measurement Specialties, Inc.).The movement of the
core allows changes in the primary’s linkage to the two secondary coils hence causes the
induced voltages to change. The connection of the coils creates differential voltage
between the top secondary and bottom secondary voltage. The phase of the output
voltage determines the direction of the displacement (up or down) and amplitude

indicates the amount of displacement.

The sliding core does not touch the inside of the tube, hence it is frictionless. The
absence of any sliding or rotating contacts allows the LVDT to be completely sealed
against the environment. Any other movements such as the rotation of the core around

the axis will not affect its measurements.

LVDTs can work and withstand in extreme environments such as in cryogenic
temperatures or up to 1200°F (650°C), in harsh environments, under high vibration and
shock levels. Applications of LVDTs can be found in power turbines, hydraulics,
automation, aircraft, satellites and nuclear reactors. It has also been used in the study of
leaf elongation automatically by transmitting the displacement of the rod (sensor)

attached to the leaf tip (Figure 4).

http://www.ni.com/white-paper/3638/en

ac Source

ey

Moveable
core

Penay

pect) 2/5) 0

Series
opposition
connection

Secondary |

25

Figure 4.Application of LVDT in recording leaf elongation (left) and the general LVDT

assembly (right).

Factors Affecting Leaf Appearance and Leaf Elongation Rates

Leaf appearance and elongation are subject to exposure to different environmental

conditions which affects their kinetics. Although there is a genetically fixed growth

pattern of plant organs, strong modifications can occur due to the effect of environment

(Walter and Schurr, 2005). Cookson et. al (2005) discussed that growth and development

of leaves respond to hormones, nutritional and environmental conditions such as soil

water content, light and temperature. Phyllochron of rice greatly fluctuates in the course

of development in calendar days under natural conditions, such as constant temperature

(Itoh and Sano, 2006; Streck et al., 2008; Yin and Kropff, 1996). It was suggested that

there could be internal regulation of phyllochron rather than due to unpredictable

26

fluctuations under field conditions (Itoh and Sano, 2006). This is due to combined effects
of environmental conditions and genotype-specific differences between species,

subspecies and ecotypes of the same species (Cookson, et. al, 2005).

Temperature

The rate of plant development is primarily influenced by temperature (Clerget and
Bueno, 2013), and can be modified by other factors such as photoperiod (Yin and Kropff,
1996). McMaster (2005) reported that the most critical factors interacting with genetics
that have significant influence in the phyllochron and phenological development are
temperature and photoperiod. Regarding the duration of vegetative growth however, the
effect of temperature is not constant because the minimum temperature is dependent with
the position of shoot (Itoh and Sano, 2006). Furthermore, Clerget and Bueno (2013)
reported that plant development and growth is not clearly influenced by environmental
conditions characterized by slightly higher mean temperatures and lower solar radiation.

The relevant temperature for crop development is the temperature to which the
apical meristem is exposed (Yin and Kropff, 1996) in which for irrigated rice is water
temperature during much of the season. Sie et al. (1998b) reported that seed germination
rate was linearly correlated with water temperature across and within all rice lines. The
particular study found out that the extrapolated base temperature was 8°C with optimum
temperature of >27°C. Small differences in the base temperature can strongly affect the

duration of germination at low temperatures because the duration is inversely

27

proportional to the temperature. Clerget and Bueno (2013) claimed that the growth
stopped when sorghum was temporarily exposed to higher temperature (about 60°C) for
about 1-2 h. Generally, in tropical grasses, yield is not affected by exposure to supra-
optimal temperature (40°C) with or without moisture stress (Bade, et. al, 1985). Plants
have compensating mechanism upon removal of stress hence decreasing the temperature
to optimum allows the plant to recover the delay through increased elongation rate. On
the other hand, advanced leaf position is not sensitive to temperature because as the
plants become taller, due to the effect of increasing air temperature. Leaves in advanced
position experience warmer environment than early leaves, thus masking their low
sensitivity to temperature (Sie et al, 1998a). Exposure of tropical grasses to optimum
temperature resulted in increased rate of stem elongation, leaf appearance, tiller number

and leaves per tiller (Bade, et. al, 1985).

The relationship of biological processes and plant development with temperature
is generally nonlinear showing only a small linear portion (Streck et al., 2008). Yin et al.
(1995) reported an exponential (nonlinear) increase in leaf appearance rate in response to
increasing temperature in barley and wheat genotypes. Similarly, Parent et al. (2009)
reported a non-linear response of leaf elongation rate in response to temperature.
However, some of the plant processes occurring in the course of its development may

respond differently to day and night temperatures (Yin and Kropff, 1996).

28

Thermal time. Crop development can be predicted using the concept of thermal
time, or growing degree days (GDD) (McMaster, 2005). This involves summation of the
differences between daily mean air temperature and base temperature (M. Sie et al,
1998). In rice and wheat, faster leaf area production in conjunction with exposure to high
CO) condition significantly increased grain yield (Seneweera et al., 1995). Differences in
varieties significantly caused variation in the duration of vegetative phase (Clerget and
Bueno, 2013). Clerget and Bueno (2013) also found that when the duration of the
vegetative stage of rice was shortened, the total number of leaves produced by the apical

meristem was also reduced.

Sie et al. (1998a) concluded that a cultivar’s base and optimum temperatures can
be measured rapidly in extended germination tests in thermally variable environments.
The adaptation of indica rice thriving in irrigated arid areas depends partly on the
environmental responses of leaf appearance and floral induction. The thermal sensitivity
of floral induction varied considerably among rice cultivars that are only weakly

photoperiod-sensitive (Sie et al., 1998b).

Since growing degree days (thermal time) is the main focus in the establishment
of relationship of phyllochron and phenology to total crop duration, the point of
temperature measurement should be considered. Based on theory, soil temperature can
give better approximation of the shoot apex temperature than that measured above the
canopy (McMaster, 2005). This was initially claimed by Peacock (1975) as cited by
McMaster (2005) pointing out that temperature is perceived in the shoot apex and most

developmental processes such as, leaf primordial formation and that single and double

29

ridge occur in this area. Furthermore, prior to internode elongation, the shoot apex is
located in the crown (about 20 mm below the soil surface) hence temperature readings

might better represent apex temperature (McMaster, 2005).

Water

Aside from temperature, water availability also affects phenology. However,
water availability has lesser effect on the phyllochron. The duration of grain filling stage
was reduced by 20% with water availability, hence could generally reduce the growing
degree days needed to be accumulated in the course of development (McMaster,2005).

Leaf elongation was found to be one of the plant processes most sensitive to water
deficits (Cutler, 1980). Day elongation was equal to or greater than that at night, despite
greater bulk leaf and turgor pressure (‘¥p) at night (Wiangsamut and Mendoza, 2008).
Hence, under well-watered condition, daytime rate of elongation is high while nighttime
rate is low even though bulk leaf turgor potential was less during the day. Also, rate of
elongation is increased during the time of transition from day to night accompanied with
the increase in turgor pressure. In contrast, the elongation rate is increased during the
transition of night to day following the sharp decline in the turgor pressure. The growth
of the leaf is then rapidly recovered by increasing the leaf elongation at high rate during
the whole day period (Cutler, 1980; Wiangsamut and Mendoza, 2008). The higher
reduction of LER during transition from day to night provided high carbohydrate

accumulation at nighttime (Wiangsamut and Mendoza, 2008).

30

Munns et al. (2000) reported that sudden changes in humidity, light and salinity
induce sudden changes in leaf water status which significantly affected leaf elongation
though in a transient manner. Water relations are responsible for the sudden changes in
leaf elongation rate resulting from sudden changes in water stress. During long days of
water stress, effects of root signals predominates effects of water relations. Further, leaf
water status can limit leaf expansion rates during periods of high transpiration on a 24-h
basis (Munns et al., 2000).

Shoot water status can regulate leaf expansion during the light period, particularly
when a low soil water potential is coupled with a high evaporative demand. This
phenomenon is governed by the release of abscissic acid (ABA) as a chemical message
from the roots in dry soil that regulates in both light and darkness, although low leaf
water status could cause further reduction in growth (Ben Haj Saleh and Tardieu, 1997).
Rapid changes in humidity cause large transient changes in leaf elongation rate, attributed
to changes in the leaf water potential as function of humidity. After these changes, the
steady rate of elongation returned to the rate close to the original trend which means that
the steady leaf elongation rate was independent of leaf water status. The study revealed
that the growth rate at night did not gradually occur throughout the dark period. Most
likely, this means that hormones control leaf expansion in water-stressed plants during

the night (Munns et al., 2000).

31

Secondary factors

Less important secondary factors emerge in a number of different and sometimes
contradictory studies on phyllochron response to variation in
light, CO, level, irrigation, nitrogen availability, salinity, soil properties, planting depth,
planting time, and genotype. These abiotic factors often affect the phyllochron only after
a threshold value is reached. McMaster (2005) suggested further investigation on the

effects of abiotic factors and how it could be altered using management practices.

Plant density and aerobic condition. Higher plant densities and aerobic soil
conditions reduced the rate of leaf appearance in rice(Clerget and Bueno, 2013). The use
of the phyllochron interval for predicting earlier growth stages is reasonable because
growth stages prior to flag leaf appearance are not affected by water availability

(McMaster, 2005).

Sowing date, Phyllochron and inflection points are significantly affected by
sowing date in all varieties. Plants sown in August (IRRI, Philippines) are characterized
by shorter phyllochrons in the second and third phase than those sown in the month of
May (Clerget and Bueno, 2013). Planting dates within a year is a factor that causes
variation in the plastochron and phyllochron (Yin and Kropff, 1996).

Moreover, sowing time in the month of May yielded high average shoot and root
biomass at heading time. During this time, plants have longer duration of vegetative

phase thus producing more leaves and tillers per plant and leading to maximizing the

32

capture of solar radiation (Clerget and Bueno, 2013). Considering differences in
photoperiod in sowing dates, growers and extensionists are interested on the effect of
climate change scenarios on leaf development especially in the changes in emergence
date that is either within or outside the current recommended sowing period (Streck, et.

al, 2013).

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Preliminary Experiment

A preliminary experiment was conducted in the BG10 greenhouse at International
Rice Research Institute, Los Bafios, Laguna in April 15, 2013. IR 72 was used in both
manual and automatic leaf elongation measurements. The experiment aimed to test the
protocol for the measurement of leaf growth and do necessary adjustments to fine-tune

the methodology for subsequent conduct of experiments.

Twelve pots (Area = 0.71 m’) with two plants each were used in the preliminary
experiment. Leaf elongation was measured both manually and automatically. Sixteen
plants were used for manual measurements while the remaining 8 plants were used in
automatic leaf measurement. All measurements were done starting from leaf 8 of the
main tiller. Distance between consecutive collars was also measured starting from leaf

11.

34

Core Experiment

Time and Place of Study

The experiment was conducted in the BG-10 greenhouse (Appendix Figure 3) at
International Rice Research Institute, Los Bafios, Laguna from June to December 2013.
The first sowing and second sowing were done on June 6 and September 19, 2013,

respectively.

Experiments

Characterization of Leaf Growth of Contrasting Genotypes. Eleven contrasting
varieties was used,i.e. 2 early maturing, 3 intermediate, 2 late maturing, 2 tropical
japonica, and 2 hybrids (Table 1)as the treatments. Each treatment consists of | plant per
replication with 4 replications per treatment, arranged in Randomized Complete Block

Design (RCBD) (Table 2).

35

Table 1. Rice genotypes used in the characterization of leaf growth experiment.

GENOTYPES CROP DURATION CATEGORY
HONG ZUI ZHAO::IRGC 68090-1 esas Early, Indica
E 5168::IRGC 68021-1 eOA100 Early, Indica
NSIC Re 222 1OT 2g Medium, Indica
101-120 ;
PSB Re 18 Late, Indica
R?2 101-120 Medium, Indica
WAS 203-B-B-2-4-1::C1 121-140 Late, Indica
SAHELIKA::Cl eRe Late, Indica
MESTIZO 7 IO Tze Hybrid, Indica
105-120 ae.
MESTIZO 30 Hybrid, Indica
IR 780 1212140 Late, Japonica

AZUCENA ae Medium, Japonica


No}
ay

082 Ul

1os1

1-06089 DOUL:‘OVHZ

77 OU OISN

~1-@-E-A-€07 SVM 1NZ DNOH
tL Ul | EF 81 2Y aSd | Ze VNaonzv | 17 TOT | OL
-1-@---€07 SVM.
0€ OZILSAW | Zr 0€ OZLLSAN | TE ZL OZILSAN | 02 1-06089 ODUL::OVHZ | 6
INZ DNOH
VNaONZv | Ir VWNAONZV | 0€ 1O“T/6r 81 UN aSd | 8
--7-€-8-£07 SVM
1-06089 DDULOWHZ | Ob | 1-1Z089 DOU 8915 a | 67 ZZ UI | 81 L OZILSAN | Z
1NZ DNOH +
81 9U dSd | 6€ LOZLLSAN | 87 | 082 UI | ZT TO: WXITAHVS | 9
TO. VAITSHVS | 8€ 7 Ul | LZ 0€ OZILSA | 91 wu | $
777 9U OISN | LE 082 WI | 92 112089 OOUI-891S a | ST 0€ OZILSAN | P
L OZILSAW | 9€ 77 U OISN | SZ IO. WAITSHVS | $1 082 UI | €
TO=1 | S€ 1-06089 ODUI:OVHZ | 2 @Z 9U OISN | €T I-17Z089 OOUIEB9Ts J |Z
~b-7-G-8-€07 SVM 1NZ DNOH
112089 OOUE 8916 3 TO: VXITAHVS 81 9Y aSd | ZI VWNaonzv | T
> ALVOITdaa roa PRINTER ya] TALVOITATa T ALVOITdaa

LOd

‘yuoutadxe YIMOIS Jea] JO UONeZA}ORIeYO dy} UI pasn INo-AeT “7 9IQUL

37

Evaluation of Diurnal Leaf Growth of 4 Contrasting Genotypes. Four
contrasting varieties was used ,i.e. early maturing, intermediate, late maturing, and hybrid
(Table 3) laid out in Completely Randomized Design (CRD) with two replicates (Table

4). The linear variable displacement transducer (LVDT) was used in this experiment.

Table 3. Rice genotypes used in diurnal growth evaluation experiment.

CROP DURATION

GENOTYPE (days) CATEGORY
80-100

HONG ZUI ZHAO::IRGC 68090-1 Early, Indica
101-120

IR 72 Medium, Indica
121-140

SAHELIKA::C1 Late, Indica
101-120 ; ;

MESTIZO 7 Hybrid, Indica

Table 4.Lay-out used in diurnal growth evaluation experiment.

GENOTYPE

1 IR72
2 SAHELIKA::Cl
3 IR72

4 MEZTIZO 7
-

HONG ZUI ZHAO::IRGC 68090-1
a sno
SAHELIKA::C1

8 HONG ZUI ZHAO::IRGC 68090-1


38

Plant Management

Forty-four large pots (Area = 0.71 m7) filled with soil from irrigated lowland rice
field was used. Basal fertilizers were applied in each pot, i. . 3.6 g P as Solophos, 0.56 g
Muriate of Potash and 0.32 g ZnSO4 before flooding. Water level was maintained at
approximately 3 cm above the soil surface.

Three days before planting, seeds were soaked for 24 h and incubated at 30°C for
2 days. Three germinated seeds of each variety were planted in each pot and then thinned
at 10 days after sowing (DAS). Weeds were removed few days before sowing until little
or no weeds have emerged. Urea was applied at one, five and eight weeks after planting.
Pesticide (Actara) was applied at during the 10" week due to the observed insect pests

that were not controlled by home insect spray (Baygon).

Data Collection

Manual Characterization of Leaf Growth. The leaves of the main stem were
numbered according to their rank of appearance. Number of leaf rank was written upon

full expansion of the leaf of interest.

39

Daily Leaf Elongation. Leaf blade growth was measured by daily tagging the
newly developing leaf using a permanent marker. From leaves 3-7, the reference used
was the collar of the previous leaf (n-1; where n is the leaf being measured).Starting from
leaf 8, the reference used was n-2 because the collar of n-1 appears a day later than the
appearance of a new leaf, in some cases. The distance between two tags, which
corresponds to the leaf growth for the day, was measured using a ruler after one day
(Appendix Figure 2). The exact time of tagging a specific leaf was noted as the reference
for the rate of growth calculation. A leaf wastagged and measured when the tip had
visibly emerged from the whorl. Thisparameter was gathered from all leaves of the main

tiller. Measurements and tagging was done early in the morning, 7 days a week.

Distance between Consecutive Collars. The distance between two consecutive
collars was measured starting from leaf 9 at2 days interval. The data was used as
indication that the leaf n-2 can be used as the reference for measuring the distance of its
daily leaf elongation given that stem elongation starts at later vegetative stage of rice. For
medium maturing genotypes, generally, stem elongation starts to occur at leaf 11 even
when the leaves are fully expanded. To account for this parameter on all growth durations
of the contrasting genotypes, measurement was done starting from leaf 9. This means that
the collar distance of collar 9 was in reference to the collar of leaf 8, and so forth
(Appendix Figure 2). Measurement of specific collar was done until the senescence of the
reference collar. Moreover, the collar distance data was used for the determination of the

exact date when the stem elongation has occurred in each genotype. Since most of the

40

analyses were based onthermal time, temperature was taken into consideration. Prior to
the onset of stem elongation, thermal time was calculated using soil temperature data and

at its onset, when the collar distance exceeds 5 cm, air temperature was then used.

Automated Evaluation of Diurnal Leaf Growth of 4 Contrasting Genotypes.
Prior to installation of the LVDT, the equipment was calibrated in actual measurement in
mm from the mV data that was collected in the datalogger. Each unit of LVDT has its

corresponding calibration program for the transformation of mV data to mm.

Leaf Displacement (Automatic). Eight plants (2 plants per variety) were measured
automatically using the 8 units of LVDT (Chauvin Amoux, Paris, France). Leaves from
the main tiller were measured automatically according to the leaf rank. Leaf elongation
was measured every 15 min by transmitting the displacement of the rod (sensor) via a
pulley attached to it, which is carried by a thread attached to the leaf tip and to a 30 g
counterweight. A wooden clip was used to attach the thread to the leaf tip. At the onset of
stem elongation (i.e. appearance of leaf 9 for early maturing and leaf 12 for the others),
counterweight was removed as the fixed reference and the reference clip was then
transferred to leaf n-2 for the same reason as that of manual measurement. Measurements
began when the tip of the leaf appears above the whorl and lastedupon the appearance of
a new leaf. The displacement limit of the sensor is only up to 20 cm, hence the clip was

adjusted everyday, i. e. from the previous position of the clip to the lowest opened part of

41

the elongating leaf. A datalogger(CR1000, Campbell Scientific, Logan, UT, USA)

temporarily stored the data. Actual LVDT setup was shown in Appendix Figure 4.

Climatic Data. Climatic data was measured in the whole duration of the
experiment. Soil temperature was constantly monitored using three thermocouples
(PyroControle, Vaulx en Velin, France) in three pots chosen randomly and installed at 2-
cm depth. Also, solar radiation (Pyranometer LI-200, Li-Cor, Lincoln, NE, USA), air
temperature and relative humidity at 2m (Sensor HMP 45C, Vaisala, Helsinki,
Finland)were continuously measured and the data were stored in a datalogger (CR10X,

Campbell Scientific, Logan, UT, USA).
Data Analysis
Manual Characterization of Leaf Growth of 11 Genotypes

Date of Leaf Appearance. The date of leaf appearance was extracted from the
dataset of daily leaf elongation. The date of leaf tip appearance corresponds to the first
date of measurement of leaf elongation.

Kinetics of Leaf Appearance. The date of leaf appearance was analyzed usingto

SAS version 9.2 where the parameters were and their confidence intervals were estimated

using Proc NLIN. Dynamics of leaf development were fitted to either bilinear or trilinear

42

segmented model. The observed leaf number (LN) from the leaf appearance data was
regressed against the elapsed thermal time using the equations of bilinear or trilinear, as
shown below.
Bilinear: LN = a + (b, x min(TT,TC,)) + (bz x min(T, — TC,,max(0,TT — TC;)))
Trilinear:LN = a + (b; x min(TT,TC,)) + (b2 x min(T, — TC;,max(0,TT — TC,)))
+ (b3 x min(T, — TCz,max(0,TT — TC2)))
Where,
a = number of leaves at emergence
b,, bz, bs = initial, secondary and tertiary rates of development
T = thermal time when the last leaf appeared

TC,, TC,= thermal time when the development rate changed

The kinetics of leaf appearance was further analyzed based on the methods done

by Clerget and Bueno (2012).

Leaf Elongation Rate. Leaf elongation rate was computed as LER = (LE2 -
LEi)/((XT2 — LT,) where: LER = leaf elongation rate (mm °Cd"'); LEI = ieaf
elongation at a given time 1 (mm); LE2 = leaf elongation at a given time 2 (mm).
(ZT, — XT,= difference between sums of temperatures during the time eiapsed between
the two successive tagging. The average of day LERs from the first day of leaf
appearance until the last day of leaf elongation was caiculaied in millimeter per hour (mm

°C"),

43

Leaf Elongation Rate on the Second Day. The leaf elongation rates on the second
day of measurement were extracted from the dataset. The rate of growth during the
second day corresponds to the initial and/or maximum raie of elongation of each leaf
because during the first day, the exact time of appearance was not known hence there was
no definite interval of elongation. Since LER decreased with time, the succeeding rates
were not used, and this LER on the second day further reported as the LER of each

successive leaves.

Leaf Rank with Maximum LER. The rates on the second day were subjected to
curve fitting using the software Table Curve 2D version 5.01 and generated a model that
best represents the maximum LER of all genotypes. The formula generated was: y = a +
bx? + cx*, where x = leaf ; y = maximum LER. The software aiso generated a/ b/c
unique for each genotype. Maximum LER with specific leaf number for each genotype

was obtained from the derivation of the formula.

Evaluation of Diurnal Leaf Growth of 4 Contrasting Genotypes

Leaf elongation rate (LER) per Hour. The 24-h elongation data generated by the
LVDT on ihe duration of the two sowing dates were computed as elongation which is in
millimeter per day (mm/d) using the formula: LER = (LE2 - LE1)*2/(t, — t,), where:
LER = leaf elongation rate (mm h"'); LE] = leaf elongation at a given time 1 (mm); LEZ

= leaf elongation at a given time 2 (mm);t2 = tl + 15. Four LER values were calculated

44

and averaged per hour since measurements were logged every 15 minutes. The multiplier
‘2’ was used in the LVDT setup because the elongation of the leaf is carried by the two
threads on each side of the pulley. The global average of hourly LERs for all ieaves from

the first day until last day of recordwas calculated and in millimeter per hour (mm h").

Leaf elongation rate (LER) per Degree-day. Leaf elongation rate per thermal time
elapsed was computed as LER = (LE2 - LEi)*2/(2T — YT,), where: LER = leaf
elongation rate (mm °Cd"'); LEI = leaf elongation at a given time 1 (mm); LE2 = leaf
elongation at a given time 2 (mm). 27, —Y/T,= difference between sums of
temperatures during the time elapsed between the two successive recordings.The global
average of hourly LERs for all leaves from the first day until last day of record and was
calculated in millimeter degree-day (mm °Cd").

Correlation of LER and Citmate Parameters. The effect of ciimate parameters on
the diurnal leaf growth evolution of the four genotypes was correlated using SAS version

9.2

45

Climate Data

Daily total global radiation and daily averages of air temperature, soil temperature
and relative humidity for the two sowing dates were computed and plotied across the crop
duration. Thermal time was calculated to have an estimate of the physiologically active
temperature of the day. The sum of daily active temperatures was obiained to determine

the accumulated thermal time from emergence.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

Preliminary Experiment

Leaf Appearance Rate

Data collection in the preliminary experiment started at leaf 8 until flag leaf of the
main stem. Generally, phyllochron increased with time. Figure 5 shows the increasing
leaf number of IR 72 with one inflection point at leaf 10 showing bilinear trend. Leaf
appearance rate has greater slope at early vegetative stage than at the late vegetative

stage.

Leaf Number

DAS

Figure 5.Leaf appearance rate of IR 72 across growing days. Date of appearance of
leaves was the first date of measurement of LER extracted from the dataset.
Data was obtained from the average of plants in 12 pots.

47

Leaf Elongation Rate

Manual measurement was done in sixteen plants, starting trom leaf 9, by tagging
the newly developing leaf using a permanent marker. The new leaf was marked at the
base with a specific reference collar. Initially, the reference point of tagging was the leaf
previous (n-1) to the leaf being measured (n) knowing that the appearance of a new leaf
and the collar of the previous leaf occur simultaneously. In the contrary, it was observed
that in some plants, the collar of n-1 appears a day later than the appearance of a new leaf
in the more advanced leaf stage of the plant hence the reference n-1 was used from leaves
3-7 and was shifted to leaf n-2 starting from leaf 8. Leaf elongation rate increased from

leaf 8 and reached its maximum at leaf 10-11 then gradually decreased (Figure 6).

6 es ae
Xa

5 . Shy
3 A
Sa
é
£ 1
& “S
83 *
FS

2 XN

8 9 10 a 12 13 14 15 16

Leaf Number

Figure 6.Maximum leaf elongation rate of IR 72 (mm/°Cd). The values were the
average maximum LER per pot from leaf 8 - 16. Thermal time (°Cd) was
computed using the soil temperature in the randomly placed thermocouples.

48

Collar Distance

The distance between two consecutive collars was measured starting from leaf 11
at 2 days interval (Figure 7). Initially, this was done to check the occurrence of stem
elongation in leaf n-1 while measuring leaf n with collar of leaf n-2 as the reference.
Later on, it was discovered that the data can be used to determine the onset of stem
elongation in each genotype. The exact date of onset of stem elongation indicates that the
temperature to be used for the computation of thermal time will be coming from the air

temperature, instead of soil temperature.

80
70
= 60
E °
= so Leaf11
FS *—Leaf12
8 40
2 = o « . ry
3 = Leaf 13
*° a ™ Leaf14
°
8) 20) eames
me ~ Leaf1s
=~ Leaf 16
0

35 37 39 42 43 46 49 51 53 S6 58

DAS

Figure 7.Collar distance of the last 6 leaves of IR 72 grown in April 2013.This was
gathered from the average of collar distances of plants in the 12 pots. The
distance between the collar of interest and the collar of its predecessor was
measured in 2-d interval. Measurements were done upon the appearance of the
collar of interest until the senescence of its reference collar.

49

Automatic Leaf Elongation Measurement (LVDT)

The leaf elongation rate (Figure 8) per thermal time was computed per leaf.
Leaves i0, 12 and 15 were used io compare the irend in LER/°Cd across leaf rank.
Duration of growth of leaf 11 was shorter than that of leaf 12 and 15. Similar with the
results of the manual LER, auiomatic measurement of LER showed that the growth of
specific leaf decreases with time. Furthermore, leaf elongation expressed in thermal time
prominently showed its response io changes in daytime. The diumai ieaf growth
evolution followed a regular pattern which was high during the night and low during the
day. The drop of LER observed everyday ai 8:30 am therefore means that leaf growth

declines early in the morning after sunrise and further decreases during the day.

Conclusion

Results of the preliminary experiment were in agreement with other published
studies hence, the protocol can be used for the core experiment involving eleven
contrasting genotypes. Observations throughout the duration of the experiment were used

to adjust and fine-tune the protocol so that it couid fit the core experiment.

50

——r

4

LER (mm/°Cd)
Ornweuavood

08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30
AM PM AM PM AM PM AM PM AM PM AM PM AM PM

Time of day

LER (mm/°Cd)
OHNUYaUareEed

08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30
AM PM AM PM AM PM AM PM AM PM AM PM AM PM

Time of day

LER (mm/°Cd)
orNUauarvwvd

1,
ht
With Maw

08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30 08:30
AM PM AM PM AM PM AM PM AM PM AM PM AM PM

Time of day

Figure 8. Diurnal Leaf elongation rate of leaves 10 (A), 12 (B) and 15 (C) of IR 72
(mm/°Cd) measured in the LVDT. Leaf displacement was recorded in 15-min
interval. Thermal time (°Cd) was computed using the soil temperature in the
randomly placed thermocouples.

51

Core Experiment

Climate Data

The conditions in which the plants were exposed for the two sowing dates were
logged for 24 hours throughout the whole duration of the experiment. Table 5 shows the
average daily values of soil and air temperatures, relative humidity and global radiation in
June and September 2013 sowing. Global radiation values were gathered during day
period because of ils zero values during the night period. Data show that global radiation,
soil and air temperatures were lower in the second sowing (September) while the relative
humidity did not differ. However, the differences between sowing dates are smail apart

for GR where day length is related.

Table 5. Average daily values of climate parameters during the two sowing dates.

PARAMETERS —eEeaeRRR—EE eer ere
June September
Night Day Mean Night Day Mean

Soil Temperature (°C) 28.99 30.54 30 26.65 30.92 28.78
Air Temperature (°C) 26.92 31.22 29.16 26.21 30.26 28.08
Relative Humidity (%) 80.01 65,28 72.5 78.98 65.3 72.55
Total Global Radiation

(MJm?) 5.34 3.93

Temperature of both air and soil was crucial in the computation of thermal time.
Thermal time (SumT) was pertains to the cumulative difference of average temperature

per day and the base temperature for rice (11°C). The minimum temperature for leaf

52

growth varied with the position of the shoot hence temperature effects are not equivalent
during the vegetative growth (Itoh and Sano, 2006). During the early stage of the plant,
soil temperature was used but ai the onsei of stem elongation, temperature used for ihe
computation was shifted to air temperature. Each genotype had its corresponding date of
onset of stem elongation (Appendix Tabie 5) based from the collar distance data shown in

Appendix Tables 6 and 7.

Daily values of climatic parameters, in days after sowing (DAS), were shown in
Figures 9 — 12. Upon comparison of the highest and the lowest values of each parameter
for ihe first sowing, it was deduced that the lowest vaiues of ioiai giobai radiation, soii
and air temperature and the highest relative humidity were observed on the same day. On
the other hand, the day with highest global radiation coincided only with that of highest
soil temperature. The days with highest and lowest values of air temperature and relative
humidity inversely coincided with each other. There was no absoiute coincidence of days
with highest and lowest observed values in the second sowing. However, the days with
lowest relative humidity and highest air and soil temperatures were relatively near the
day with the highest observed global radiation. Hence, the climate parameters, in one way

or another, affeci each other.

Monitoring of temperature changes is important because leaf elongation is driven
by meristem temperature especially in favorable conditions (Lafarge and Tardieu, 2001).
Hodges (1991) as cited by Yin et. al (1995) suggested that temperature primary affects

crop development and can be modified by other factors such as photoperiod. Moreover,

53

Ellis et al (1993) cited that the optimum temperature for leaf appearance rate of indica
cultivars may be cooler than 30°C. However, Bade et. al (1985) reported that the
optimum temperaiure for growth of tropical grasses ranges from 30 — 35°C during the
day and 25 - 30°C during the night. This can relate to the observed maximal
photosynthetic rate of rice at 30 — 35°C (Nagai and Makino, 2009). However, difference
in night and day temperature does not affect leaf development (Yin and Kropff, 1995)
and leaf growih at a given temperature will not be affected by its short exposure to low or
high temperature each day (Parent, 2010). Hence, expressing leaf elongation and
appearance in thermal units gives temperature-independent results (Lafarge and Tardieu,

2001).

54

35
33
3 t
2
2 +
o
e June
&
je = Sept
<

23
0 10 20 30 40 SO 60 70 80 90

Das

Figure 9.Average air temperature during the experimental period covering two sowing
dates.

35
33
31
29

ae a June

27 “ \ ) |Get Ao PB | Sept

Soil Temperature (°C)

25

23
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90

DAS

Figure 10.Average soil temperature during the experimental period covering two sowing
dates.

90

June

Sept

Relative Humidity (%)

60

55

50
0 10 20 30 40 5SO 60 70 80 90

DAS

Figure 11.Average relative humidity during the experimental period covering two
sowing dates.

June

=~ Sept

Global Radiation (MJ/sq.m)
w

DAS

Figure 12.Totalglobal radiation during the experimental period covering two sowing
dates.

55

56

Characterization of leaf growth of 11 genotypes

Leaf Appearance Rate. The genotypes followed a relationship of leaf appearance
with respect to thermal time starting from leaf 3 until the appearance of flag leaf. Figure
13shows the leaf appearance rate of all genotypes in June and September sowing. The
specific time of appearance of each leaf and the corresponding standard errors and
confidence intervals of leaf appearance in all the leaves of each genotype were shown in
Appendix Tables 1 - 2.Phyllochron increased with thermal time as observed in all
genotypes in the two sowing dates although the second sowing has shorter growth
duration because the varieties are photoperiod sensitive. However, the leaf appearance
rates of the genotypes are consistent with the two sowing dates with visually curvilinear
portion at the middle of the curve. There was a slight difference in leaf appearance.
between the two sowing dates and that can be related to day length. It was reviewed that
temperature is the primary factor the affect leaf appearance hence rate calculations were
expressed in thermal time to remove the temperature factor. Although all climatic
parameters are relatively similar, the photoperiod is not the same where June sowing has
long day period while September has short-day period. Also, there were no observed
morphological differences in each genotype between the two sowing dates and that was
expected because the seeds were obtained from IRRI gene bank. The differences in the
final leaf number and final thermal time of the genotypes were shown in Table 6.

The leaf appearance of genotypes in the two sets of sowing were combined and

grouped according to type and duration with their corresponding confidence intervals, as

57

shown in Figures 14 - 18, i.e. Figure 14 showing two hybrid varieties, Mestizo 30 and
Mestizo 7; Figure 15 for two tropical japonicas — Azucena and IR 780; Figure 16
showing two early maturing genotypes — Hong Zui Zhao and E 5168; Figure 18 for three
medium and common open-pollinated varieties in the Philippines — IR 72, NSIC Re 222
and PSB Rc 18; and Figure 17 for Sahelika and Was 203 which are late-maturing
varieties. Starting with leaf 3 until the flag leaf, graphs show relationship that generally
visually looks like curvilinear with thermal time in genotypes in the two sowing dates.
Plants grown in September 2013 sowing date have 1 — 3 leaves less than the final leaf

numbers of the June 2013 sowing.

Table 6.Final leaf number and thermal time of the genotypes in the two sowing dates.

June 2013 September 2013

Genotype

Leaf No. SumT Leaf No. SumT
Azucena 18 1229.33 16 930.10
E 5168::IRGC 68021-1 li 579.84
HONG ZUI ZHAQ::IRGC 68090-1 12 649.39 11 569.95
IR 72 17 1130.33 15 950.10
IR 780 17 1385.61 16 1184.01
Mestizo 30 16 1009.59 14 856.85
Mestizo 7 18 1160.38 16 956.37
NSIC Re 222 19 1257.00 17 1033.82
PSB Re 18 19 1570.28 16 1100.84
SAHELIKA::C1 21 1402.58 18 1108.83

WAS 203-B-B-2-4-1::C1 18 1293.45 17 1144.92


58

Mestizo 30
=—IR72
15 fs R781

Mestizo7

Leaf Rank
4

aa Azucena
Hong Zui Zhao
NSIC Re 222
PSB RC18
Sahelika
Was 203
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800

SumT (°Cd)

Mestizo 30
20
*—IR72
IR 780
Mestizo7

* =~ Azucena

Leaf Rank

*— Hong Zui Zhao
NSIC Re 222
PSB Rc18
Sahelika
Was 203

0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 tie

SumtT (°Cd)

Figure 13.Leaf appearance rate across thermal time of the contrasting rice genotypes
grown in June (A) and September (B) sowing. Date of appearance of leaves
was the first date of measurement of LER extracted from the dataset. Data was
obtained from the average of plants in 4 plants per genotype. Thermal time
(°Cd) was computed using the soil temperature and air temperature.

59

On the other hand, compared with June 2013 sowing, thermal time for leaves to
appear in the second sowing is longer in most genotypes except for IR 780, IR 72 and
Hong Zui Zhao. There was no E 5168 (early-maturing) planted in the first sowing
because there was an error in the actual genotype planted. In the second sowing, on the

other hand, all 11 genotypes were present.

Similar with the results, Yin and Kropff (1995) reported that there was a small
variation in leaf number of rice when it was exposed to consiani temperature treatments
and normal diurnally fluctuating temperatures. Furthermore, when flowering was delayed
by the effect of diurnally fluctuating temperature, the final main-siem leaf number was
increased (Yin and Kropff, 1995). Hence, longer duration in June sowing increased the

finai ieaf number of all the test genotypes.

Mestizo 30 Mestizo7

Figure 14.Leaf appearance rate of hybrids sown in June and September 2013 sowing.

Azucena IR780

sumt (a) Sumt (mm/"ca)

Figure 15.Leaf appearance rate of tropical japonicas sown in June and September 2013
sowing.

60

Hong Zui Zhao £5168

Leaf Rank

sum ("ca Sum (168)

Figure 16.Leaf appearance rate of early maturing indicas sown in June and September
2013 sowing.

Sahelika Was 203

Figure 17.Leaf appearance rate of late maturing indicas sown in June and September
2013 sowing.

61

62

NSICRe 222 PSBRC18

IR 72

Figure 18. Leaf appearance rate of medium maturing indicas sown in June and
September 2013 sowing.

To test for the kinetics of leaf appearance, modeling was done. Each genotype
was analyzed on its fitting in broken-linear model. Figure 19 shows the kinetics of leaf
appearance of NSIC Re 222 in the two sowing dates. NSIC Re 222 was used as an
example because this genotype has an intermediate growth duration. A trilinear model
better explained the trend of the leaf appearance in June sowing (Figure 19A) and
September (Figure 19B). The trilinear kinetics was especially prominent in long duration
varieties. Since the first 3 to 4 leaves are pre-existing in the embryo, they appeared faster

than the succeeding leaves hence creating an inflection point leading to trilinear kinetics.

63

Manual inspection of the points in Figure 19 revealed that there were points
which were below the model line around the second inflection point. To further analyze
its fit to the model, the distribution of residues were determined. Residues are values
above or below the predicted values of the model around the inflection point i.e.
difference between observed and predicted values. Normally, a better fitted data have
residues that are randomly distributed above or below the predicted values of the model.
Analysis of the residues revealed that the distribution of residues around the inflection
points have a structure and has no random distribution (Figure 20).The occurrence of the
residual structure implied that there were values that were grouped or clumped above and
below the predicted values set by the model. Hence, quadrilinear kinetics of leaf
appearance was assumed. Around the second inflection point occurring in leaves 11 - 14,
residuals were all found below the predicted value and this corresponds to the visually
curvilinear portion of the leaf appearance ploi. The patiern was also observed in the
second sowing but was less pronounced. To test the fitting of the residual values near the
second inflection point in the trilinear model, values from the start until the first
inflection point, represented by the pre-existing leaves (3 and 4), were deleted knowing
that the appearance raie of the early leaves is different from the others. In this way,
trilinear model can siill be used. The suppressed dataset was again tested if fitted in a
trilinear model. Results showed that a trilinear kinetics of leaf appearance was still
observed in NSIC Rc 222 in June sowing upon suppression of the first 4 leaves as shown
in Figure 21. This means that the shift in the leaf appearance rate is not abrupi but

gradual. The gradual shift in the rate caused the observed values to be systematically

64

below from the predicted values near the inflection point on the first run. This implies
that the visually curvilinear portion was the transition period between two linear portions
of the leaf appearance piot. In the June sowing, the transition period started at leaf 8 to 11
and ended at leaf 11 to 16. On the other hand, leaf 8 to 11 started the transition period in
September sowing and ended ai leaf 10 to 14. These ieaf ranges represent each genotype
depending on the duration, e.g. transition period of early genotype started at leaf 8 and
ended at leaf 10.The range represents all ihe genotypes since each of them had specific

point of start and end of the transition period.

Representative genotypes showing different patterns of kinetics of leaf
appearance from sowing | to sowing 2 were shown in Figure 22 (trilinear — bilinear) with
Was 203 and Figure 23 (bilinear — bilinear) with IR 72. Given that Was 203 is a iate
maturing genotype; its sensitivity to photoperiod was observed by its shift in its kinetics
of leaf appearance from irilinear io bilinear from first to second sowing. On the other
hand, IR 72, a medium maturing genotype, showed consistent kinetics of leaf appearance
in the two sowing dates. The kinetics of ieaf appearance of other remaining genotypes

with corresponding slopes was shown in Appendix Figure 5a to h.

LeafRank

Figure

02
01

0.1

Average Residue

0.2
03

Figure

65

A B
= 20
as 18
16 «
z2R
= ‘
= 10 .
, £8
* 6 "
: ee
” Fd
i 0
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 © 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400
Sum ("Cd) Sum (°Cd)

19. General linear model of NSIC Rc 222 leaf appearance rate using the complete
data of June (A) and September (B)sowing.

04

=f eel ieee |
8 oye | 2. | 5 Th a
x
3
Leaf Rank LeafRank

20.Residuals of NSIC Re 222 leaf appearance modeling the June (left) and
September 2013 (right) sowing. Random distribution of residues is expected
as a proof that the model fits well data.

Pi A 20

é ot 18

F 14

x “ 2 rar)

840 P aoe

é p 2 10
© 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 0 200

SumT ("Cd)

400 600 800 1000 1200

sumt (°Ca)

1400

Figure 21. General linear model of NSIC Rc 222 leaf appearance rate using probably
complete data set of June (A) and September (B) sowing.

20 i 20
18 - 18
16 mae 16
14 2" 63=0.0078 14
Par a = 12
£ 10 peices = 10
bay ea 38
e renee G ra!
4 a
2¢ 2«
0 0
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 0 200
Sum ("Cd)

400 600 800 1000 1200

sumT ("Ca)

Figure 22.General linear model of Was 203 leaf appearance rate using probably
complete data set of June (A) and September (B) sowing.

A
20 20
18 in 18
16 . 16
14 . 14
Y ~*~ b2=0.0089 fal
z 2 a : 2
e «
& 10 e R10
28 ” eee)
. b1=0.0165
6 . 6 <
4 a 4 .
27 ie ae
0 0
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 0 200
SumT (°C)

- b2= 0.0098

b1=0.0174

400 600 800 1000 1200
SumT (*Cd)

1400

1400

Figure 23.General linear model of IR 72 leaf appearance rate using probably complete

data set of June (A) and September (B) sowing.

66

67

Removal of data corresponding to early leaves until the first inflection point was
based on the fact that the first two leaves have the highest leaf appearance rate because
the seedlings still has ample resources for leaf development coming from the cotyledon
(Streck et al., 2008). Moreover, the embryo has initially three developed leaves wherein
the 4"is already initiated, thus the growth is expected to be faster at early stage compared

to the succeeding leaves (Nemoto et al., 1995 as cited by Clerget and Bueno, 2013).

The kinetics of leaf appearance for the two sets of sowing dates was summarized
in Table7. The information was deduced from the modeling of the data devoid of leaves 3
and 4. The table shows that the leaf appearance of genotypes planted in sowing i (June
2013) better fitted in trilinear model except for IR 72. On the other hand, a bilinear
kinetics was observed in ihe leaf appearance of some genotypes planted in sowing
September. These genotypes include Azucena, IR 72, Mestizo 30, Mestizo 7 and Was
203. Although differences in the kinetics of ieaf appearance were observed between the
two sowing dates, no trend or pattern was observed in the dynamics of leaf appearance in
relation to the category where the genotypes beiong. Genotypes which shifted from
trilinear to bilinear were Azucena, Mestizo 30, Mestizo 7 and Was 203, and this could be
associated with their photoperiod sensitivity. Bilinear kinetics means that eariy and
middle leaves appeared faster and at the same rate. Faster leaf appearance rate means that
the plant took shorter time to reach its reproduciive stage resulting to lesser final leaf
number hence shorter crop duration. The short development phase of plant implies that
accumulation of photosynthaies in the culm could poientially be reduced. The reserved

assimilates in the culm compensates the increasing respiration during grain filling stage

68

hence reduction of stored carbohydrates in the culm due to shortened crop growth
duration may result to reduction of grain growth and finally yield (Streck, et. al, 2013).
Photoperiod sensitivity of genotypes need to be considered because a stable duration
under variable daylengths and temperatures is a trait that a variety shoud have to

maximize the croppings per year (Sie, et. al, 1998).

Clerget and Bueno (2012) reported that the phyllochrons and inflection points of
leaf appearance in aerobic rice were significantly affected by sowing date. They also
found that August sowing had shorter phyllochrons in the second and third phase with
inflection points occurring earlier than in May sowing. Similar study on sorghum
(Clerget et. al, 2008) found that phyllochron was affected by sowing date with cited
correlations that were found with temperature, daylength, thermo-photoperiodic index,
the rate of change of daylength at emergence and intensity of radiation. Conversely, Yin
and Kropff (1995) suggested that ieaf appearance rate is not greatly affected by
photoperiod and thus this information can be used to predict flowering dates in rice
provided thai the final main-stem leaf number is known. Studies in sorghum, maize and
millet showed a linear relationship of leaf initiation with thermal time and were not
affected by differences in photoperiod (Lafarge and Tardieu, 2001). Similariy, a iinear

response between leaf emergence and thermal time was reported by Eixarch et.al (2013).

69

Table 7. Summary of kinetics of leaf appearance of the genotypes for the two sowing dates.

GENOTYPE CATEGORY San spam
Azuccna Medium, Japonica trilinear bilinear
E 5168::IRGC 68021-1 Early, Indica trilinear
HONG ZUI ZHAO::iRGC 68090-i Eariy, Indica trilinear trilinear
IR 72 Medium, Indica bilinear bilinear
IR 780 Late, Japonica trilinear trilinear
Mestizo 30 Hybrid, indica trilinear bilinear
Mestizo 7 Hybrid, Indica trilinear bilinear
NSIC Re 222 Medium, Indica trilinear trilinear
PSB Rc 18 Medium, Indica trilinear trilinear
SAHELIKA::C1 Late, Indica trilinear trilinear
WAS 203-B-B-2-4-1::C1 Late, Indica trilinear bilinear

Thus, the discovery of the transition period between two linear portions of the leaf

appearance curve resulted to trilinear ki ven after the suppression of the first four
leaves. Similar with results was reported by Clerget and Bueno (2012) showing a trilinear
kinetics in aerobic rice and that the appearance raie of first five leaves was higher than
next leaves. The kinetics of leaf appearance suggests that the phyllochron changes
depending on the siage of the plant. Clergei et al (2008) cited that phyliochron in rice was

changed after panicle initiation and hence related to the onset of stem elongation.

70

Leaf Elongation Rate. Daily manual elongation measurement of leaves from the
main tiller starting from leaf 3 until flag leaf was done in all genotypes planted in the two
sowing dates (June and September 2013). Maximum LER of all genotvpes together were
shown in Figure 24. Graph shows that LER increases linearly with leaf until reaching the
neak at leaf 8 — 14 denending on the duration of the genotvne. and then it eraduallv
decreases hence it fits in a bell-shaped curve. This behavior of LER was not prominent in

early maturino varieties such ac Hano 7ni Zhan and F S168 hut is hiohly nraminent in

long duration genotypes.

‘The behaviors of maximum LUR per leat of each genotype in the two sowing
dates were shown in Figures 25 - 29. The genotypes are grouped based on the category of
crop type and duration, i.e. hybrids (Figure 25), tropical japonicas (Figure 26), early-
maturing (Figure 27), intermediate-maturing (Figure 28) and late-maturing varieties
(Figure 29). LER did not differ between two sowing dates although the growth duration
of genotypes was shorter in September than in June sowing. Standard errors and
confidence intervals of leaf elongation in all the leaves of each genotype were shown in

Appendix Tables 3 - 4

71

A
10
8 ;
Mestizo 30
q Y My : *—IR72
= 6 ¥ * 1R 780
eo o Mestizo 7
c 7
‘3 Azucena
GS 4 if ry
= 8 © Hong Zui Zhao
3 ; NSICRe 22
2 PSBRC18
; Sahelika
Was 203
aes eh nee bere eae Ob es bem Cea rig £)
Leaf Rank
B
10
9
8 Mestizo 30
—1R72
7 i AR
B j . 760
oe 1 \p y \% Mestizo7
PS “
Es) /RrY Azucena
£
& 4 * Hong Zui Zhao
ae NSICRe 222
¥ PSBRc222
2
Sahelika
1 Was 203
0 £5168

RUS 7 29. Ae 93 = 5447" 2192 gate g 23

Leaf Rank

Figure 24.Leaf elongation rate (mm/°Cd) of contrasting rice genotypes sown in June (A)
and September (B). The points correspond to the initial and/or maximal LER
which occurred on the second day of measurement. This was the average
maximum LER of four plants per genotype across leaf rank.

72

The dataset was subjected to curve fitting using the software Table Curve 2D
version 5.01 and generated a model that best represents the maximum LER of all
genotypes. The formula generated was: y= a+ bx? + cx*, where x = leaf: y =
maximum LER. The software also generated a/b constants unique for each genotype.
Maximum LER with specific leaf number for each genotype was obtained from the
derivation of the formula (Table 8). The two sowing dates followed a similar trend of
increasing LER with thermal, and then decreases. Table 9 shows that maximum LER
decreased in the September sowing by Imm/°Cd when compared with the June 2013
sowing. The corresponding leaves where the maximum LER were observed however did
not differ between two sowing dates. Two tropical japonicas, Azucena and IR 780 have
the highest and lowest observed maximum LER, respectively in both sowing dates.
Azucena had maximum LER of 8.17 mm/°Cd in June and 7.34 mm/°Cd in September
2013 sowing. IR 780, on the other hand had max LER of 5.49 and 4.67 mm/°Cd in June

and September 2013 sowing, respectively.

Mestizo 30 Mestizo 7

LER (mm/"Cd)
LER (mm/°ca)

tank LeatRank

Figure 25.Leaf elongation rate of hybrid indicas sown in June and September 2013
sowing.

73

Azucena IR 780

Leaf Rank

Figure 26.Leaf elongation rate of tropical japonicas sown in June and September 2013
sowing.

Hong Zui Zhao £5168

(mm/°C4)

Leaf Rank
LeatRank

Figure 27.Leaf elongation rate of early maturing indicas sown in June and September
2013 sowing.

Sahelika Was 203

5
E

Leaf Rank
eatRank

Figure 28.Leaf elongation rate of late maturing indicas sown in June and September
2013 sowing.

NSIC Re 222

PSBRc18
3 Bi Saas K
FS i = {
i PN bs AT,
2 IR72
n
10
5 ¢ fa
g7 ALY
Es ] ity,
gS iA i i. June
4 yl WI + sept.
yf 'l]
1
°
3s son Bos 7 2 2
Leaf Rank

Figure 29.Leaf elongation rate of late maturing indicas sown in June and September
2013 sowing.

74

75

Table 8. Maximum LER and the corresponding leaf of each genotype for the two sowing
dates.

JUNE SEPTEMBER
GENOTYPE LER LER
Leaf _ (mm/°Cd Leaf mm/°Cd
Azucena 13.00 8.17 12.08 7.34
E 5168::IRGC 68021-1 9.26 4.63
HONG ZUI ZHAO::IRGC 68090-1 9.59 7.20 8.53 6.22
IR 72 11.78 6.37 11.03 5.22
IR 780 11.85 5.49 12.10 4.67
Mestizo 30 11.60 6.84 10.69 5.56
Mestizo 7 11.57 6.23 11.83 5.57
NSIC Re 222 13.43 6.4 12.57 5.37
PSB Re 18 11.29 6.56 11.34 5.24
SAHELIKA::C1 13.83 6.77 12.48 5.60
WAS 203-B-B-2-4-1::C1 12.07 6.16 12.09 5.01

6.63 11.27 3.49

AVERAGE

Computations of leaf elongation rate were expressed in thermal time (mm/Cd).
Maximum ieaf eiongaiion in rice, regardiess of the type and crop duration foliowed a
bell-shaped curve in both sowing dates across leaf rank. This means that after reaching
the maximum, leaf growth decreases as leaf number further increases. Similar with
wheat, the decrease in the efficiency of leaf growth was associated with high demand for
nuirienis (ieaf competition) during tiller emergence hence a decline in leaf protein
concentration (Kemp, 1980a as cited by Hu, et. al., 2000). Moreover, leaf elongation
phases, exponential and linear, and end of blade elongation in all leaves were found to

occur in a regular coordinated manner in sorghum (Lafarge and Tardieu, 2001).

Leaf elongation is the cumulative effect of cell elongation (Durand et. al, 1999).

During the early stage of leaf development, there is a coordinated cell division and

76

elongation hence rendering a relatively constant mean length or growth. The primordium
at this stage is mainly composed of division zone which allows the first occurrence of
exponential phase of elongation. Then, elongation zone will predominate leading to more

rapid cell elongation than cell division leading to abrupt elongation rate. Thirdly, cells

telatively stable. Lastly, the regression in the growth zone leads to decline in leaf
elongation (Fournier, et. al, 2005). The onset of decline in leaf blade area is at floral
initiation which takes place 3 — 4 phyllochrons before the appearance of flagleaf (Tivet,

et. al, 2001).

The plants were subjected to naturally fluctuating soil and air temperatures
(Figures 9 and 10) with the lowest and highest average observed value of 25 and 34°C,
respectively hence the values are within the optimum value of growth for tropical grasses

ings are lower or

teported by Bade, et. al (1985). In any instance
higher than the optimum for some minutes or hours each day, high growth rate can still
be maintained. This was supported by the study of Parent, et. al (2010) which showed
that enzyme activities were not affected by temperature ranging from 5 - 40°C probably

due to the stabilizing effects of chaperones or activation enzymes.

77

Synchronism of Leaf Appearance and Leaf Elongation Rates. A trilinear

kinetics of leaf appearance was generally observed in the genotypes. Based from the leaf

appearance curve represented by the visually curvilinear part of the curve. Analysis of

maximum leaf elongation rate (LER) also led to identification of specific leaf where the

maximum point was observed per genotype.

The synchronism of the leaves from the two curves of two sowing dates was
shown in Figure 30. Leaves with maximum LER were plotted against the leaves where
the second inflection in leaf appearance was observed. Maximum LER was observed near
the occurrence of the inflection point. The second inflection point occurred at the
appearance of leaf 9 to 14 in June while maximum LER was observed at leaf 9 to 14. In
the September sowing, the second inflection point occurred at leaf 8 to 12 while
maximum LER was observed in leaf and 8 to 13.Hence, LER started to gradually
decrease at almost the same moment of inflection of leaf appearance that is within the
transition period. Thus the changes of the rates of leaf appearance and leaf blade growth
were not instantaneous but on the contrary gradual, affecting some 4 successive leaves.
Hence, the gradual shift in leaf appearance characterized by the transition period resulted

to gradual decrease in LER across leaf rank.

The inter-collar distance for each genotype in the two sowing dates (Appendix

Tables 6 and 7) increased rapidly at 3 to 4 leaves prior to the appearance of flag leaf and

a

is associated with rapid internode elongation as observed in many studies. This period of

78

rapid internode elongation coincided with the stable leaf appearance rate that is the
second linear portion of the curve. Analysis of the leaf where maximum LER was
observed and the leaf rank where rapid internode elongation (more or less 50 mm collar
distance) started showed distinct leaf number intervals. For early maturing genotypes,
maximum LER and rapid internode elongation coincided. Rapid stem elongation of
medium and late-maturing genotypes, on the other hand, occurred at 2 - 3 and 3 - 4
leaves after the expansion of leaves with maximum LER, respectively. Yoshida (1981)
discussed that internode elongation starts around the initiation of panicle primordium
while Clerget et. al (2014) specifically pointed out that it occurs 2 — 3 days after panicle
initiation. This correlation means that panicle initiation starts shortly after the appearance
and elongation of leaf with maximum LER. Leaf appearance and elongation rates starts to
decrease during this time to give way to elongation of internode and the developing
panicle. Topdressing of nitrogen is usually done at panicle initiation (Yoshida, 1981)
hence the fertilizer could specifically be applied after the full expansion of the leaf with

maximum LER.

Leaf appearance and elongation rates were stable in all genotypes. The use of
thermal time in expressing these rates was a unique way of showing the strictly defined
leaf development of a specific genotype at a given phytomer (Lafarge and Tardieu,

2001).Similarly, Clerget et. al (2008) found that the occurrence of longer phyllochron in

sorghum delayed the onset of elongation of each successive internode.

79

A
16
14 °
12 ¥ + ¢ %
A } ry
= 10 ‘
fa
8
o
§ 6
4 ¢ inflection
2 max LER
0
Genotype
B
16
14
ai fa x Sree Oe ee
= 10 ° ¢ ¢
A 2
= We
3
S26
4 * inflection
2 max LER
0

Genotype

Figure 30.Convergence of leaves of leaf appearance and maximum LER of genotypes in
June (A) and September (B) sowing. Leaves corresponding to the onset of the
second inflection of the trilinear model and that of maximum LER were tested
for synchronism.

80

Therefore, the hypothesis that LER increases with plant age until around leaf 11,
suddenly drops down at the time of appearance of the 12" leaf and then stabilizes was not
totally true. Leaf elongation rate of the genotypes in the two sowing dates revealed that
the rate of growth increased as plant ages reaching its maximum at leaf 9 — 14 depending
on the duration of the genotype. Then, there was a gradual decrease in LER in the
succeeding leaves. Moreover, it was also not totally true to hypothesize the bilinear
kinetics of leaf appearance because the data better fitted in trilinear modei upon
suppression of the early leaves. This can also be further explained by the occurrence of
transitional period between the two linear portions of the curve. Data proved that the
point of maximum LER coincided with the transition period of leaf appearance at the
point near the second inflection. Hence, leaf appearance and leaf elongation occur in
synchrony at specific time and leaf stage depending on crop duration. This means that
LER started to gradually decrease at almost the same moment of inflection of leaf
appearance that is within the transition period. Thus the changes of the rates of leaf
appearance and leaf blade growth were not instantaneous but on the contrary gradual,
affecting some 4 successive leaves. There is a nearly synchronous occurrence of
inflection point of leaf appearance kinetics and panicle initiation in flooded crops
(Clerget, et. al, 2014). Also, a synchrony in apical leaf initiation rate and leaf appearance
rate was observed in rice by Clerget, et, al (2014) with stable difference of four leaves

hence there is a maximal leaf initiation rate until the development of the last leaf.

Since there was no sudden drop of LER after reaching its maximum, the dual

effect of reduced cell division and cell elongation was not experienced by the plant

81

simultaneously hence the decrease in LER occurred gradually, This may be explained by
the occurrence of the transition period in the leaf appearance which implies that there was
no abrupt decrease in celi division during each inflection. Since the maximum LER
occurred between the transition period of leaf appearance, the cells still have enough time
to elongate while the meristems still continue to multiply cells in gradually decreasing
rate. Fournier et. al (2005) reported that leaf emergence controls leaf elongation. This
synchronism could be explained by the report of Cookson, et. ai (2005) that there is a
relationship between the regulation of processes of leaf formation and early leaf growth

with differences due to genetic and environmenial factors.

Evaluation of Diurnal Leaf Growth of Four Contrasting Genotypes

Leaf Elongation Rate per Hour. The average leaf elongation rate (LER) per hour
(mm/h) of all the leaves of the 4 genotypes in the June and September sowing was shown
in Figure 31. Elongation was higher but less stable during the day while night elongation
was lower but more stable. Elongation in June was stable from 7 pm to 6 am ranging
from 4.3 — 5.3 mm/d in all genotypes. The rate started to gradually increase at 6 am
reaching ils highest rale ranging from 5.8 to 6.8 mm/d al around 11 am, and then
gradually decreased. At 3 — 4 pm, elongation stabilized with relatively the same rate as
that of 7 pm — 6 am then increased in a relatively abrupt manner reaching another peak at
around 6 pm with 5 - 6 mm/d elongation, and then gradually decreased before it

stabilized at 7 pm. On ihe other hand, the diumai patiern of leaf elongation for the

82

September 2013 sowing also showed stable rate of elongation of 4 —- 6 mm/d was
observed from 6 pm to 6 am and then gradually increased with slightly abrupt increase at
8 am reaching the peak at 10 am (7 — 8 mm/d) and then gradually decreased again. At 3
pm, there was an increase in elongation until 5 pm and then an abrupt decrease until 6 pm
(5.5 — 6.5 mm/d). When compared to June 2013, time poinis of increases, decreases and
peaks were 1 hour earlier in the September 2013 sowing. With regards to the highest peak
of elongation within the day, the second sowing had 1 mm/d elongation higher than the
first sowing. The stable night elongation rates of the two sowing dates relatively did not
differ. Ai sunsei, a sudden increase in LER occurred before the onsei of the sieady night

elongation rate.

Leaf Elongation Rate per Degree-day. Expressing the leaf elongation rate in
thermal time (elongDD) resulied in different diurnal elongation patiern (Figure 32). The
thermal time is used to describe the effect of temperature on crop development because
thermal time expression shows a linear relationship between development and
temperature over a wide range of temperatures (Roberts and Summerfield (1987) as cited
by Yin, et. al (1995)). EiongDD was higher during the nighi than during the day for both
sowing dates as shown in Figure 30. At around 7 pm, elongDD started to gradually
increase reaching its peak at around 5 - 6 am with the rate of 7 — 8 mm/*°Cd. The firsi

sowing shows a gradual decrease in LER starting from 6 am to 3 pm and then stabilized

until 4pm before its abrupt increase with a peak at 6 pm at the rate ranging from 5.5 - 6.5

83

10 A
9
8
7
2
= es
ay yy: eS ry *—1R72
Es Seextet a a
CP ince SS = Mestizo 7
= 4
33 Hong Zui Zhao
2 Sahelika
1
0
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
Time of day (h)
10 B
9
8
—
7 x
€ 6 4 Se
. *—IR7
— 5 exeet, . a
o 4. =~ Mestizo 7
&
s
3 Hong Zui Zhao
2 Sahelika
1
0

i?) 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22

Time of day (h)

Figure 31. Leaf elongation rate (in mm/h) of genotypes with respect to time of day on the
June (upper) and September (lower) sowing. The LVDT automatically
measured the leaf displacement in 15-min interval for 24-h period throughout
the duration of leaf elongation. Elongation (mm/h) was the average of all
observations per hour.

84

mm/°Cd. A sudden decrease was then occurred until 7 pm before the onset of it gradual
increase. On the other hand, in the second sowing, there was an increasing elongDD from
6 pm to 7 am, with a minor decrease at 8am and then an increase reaching the peak at 10
am (8.5 — 9.5 mm/°Cd). Furthermore, there was a sudden decrease from the peak until 11
am followed by a gradual decrease of elongation until 3 pm. Another peak was observed
before sunset, 5 pm (6 — 7 mm/Cd) and then decreased up to 6 pm. The elongation rates
at the peaks of the second sowing were more or less 1 mm/Cd higher than in June. During
this period, the high rate of elongation occurred in longer time period hence the period of

low LER which mostly occurred on the later pari of the day became shorter.

The diurnal leaf growth evolution thus revealed that actual absolute leaf
elongation raie (mm/h) was higher during the day than during the night in both sowing
dates. All genotypes have generally similar trend. There were observed abrupt changes in
the behavior of LER during the transitions of dark and light. These results are in
agreement with Cutler (1980) and Wiangsamut (2008) that under well-watered
conditions, daytime LER was higher than nighttime LER (with observed perturbations
during light/dark transitions. Cutler (1980) revealed that within few minutes after
illumination, LER declined and remained low for 15 —- 60 minutes before proceeding to
its rapid increase. On the other hand, there was a transient increase in LER for few
minuies after dark transition lasting for 30 — 60 min before its steady night rate (Cutler,
1980). Moreover, Sadok, et. al (2007) reported that the tendency towards changes in LER
during the night and the PPFD during the preceding day are not related. Instead, PPFD

consistently affects the transient changes in LER during day — night transitions.

85

A

10

9

8 .

— LK

=7 pe - ao
i Aaa oN =O
fs hn = A i *—IR72
E
=, = Mestizo 7
a

3 Hong Zui Zhao

2

Sahelika
1
0
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
Time of day (h)
B
1
aan
| aad =~
a ‘e ‘
Sa Sa a
* IR 72

=~ Mestizo 7
Hong Zui Zhao

Sahelika

LER (mm/°Cd)
OPN we Ha Oo Oo

0.2.4 -.6)--8 10 12.14, 46 :18- 20; 22

Time of day (h)

Figure 32.Leaf elongation rate (in mm/°Cd) of genotypes with respect to time of day on
June (upper) and September (lower) sowing. The LVDT automatically
measured the leaf displacement in 15-min interval for 24-h period throughout
the duration of leaf elongation. ElongDD (mm/°Cd) was the average of all
observations per day divided by thermal time elapsed.

86

Light and temperature increases during the day hence LER also increases until it
reaches its saturation. These factors directly affect leaf growth hence another way of
analyzing this diurnal evolution of growth is through thermal time expression. Expressing
leaf elongation in thermal units gives temperature-independent results (Lafarge and
Tardieu, 2001). In this way, night elongation is higher than day elongation suggesting a
negative effect of evaporative demand. Similar result on the decrease of LER during the
day was reported by Sadok (2007) and this could be associated to high day transpiration
that is related to evaporative demand. In contrast, Parent et. al (2010) reported that leaf
growth of diverse rice genotypes was insensitive io water deficit and evaporative demand

which may be associated with slower stomatal opening in the morning, or to a plant

hydraulic conduciance.

Correlation of LER and Climate Parameters

Climatic data collected throughout the duration of the two sets of experiment were
analyzed based on the extent of their effect to elongation and elongDD. Tabie 9 shows
the correlation analysis of leaf elongation rate with air temperature, soil temperature,
global radiation and relative humidity. It can be deduced that global radiation and soil
and air temperatures had moderate to strong positive correlation with elongation while
relative humidity had moderate to strong negative correlation with it. On the other hand,

expressing LER to elongDD resulted to its negative correlation with soil and air

87

temperatures and positive correlation with relative humidity. Streck et. al (2008) cited
that biological process, including plant development, have non-linear response to

temperature, with only a small part of the process being linear.

Table 9. Correlation analysis of leaf elongation rate with the climatic parameters.

Parameter Elongation ElongDD

1 2 1 2
Air Temperature 0.534 0.711 -0.487 -0.128
Soil Temperature 0.441 0.543 -0.672 -0.470
Global Radiation 0.535 0.647 -0.098 0.407
Relative Humidity -0.509 -0.663 0.536 0.210

Variations in growth of plants during the 24-h period could be due to additive
effects of circadian rhythm, temperature and evaporative demand. They found that LER
increases with temperature from 6-30°C and is less affected by the circadian clock.
Moreover, iow or high temperatures experienced by plants for some hours each day did
not affect the capacity of leaves to grow at a given temperature. Leaf growth zones of
monocotyledons are covered by leaf sheaths or embedded in the soil hence are proiecied
by atmospheric temperature variations. A study on maize and rice revealed that leaf
growth proceeds constantly even when exposed to changing day and night durations
(Poire et. al, 2010).A part of the whole process of leaf development is affected by
temperature and that is specific to the time of cell cycling. The last part in phyllochron,

which is cell growth, is influenced by other factors such as carbohydrate, water and

88

nutrient availability that depends on the environmental conditions in which the plant is
grown. Hence, the plastochron is more strongly related to temperature (essentially only

cell division) than the phyllochron (which includes cell growth) (McMasier, 2005).

SUMMARY

This study was conducted to characterize the rate of leaf appearance and
elongation of all leaves of the main tillers of contrasting rice plants, and to determine the
relationship that exists between growth rates. The experiment was conducted using
eleven contrasting rice genotypes grown in 13-L pots under flooded conditions in the
BG-10 greenhouse at International Rice Research Institute, Los Bafios, Laguna from June
to December 2013. A protocol was developed with some modifications from other

studies to fine-tune with the objectives of the experiment.

Leaf appearance rate of varieties sown in June 2013 better fitted in a trilinear
model except for IR 72. A bilinear kinetics of leaf appearance was observed in some
genotypes in the September 2013 sowing. The trilinear kinetics can be explained by faster
appearance of the first four leaves, rendering two inflection points and with the fact that
phyilochron changes with plant age. The difference in kinetics was due io photoperiod
sensitivity which caused faster rate of growth of rice in short-day period hence leaves
appeared at the same rate uniil leaf 11, and then decreased with the succeeding leaves.
Analysis of residues revealed the occurrence of a transition period in the leaf appearance
when leaves 3 and 4 were removed from the data. This period corresponds to the
transitional portion of the whole curve and could be found between the two linear parts of
the leaf appearance curve. For the first sowing, the transitional period started in leaves 8

to 1land ended in leaves 11 - 16. On the other hand, transition period for September

90

sowing started in leaf 8 to 11 and ended at leaf 10 to 14. The ranges of leaves pertain to

the specific points in the transition period which depends on the genotype.

ardiess of

qd

the type
curve in both sowing dates across leaf rank. Maximum leaf elongation rate (LER) of all
genotypes increased linearly with leaf rank until it reached leaves 10 to 14 and 8 to 13 in
the first and second sowing, respectively; then it gradually decreased with leaf rank. This
behavior of LER was not prominent in early maturing varieties such as Hong Zui Zhao

and E 5168 but is highly prominent in long duration genotypes.

e genotype, results show that the

For a pet
maximum rate of elongation has occurred within the transition period or near the second
infiection point of the leaf appearance curve. The synchronism of the onset of maximum
LER and the transition period was therefore observed. The proximity of the onset of
maximum LER io the start and end of the transition period depends on the genotype and
sowing date. The duration of the transition period in the two sowing dates were 3 — 4

leaves in June and 2 — 3 leaves in September.

Correlation of leaf with maximum LER and the onset of rapid internode
elongation showed that internode elongation occurred at 0 - 2, 2 — 3 and 3 — 4 leaves
after the occurrence of maximum LER for early, medium and late-maturing genotypes,
respectively. Since panicle initiation starts 2 — 3 days before internode elongation, panicle
initiation could begin shortly after the appearance and full expansion of leaf with

maximum LER.

91

Diurnal leaf elongation rates observed in four contrasting genotypes using LVDT
showed an actual absolute leaf elongation rate (mm/h) which was higher during the day
than during the night in both sowing dates. Thermal time (mm/Cd) expression however
showed the reverse. Stable LER was observed from 6 pm to 6 am and increased during
the day reaching iis peak ai 10 — 11 am. Aili genotypes have generaily similar trend with
the highest LER. A decrease in elongation was observed after 6 am before reaching its
peak. Also, before reaching its stable LER, an increase at 5 - 6 pm was observed in both
sowing dates. In both sowing dates, air temperature, soil temperature and global radiation
were positively correlated with LER/h while a negative correlation of relative humidity

with elongation (mm/h) was observed.

CONCLUSION

A broken-linear leaf appearance confirmed for 11 varieties of very different
origins. The relationship between rate of leaf appearance and thermal time followed a
trilinear kinetics during the long-day (June) period while it some genotypes showed
bilinear kinetics during short-day (September) season. The visually curvilinear portion of
the leaf appearance was associated with the transition period before panicle initiation.
The duration of the crop for a particular period affects the kinetics of leaf appearance.
LER of successive leaves goes through a maximum and then gradually decreases as leaf
rank increases.No sudden drop in LER was observed since there was no sharp infiection
in the leaf appearance. The sharp inflection in the leaf appearance is not present, instead
there is a gradual decrease in the rate of ieaf appearance affecting 3 — 4 leaves which is

associated with the transition period.

There was a synchrony between the onset ef maximum LER and the second
inflection of the leaf appearance which is within the transition period. The maximum rate
of elongation has occurred within the transition period of ieaf appearance which is the
curvilinear portion of the leaf appearance curve. The leaf with maximum LER was the

last to appear before the ieaf appearance raie was reduced.

For research purposes, the inter-collar distance is useful in determining the start of
internode elongation especially in non-destructive measuremenis. First, ihe start of
internode elongation is relevant in determining the specific time of shifting from soil to

air temperature for the computation of thermal time. Second, internode elongation relates

93

to panicle initiation which is a crucial point in cereal development. Panicle initiation may
start shortly after the full expansion of leaf with maximum LER or to about 2 - 3 days
prior to internode elongation. Since nitrogen application is usually done at panicle
initiation, the information could help Agronomists in identifying the specific date of
fertilizer application so that it could efficiently supply the nutrient requirement of the

developing panicle.

wo linear portions of the

The discovery of the transition period between the
Trilinear kinetics of leaf appearance, and its synchronism with leaf elongation rate and
onset of panicle initiation proved a more compiex dynamics of leaf development. The
coincidence of maximum LER, panicle initiation and the gradual reduction of leaf
appearance, followed by the gradual decrease in LER which is coupled with the
occurrence of rapid internode elongation, give a detailed support on the plant’s
physiological preparation for iis shift from vegetative to reproductive stage. During this
period, efficiency of nitrogen application would be high. Also, the current result deviated
from previously elucidated linear, bilinear or curvilinear kinetics of leaf appearance. This
discovery could provide important information for the improvement of leaf area
simulation by giving more realistic results. The results highlighted thai different
genotypes have differences in the kinetics of leaf appearance and photoperiod sensitivity.
Thus, an abrupt change in the leaf appearance rate could result to overestimation of leaf
area that could affect simulation of canopy architecture of specific rice genotype. The

origin and crop duration of rice genotypes do not reflect specific kinetics of leaf

94

appearance and synchronicity with leaf elongation, and that could be attributed to their

degree of photoperiod sensitivity and unique genetic make-up.

Expression of leaf elongation per unit clock time showed higher day rate than
night rate due to higher temperatures during the day. On the other hand, when rate was
expressed in thermal time, LER is lower during day than during night, suggesting a
negative effect of evaporative demand. There was a slight decrease in elongation at the
transition from night to day, after which a rapid increase. Before sunset, there was a slight
increase in elongation then a gradual decrease proceeding to stable night elongation rate.
Global radiation, soil temperature and air temperature had moderaie to sirong positive
correlation with elongation while relative humidity had moderate to strong negative

correlation with it.

Architectural modeling and incorporation of functionality in crops require large
quantities of extensive and more precise daia than usuaily coliecied. Daily collection of
manual leaf elongation and 15-minute automatic logging of elongation using the LVDT
generated vast amount of data. This precise method of daia colieciion has not been done
by previous researches. Since leaf appearance and elongation determines the canopy
architecture, which relates to the maximization of energy capture for biomass production,
the information from this study could provide differences in the canopy development of
contrasting genotypes exposed in different growing conditions. Thus, results of this study
could be a reliable source of information for the breeders and crop modelers for their crop

improvement and climate adapiation strategies. On the other hand, one limitation of the

95

study is that the conditions inside the greenhouse were not controlled hence correlation
between climate variables and LER may not necessarily be representative because the
climate variables coexist. Moreover, the use of photoperiod sensitive rice genotypes can
either be an advantage or a limitation of the study. This was a limitation because it
affecied the test for repeatability of the experiment due to changes in growih duration,
final leaf number and kinetics of leaf appearance between two sowing dates. Conversely,
the use of the contrasted genotypes proved thai the dynamics of leaf appearance, leaf

elongation and their synchronicity was affected by photoperiod only on a lesser extent.

Further study on the cellular level! is therefore recommended in order to determine
the activity of the meristems during the specific point of leaf appearance especially the
iransition period. Concentrations and activities of hormones during the inflection points
and transition period could also be elucidated. Moreover, difference in cell activity during

nighi and day could also be studied under controiled condition.

LITERATURE CITED

BADE, D.H., B.E. CONRAD and E.C. HOLT.1985. Temperature and water stress effects
on growth of tropical grasses. J. Range Management, 38(4): 321 - 324.

BIRCH, C.J., B. ANDRIEU, C. FOURNIER, J. VOS and P. ROOM. 2003. Modeling
kinetics of plant canopy architecture — concepts and applications. Europ. J.
Agronomy, 19: 519 - 533.

CLERGET, B. and C. BUENO.2013. The effect of aerobic soil conditions, soil volume
and sowing date on the development of four tropical rice varieties grown in the
greenhouse. Functional Plant Biology, 40: 79-99.

CLERGET, B., M. DINGKUHN, E. GOZE, H.F.W. RATTUNDE and B. NEY. 2008.
Variability of phyllochron, plastochron and rate of increase in height in
en citivn con aaate

Bhi ain ie: tam varieties. A of Botany 101: 579-594
photoperiod-sensitive sorghum varieties. Annals of Botany 101: 579-594.

CLERGET, B.,C. BUENO, 1.R. QUILTY, T.Q. CORREA JR and J. SA 3, 2014.
Modifications in development and growth of a dual-adapted tropical rice variety
grown as either a flooded or an aerobic crop. Field Crops Research 155: 134 -—

143.

COOKSON, S.J., M. VAN LIJSEBETTENS and C. GRANIER. 2005. Correlation
between leaf growth variables suggest intrinsic and early controls of leaf size in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant, Cell and Environment, 28: 1355 — 1366.

CUTLER, J.M., P.L. STEPONKUS, M.J. WACH and K.W. SHAHAN. 1980. Dynamic
aspects and enhancement of leaf elongation in rice. Plant Physiology 66: 147-152.

DURAND, I.L., R. SCHAUFELE and F. GASTAL. 1999. Grass leaf elongation rate as a
function of developmental stage and temperature: morphological analysis and
modeling. Annals of Botany, 83: 577 — 588.

EIXARCH, M.M., Z. DE-FENG, M.C. FORNER, E.P. MAYOR and N.T. NAVARRO.
Water, nitrogen and plant density affect the response of leaf appearance of direct
seeded rice to thermal time. Rice Science 20(1): 52 — 60.

ELLIS, R.H., A. QI, R.J. SUMMERFIELD, and E.H. ROBERTS. 1992. Rates of leaf
appearance and panicle development in rice (Oryza sativa L.): a comparison of
three temperatures, Agric. For. Meteorol., 66: 129-138.

97

FOURNIER, C., J.L. DURAND, S. LIUTOVAC, R. SCHAUFELE, F. GASTAL and B.
ANDRIEU. 2005. A functional-structural model of elongation of the grass leaf
and its relationships with the phy!lochron. New Phytologist 166: 881-894.

HU, Y., K.H. CAMP and U. SCHMIDHALTER. 2000. Kinetics and spatial distribution
of leaf elongation of wheat (7riticumaestivum L.) under saline conditions. Int. J.
Plant Sci. 161(4): 575 — 582.

ITOH, Y and Y. SANO. 2006. Phyllochron dynamics under controlled environments in
rice (Oryza sativa L.). Euphytica, 150: 87-95.

KEMP, D.R. 1980a. The growth rate of successive leaves of wheat plants in relation to
sugar and protein concentrations in the extension zone. J. Exp. Bot. 31:1400-
1411.

LARIJANI, B.A., Z.T. SARVESTANI, GH. NEMATZADEI, A.M. MANSCIIADI and
E. AMIRI. 2011. Simulating phenology, growth and yield of transplanted rice at
different seedling ages in Northern Iran using ORYZA2000. Rice Science. 18 (4):
321-334.

MARTINEZ-ELXARCH, M., Z. DE-FENG, M. CATALA-FORNER, E. PLA-MAYOR
and M. TOMAS NAVARRO. 2013. Water, nitrogen and plant density affect the
response of leaf appearance of direct seeded rice to thermal time. Rice Science. 20
(1): 52-60.

MCMASTER, G:S. 2005.Phytomers, phyllochrons, phenology and temperate cereal
development. Journal of Agricultural Science. 143: 137-150.

MUNNS, R., J.B. PASSIOURA, J. GUO, 0. CHAZEN and G.R, CRAMER. 2000. Water
relations and leaf expansion: importance of time scale. Journal of Experimental
Botany 51:1495-1504.

NAGAI, T. and A. MAKINO. 2009. Differences between rice and wheat in temperature
responses of photosynthesis and plant growth. Plant Cell Physiol. 50(4): 744-755
doi:10.1093/pep/pep029.

PARENT, B., G. CONEJERO and F. TARDIEU. 2009. Spatial and temporai analysis of
non-steady elongation of rice leaves. Plant, Cell and Environment, 32: 1561-1572.

PARENT, B., ©. TURC, Y. GIBON, M. STITT and F. TARDIEU. 2010. Modelling
temperature-compensated physiological rates, based on the co-ordination of

98

responses to temperature of developmental processes. Journal of Experimental
Botany 61(8): 2057-2069.

PARENT, B., B. SUARD, R. SERRAJ and F. TARDIEU. 2010. Rice leaf growth and
water potential are resilient to evaporative demand and soil water deficit once the
effects of root system are neutralized. Plant, Cell and Environment, 33: 1256 —
1267.

POIRE, R., A. WIESE-KLINKENBERG, B. PARENT, M. MIELEWCZIK, U.
SCHURR, F. TARDIEU and A. WALTER. 2010. Diel time-courses of leaf
growth in monocot and dicot species: endogenous rhythms and temperature
effects. Journal of Experimental Botany 61(6): 1751-1759.

SADOK, W., P. NAUDIN, B. BOUSSUGE, B. MULLER, C. WELCKER and F.
TARDICU. 2007. Leaf growth rate per unit thermal time follows QTL-dependent
daily patterns in hundreds of maize lines under naturally fluctuating conditions.
Plant, Celi and Environment, 30: 135 - 146.

SENEWEERA, S.P., A.S. BASRA, E.W. BARLOW and J.P CONROY. 1995. Diurnal
regulation of leaf blade elongation in rice by CO2: is it related to Sucrose-
Phosphate-Synthase activity? Plant Physiology 108 (4): 1471-1477.

SIE, M., M. DINGKUHN, M.C.S. WOPEREIS and K.M. MIEZAN.1998a. Rice crop
duration and leaf appearance rate in a variable thermal environment. I.
Development of an empirically based model. Field Crops Research 57: 1-13.

SIE, M., M. DINGKUIIN, M.C.S. WOPEREIS and K.M. MIEZAN.1998b. Rice crop
duration and leaf appearance rate in a variable thermal environment. II.

Comparison of genotypes Field Crops Research 58: 129 -140.

SIE, M., M. DINGKUIIN, M.C.S. WOPEREIS and K.M. MIEZAN. 1998c. Rice crop
duration and leaf appearance rate in a variable thermal environment. III.
Heritability of photothermal traits. Field Crops Research 58: 141-152.

SLAFER, G.A. 2003. Genetic basis of yield as viewed from a crop physiologist’s
perspective. Ann. Appl. Biol. 142: 117-128.

STRECK, N.A., L.C. BOSCO and I. LAGO. 2008. Simulating leaf appearance in rice.
Agronomy Joumal, 100: 490-501.

STRECK, N.A., L.O. UHLMANN and L.F. GABRIEL. 2013. Leaf development of
cultivated rice and weedy red rice under elevated temperature

99

scenarios.RevistaBrasileira de Engenharia Agricola e Ambiental, 17 (2): 190 -
199.

TIVET, F., B.D. PINHEIRO, M. DE RAISSAC and M. DINGKUHN. 2001. Leaf blade
dimensions of rice (Oryza sativa L. and Oryza glaberrimaSteud.) relationships
between tillers and the main stem. Annals of Botany 88: 507 - 511.

WALTER, A. and U. SCHURR. 2005. Dynamics of leaf and root growth: endogenous
control versus environmental impact. Annals of Botany 95: 891-900.

WIANGSAMUT, B. and T.C. MENDOZA. 2008. Leaf elongation rate, agronomic traits
and grain yield of three transplanted rice genotypes. Journal of Agricultural
Technology.pp.205-217

YIN, X., M.J. KROPFF, G. MCLAUREN, and R.M. VISPERAS. 1995. A nonlinear
model for crop development as a function of temperature. Agriculturai and Forest
Meteorology, 77:1-6.

YIN, X. and M.J. KROPFF. 1996. The effect of temperature on leaf appearaiice in rice.
Annals of Botany 77: 215-221.

YIN, X., P.C. STRUIK, J. TANG, C. QI and T. LIU. 2005. Model analysis of flowering
phenology in recombinant inbred lines of barley. J. Expt. Bot. 56(413): 959 — 965.

YOSHIDA, S. 1981. Fundamentals of rice crop science. Intemational Rice Research
Institute, Los Banos, Laguna. 279 pp.

ZHAO, M., C. PENG, W. XIANG, X. DENG, D. TIAN, X. ZHOU, G. YU, H. HE and Z.
ZHAO. 2013. Plant phenological modeling and its application in global climate
change research: overview and future challenges. Environmental Reviews, 21(1):
1-14.

The SRI Group (Cornell University). Phyllochron considerations. Retrieved from
<http://ciifad.cornell.edu/sri/phyllochron.htmI> on 20 May 20


APPENDICES

101

Appendix Table 1a. Leaf appearance of Mestizo 30, IR 72 and IR 780 showing the
standard errors and confidence intervals in June sowing.

Genotype Leaf Sumi (Cd) _StandardError Confidence intervai
Mestizo 30 3 56.51 0.02 0.05
4 95.84 3.35 7.89
5 139.47 481 11.33
6 195.17 0.08 0.18
7 250.08 0.06 0.18
8 307.33 0.08 0.19
9 372.54 0.09 0.22
10 448.96 4.52 10.64
HW 519.10 4.93 11.59
12 598.43 4.92 11.57
13 700.44 9.43 22.19
14 798.54 9.38 22.07
15 904.26 28.67
16 1009.59 28.42
R72 3 60.54 9.50
4 101.65 0.08
5 159.33 12.57
6 213.49 17.53
7 268.47 17.17
8 329.35 21.19
9 389.72 25.68
10 159.56 mae
ny 524.30 29.48
12 603.49 30.05
13 704.96 49.25
14 812.52 48.45
15 937.04 66.82
16 1059.19 53.81
17 1130.33 164.62
IR 780 3 76.89 9.98
4 116.27 15.84
5 190.27 ils!
6 254.77 10.94
7 323.72 12.84
8 13.56
9 14.52
10
YW
12
13 28.28
14 32.63
15 33.76
16 28.55
17 28.97


102

Appendix Table 1b. Leaf appearance of Mestizo 7, Azucena, Hong Zui Zhao and NSIC
Rc222 showing the standard errors and confidence intervals in June sowing.

raf Sumi (Cd) Standard Error Confidence Interval

Genory Te
Mestizo 7 3 36.31 O01 0.03
4 89.88 0.08 0.18
5 129.60 Ss. 12.02,
6 175.56 0.07 0.16
7 227.17 463 10.89
x 281.05 4.30 1.11
9 329.21 0.08 0.19
10 401.14 10.89 25.63
a 469.37 5.25 12.36
12 538.77 9.41 22.15
13 628.44 12.57
14 719.45 14.70
15 826.64 17.95
16 956.27 24.09
17 1059.10 15.42
18 1160.38 1485
19 1230.80
Azucena 3 81.16 8.44 53.28
4 134.59 0.29 1.81
5 195.15 019 1.18
6 268.89 0.22 1.36
7 329.17 0.26 161
8 395.61 0.16 1.04
9 474.64 0.20 1.23
1 333.78 0.17 hao
iu 633.24 0.19 118
12 T2448 951 60.01
13 81329 0.21 131
14 921.59 0.17 1.06
15 1026.67 0.17 1.09
16 H1S1.98 16.80 106.09
17 1243.98 8.13 51.34
18
Hong Zui Zhe 3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
a
2
NSIC Re 222 5
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
W
2
13
4
1s
16 886.61
7 1015.11
18 1133.21

1257.00


103

Appendix Table 1c. Leaf appearance of PSB Re 18, Sahelika and Was 203 showing the
standard errors and confidence intervals in June sowing.

Genotype _Leaf___SumT (Cd) _Standard Error Confidence interval

PSB Re 18 3 68.58 4.02 9.46
4 104.86 3.14 739
5 159.90 9.89 23.28
6 208.91 8.74 20.58
7 259.49 54 12.80
8 323.87 10.56 24.85
9 389.71 10.92 25.70
10 464.06 6.13 14.42
u 538.77 9.42 22.16
12 67341 12.93 3043
rs 128.02 12.36 29.09
4 822.24 12.20 28.71
15 950.83 1197 42.29
16 1096.08 12.29 28.93
17 1239.72 16.12 37.94
18 1406.43 14.38 33.84
19 1570.28 6.73 19.66

Sahelika 3 56.51 0.02 0.04
4 98,75 2.94 6.92
5 139.37 4.89 11.51
6 180.43 4.96 11.67
7 231.75 0.05 0.12
8 291.25 5.42 12.74
9 340.38 6.48 15.24
10 406.89 6.52 15.34
ut 164.03 6.13 M.A3
rr $33.78 0.06 0.13
B 593.51 0.07 0.17
4 675.19 007 0.16
15 749.30 5.09 11.98
16 R36 70 44n 10 54
7 950 82 18.04 42.45
18 1054.98 13.43 31.61
19 1154.18 15.74 45.97
20 1272.33 15.70 45.85
21 1402.58 19.01 55.52
22 1493.89

Was 203 3 60.53 402 9.46
4 101.70 0.02 0.05
5 144.30 5.59 13.15
6 195.19 0.05 0.12
7 245.51 455 10.71
8 301.97 5.33 12.55
9 367.32 5.19 12.20
10 435.66 7.20 16.95
n 509.55 4.63 10.89
n 588.65 4.86 1AM
n 675.23 0.06
4 764.29 5.70
15 873.85 4.48 10.54
16 1015.13 10.24 24.11
V7 114719 10.06 IVER
1k 1293.46 927 2181

Appendix Table 2a.Leaf appearance of Mestizo 30, IR 72 and IR 780 showing the
standard errors and confidence intervals in September sowing.

Genotype Leai SumT (Cd) Standard Error Confidence Intervai

‘Mestizo 30 3 1139 U: 0.08
4 118.80 951 22.38
Ss 204.81 6.00 14.12
6 243.42 5.89 13.87
7 293.33 8.16 19.21
g 357.84 9.38 22.08
9 414.44 8.64 20.33

10 488.86 9.25 21.77
ty 566.72 13.27 31.24
12 664.58 11.10 26.13
13 767.58 16.07 37.82
14 856.85 17.52 SLAS
15 924.67

R72 3 63.87 4.34 10.22
4 112.99 4.92 11.58
+ 184.72 5.69 13.40
6 243.43 5.93 13.95
7 288.26 9.61 22.62
8 343.03 5.83 13.71
9 401.25 5.69 13.40

10 469 54 496 11.68
1 $47.99 R97 19.47
12 637.10 9.15 21.53
13 732.25 12.36 29.09
14 833.04 6.25 18.26,
15 950.10 20.47 59.78

IR 780 3 75.69 749 17.63
4 128.86 9.81 23.09
5 214.50 797 18.77
6 268.29 4.96 11.68
7 328.16 5.06 191
8 396.41 9.35 22.01
9 478.90 12.58 29.61

10 557.78 14.52 34.17
W 655.22 16.33 38.44
12 741.49 14.74 34.70
13 852.90 18.50 43.53
14 972.94 34.62 101.08
15 1088.06 35.03 102.29
16 1184.01 17.31 109.27

104

105

Appendix Table 2b. Leaf appearance of Mestizo 7, Azucena, E 5168, Hong Zui Zhao
and NSIC Rc222 showing the standard errors and confidence intervals in in September
sowing.

‘Genotype Leaf Sum (Ca) Standerd Error Confidence Interval
Mestizo 7 3 60.12 372 876
4 87.52 0.04 0.09
5 152.28 138 17.85
6 219.67 4.37 10.74
7 258.49 11.62
8 37 22.40
9 21.69
10 29.77
n 2029
12 30.54
13 21.66
Mu 26.16
15 16.97
16 19.73
‘Azucena 3 10.25
4 9.98
s 0.18
6 1197
7 12.05
8 13.71
9 13.41
10 460.00 34.05
ML $23.69 18.39
12 $98.47 30.11
13 689.62 38.83
14 771.83 35.44
1S 851.53 45.55
16 930.10 44.19
E5168 3 5638 0.06
4 108.74 10.02
5 189.86 2.66
6 243.22 23.59
7 298.36 29.67
8 352.63 32.45
9 409.39 29.04
10 483.40 30.83
1579.84 28.12
Hong Zui Zhe ro e8s
4 108.77 10.02
5 179.84 11.60
6 = 238.35 12.06
7 27829 12.00
8 338.09 11.82
9 400.51 21.36
10 489.08 19
1569.95 1711
NSIC Re 222 3 56.39 0,04
4 6.02 11.64
5 16737 17.86
6 215.13 0.13
8 333.11 0.24
9 376.91 11.48
443.67 0.05
$11.64 11.48
583.75 11.84
659.65 1124
749.90 16.49
843.85, 20.98
952.19 27.28
1033.82 20.07

1083.83


106

Appendix Table 2c. Leaf appearance of PSB Rc 18, Sahelika and Was 203showing the
standard errors and confidence intervals in June sowing.

Genoty; Leaf __SumT (Ce) _ Standard Error _ Confidence Interval
PSBRe 18 3 7135 0.03 0.07
4 123.03 821 19.32
5 199.63 5.14 12.10
6 248.34 9.56 22.50
7 3208.30 43 22.19
8 3623 12.55 29.55
9 422.45 12.90 30.35
10 497.28 13.77 32.41
Hl $72.59 21.76 51.21
12 662.93 22:17 52.19
13 760.10 28.39 6621
14 8741 33.24 78.23
15 986.71 38.90 91.54
16 1100.84 9.48 27.68
‘Sahelika 3 60.12 3.73 8.78
4 100.24 8.13 19.14
5 177,12 11.79 27.75
6 224.18 5.26 1238
7 268.47 957 22.51
8 323.12 581 13.67
9 372.22 naz 26.17
10 432.57 13.16 30.98
bey 501.19 16.29 38.33
i2 566.70 13.27 31.22
13 641.26 13.97 32.89
M7154 11.56 27.20
15 798.49 15.51 36.50
16 909.80 18.75 44.12
17 1016.79 14.59 34,34
18 1108.83 15.97 37.59
19 1166.37
Was 203 3 71.36
4 11723
5 194.47
6 248.51
7 298.26
8 357.61
9 422.47
10 488.86
1 $61.70
12 650.65
13. 732.27
14 843.70
15 973.76


107

Appendix Table 3a.Maximum leaf elongation rate of Mestizo 30, IR 72 and IR 780
showing the standard errors and confidence intervals in June sowing.

Genoty) Leaf LER (mm/Cd) Standard Error Confidence Interval!

Mestizo 30 | 2.37 0.16 038
4 5.23 0.62 1.46
5 3.75 0.48 1.13
6 4.55 0.30 0.71
7 5.10 0.22 0.51
g 6.03 0.32 0.76
9 5.61 0.07 0.17
10 5.93 0.13 0.31
1 7.40 0.09 0.20
12 6.94 0.10 0.24
13 6.15 0.63 1.48
14 6.60 0.20 0.47
15 5.13 0.17 0.49
16 3.12 0.25 0.74

R77 q 237 075 060
4 3.84 0.44 1.03
5 4.27 0.06 0.15
6 4.96 0.52 1.23
7 492 0.18 0.43
8 5.62 0.50 1.18
9 531 ou 025
10 6.11 0.15 0.36
ie 6.89 0.33 0.78
12 651 0.37 0.86
13 6.32 0.20 0.47
14 5.69 0.21 0.50
15 4.12 0.09 0.21
16 3.44 051 1.19
17 3.79 0.38 239

IR 780 3 2.28 OL 0.27
4 1.76 0.46 1.07
5 3.61 0.09 0.22
6 4.72 0.09 0.22
7 4.62 0.10 0.23
8 4.49 0.15 0.36
9 5.76 0.28 0.65
10 5.81 0.41 0.96
iB 4.93 0.33 0.79
12 5.73 0.21 0.50
13 5.22 0.13 031
14 3.40 0.37 0.87
15 4.64 0.26 0.62
16 3.49 0.23 0.54

7 2.55 0.13 0.38


Appendix Table 3b.Maximum leaf elongation rate of Mestizo 7, Azucena, Hong Zui
Zhao and NSIC Re 222 showing the standard errors and confidence intervals in June

sowing.

Conetype Leaf LER (muw/Cd) Standard Error Confidence Interval

‘Mestizo 7 3 273 0.07 0.16
4 787 1.53 3.59
s 490 025 0.60
6 5.26 0.09 0.21
7 548 9026 Cxat
= 5.87 o.19 OAS
9 6.19 027 0.64
10 5.87 035 0.83
iB 6.62 0.33 0.77
12 6.73 0.32 0.76
13 5.62 0.47 Lu
14 635 034 0.80
1s 5.06 0.69 1.62
16 4.42 On 025
7 480 0.08 0.20
18 3.05 0.48 1.13
19 3.07

“Azucena 3 2.94 0.50 147
4 429 0.73 214
s 437 0.57 1.6
6 737 0.40 LIS
7 6.18 033 0.96
8 5.58 0.52 1.52
9 742 0.38 tu
10 8.12 037 1.09
i 8.49 2.68
12 891 1.10
13 9.03 0.75
14
15
16 628
7 5.76
18 $5.24
19 4.08

HongZuiZha 3 327 0.77
4 3.94 0.74
s s.19 0.49
6 592 1.47
7 5.62 151
8 6.15 0.69
9 6.69 0.58 137
10 791 037 0.87
it 631 023 0.54
12 S17 0.25 0.72

NSICRe 2223. 246 013 037
4 2.33 0.63 1.49
5 462 061 1.44
6 472 023 0.54
7 4.60 024 0.56
8 475 0.19 0.44
9 5.72 024 0.56
10 5.49 0.32 0.75
it 6.05 024 0.56
12 6.96 0.07 0.16
13 3.08 v2 va7
4 651 032 0.75
15 689 0.53 125
16 496 0.33 0.77
7 4.95 0.14 0.32
18 4.15 030 0.71
19 3.03 0.09 6.20

108

109

Appendix Table 3c.Maximum leaf elongation rate of PSB Rc 18, Sahelika and Was 203
showing the standard errors and confidence intervals in June sowing.

Genotype Leaf LER(mm/Cd) Standard Errer Confidence Interval

PSD Re 18 3 2.93 23 0.54
4 5.26 0.31 0.73
5 473 031 0.72
6 5.69 0.25 0.59
7 5.56 0.16 0.37
8 6.23 0.18 43
9 0.32 0.76
10 0.31 0.72
ll 0.26 0.62
12 0.17 0.39
13 O11 0.26
14 0.24 0.56
15 0.17 0.41
16 0.31 0.72
17
3 0.07 0.16
4 0.25 0.58
5 0.14 0.33
6 0.18 0.42
7 0.66 1.56
8 0.13 0.32
9 0.39 0.93
10 0.33 0.78
M 0.27 0.63
n 0.23 0.54
14 0.36 0.84
15 0.54 1.28
16 0.46 1.08
17 0.56 1.32
1s 0.98 2.31
19 0.51 1.48
20 0.21 1.34
21 0.44 1.28
22

Was 202 3 0.61 142
4 0.39 0.91
5 0.23 0.54
6 0.34 0.81
7 0.23 0.55
8 0.17 0.40
9 0.28 0.66
10 0.46 1.07
MW 0.07 0.17
12 ans) 0.36
13 0.27 0.63
14 0.19 0.45
15 0.12 0.28
16 0.25 0.59
17 0.32 0.76


110

Appendix Table 4a. Maximum leaf elongation rate of Mestizo 30, IR 72 and IR 780
showing the standard errors and confidence intervals in September sowing.

Genotype Leaf LER (mm/Cd) Standard Error Confidence Interval

Mestizo 3! 3 2.20 0.66 LS:
4 2.67 0.40 0.93
5 5.17 0.28 0.66
6 S.A 0.23 0.55
7 4.58 9.48 12
8 631 0.16 0.39
9 671 0.41 0.97
10 7.05 031 0.73
IL 7.08 0.50 1.18
12 6.41 0.19 0.44
13 5.93 031 0.73
14 4.83 0.30 0.89
15 2.94

IR 72 3 2.27 031 0.74
4 3.2 0.62 Ls
5 445 0.40 L1G
6 5.04 0.09 0.22
7 4.93 0.51 1.19
8 5.91 0.29 0.69
° 6.37 0.74 175
16 6.8 0.13 0.31
rs 6.93 0.23 0.55
12 6.23 0.17 0.40
13 6.14 0.32 0.75
4 4.85 Oi 0.36
is 3.73 0.37 1.0%

IR 780 3 2.93 0.07 0.16
4 2.26 0.36 0.85
5 434 0.19 0.44
6 44 38 0.00
7 418 6.58 137
8 4.96 0.47 1.10
9 4.33 1.29 3.03
10 5.64 031 0.74
lk 5.34 0.2 0.65
2 6.89 i8 O41
13 458 0.24 0.57
14 4.84 0.36 1.05
15 4.80 0.66 1.93

16 3.16 O11 0.72


111

Appendix Table 4b.Maximum leaf elongation rate of Mestizo 7, Azucena, Hong Zui
Zhao and NSIC Re 222 showing the standard errors and confidence intervals in
September sowing.

‘Conotype Leaf LER (am/Cd) Standard Error Confidence Interval
Mestizo 7 3 0.67 O15 0.36
4 2.91 0,20 0.46
5 2.39 0.30 0.71
6 5.08 0.41 0.96
7 5.24 34 0.81
8 1.32 2.10
9 0.08 0.19
10 6.25 0.31 0.73
ul 7.37 0.14 0.33
12 671 0.39 0.91
13 5.91 0.08 0.18
14 6.26 0.26 061
15 4.96 0.12 0.29
16 3.54 0.32 0.75
‘Azucena 3 3.35, 0.13 0.30
4 3.83 0.41 0.96
s 5.43 0.44 1.04
6 6.94 019 0.56
7 6.05 0.34 0.81
8 837 0.39 0.91
9 8.04 0.40 0.94
10 9.56 0.46 1.07
it 9.92 0.27 0.64
12 7.51 1.04 245
B 9.04 0.38 0.50
14 8.43 0.28 0.66
15 6.36 0.10 0.22
16 4.34 0.42 1.23
E5168 3 2.41 0.44 1.04
4 2.93 7h 1.67
s 28s 0.42 0.99
6 4.39 0.27 0.64
7 4.46 0.26 062
8 5.61 0.10 0.23
9 5.87 0.35 0.83
10 5.70 0.64 1.50
in 4.62 0.37 0.88
Hong Zui Zho 3 350 038 0.91
4 4.69 0.27 0.64
5 5.85 0.13 0.31
6 6.86 0.26 0.61
7 5.51 0.44 1.03
8 6.93 0.28 0.66
9 713 636 OBI
10 7.48 0.25 0.59
it 5.52 OL 0.27
NSICRe 222, 3 2.67 0.50 118
4 3.21 On 0.26
5 3.72 6.60 1.42
6 4.26 0.14 0.34
7 5.09 0.20 0.46
8 5.32 0.24 0.55
9 6.49 0.25 0.59
10 6.16 0.23 0.54
i 6.73 0.18 0.43
12 6.56 O17 0.39
13 6.59 0.50 17
14 7.49 0.10 0.24
15 5.15 0.25 0.59
16 4.33 0.58 1.36
17 478 0.46 1,08

112

Appendix Table 4c.Maximum leaf elongation rate of PSB Rc 18, Sahelika and Was 203

showing the standard errors and confidence intervals in September sowing.

Genotype Leaf LEK (mm/Cd) Standard Error nfidence interval

PSB Rc 18 3 3.28 0.26 0.61
4 2.90 0.36 0.86
5 4.76 0.30 0.70
6 5.16 0.30 071
7 5.19 0.24 0.57
8 6.49 0.24 0.58
9 6.49 0.07 0.17
10 7.50 0.40 0.93
M 6.78 0.43 1.02
12 6.56 0.24 0.56
3 639 0.19 0.44
4 4.35 0.47 Lu
15 463 0.10 0.23
16 3.48 0.35 1.04

Sabelika 3 314 0.24 057
4 3.96 0.27 0.64
5 431 0.64 1.50
6 5.36 0.40 0.93
1 4.67 0.53 1.24
8 6.86 on 0.26
9 136 002 0.04
10 0.32 0.76
u 0.52 1.23
12 0.65 1.52
13 0.14 0.32
14 0.52 1.23
15 0.73 L7
16 0.53 1.24
7 0.23 0.53
18 0.45 1.07
19

Was 203 3 0.45 1.05
4 0.12 0.28
5 0.37 0.88
6 0.53 1.24
7 0.38 0.90
8 0.22 0.51
9 0.19 OAS
10 0.18 0.42
ul 0.26 0.62
12 0.16 0.38
13 0.12 0.28
14 0.19 0.45
15 0.26 0.61
16 0.54 1.27
7 0.03 0.07


113

Appendix Table 5.Onset of internode elongation of the genotypes in the two sowing
dates.

GENOTYPE ONSET (DAS)
June September

Azucena 48 45
HONG ZUI ZHAO::IRGC 68090-1 32 33
IR 72 58 53
IR 780 70 65
MESTIZO 30 48 47
MESTIZO 7 4 49
NSIC Re 222 66 61
PSB Re 18 66 59
SAHELIKA::Cl 82 63
WAS 203-B-B-2-4-1::C1 68 63

E 5168::IRGC 68021-1 35

114

€8ts rs

LE€h TEL ELZE 67Z 868BZ OTEL LEZ ONE FD) TOL
-y-7-G-E- £07 SVM
St7 Ov7B LIZ 600b SLbh IEEb OOS 796 BLET POD! BBIl L7EE PRIE 96S) 1D" VMITAHVS
OVSElL 0666 PI9S 6995 86S LZLI brOT LI6Z FthPl ott OS €e 81° dSd
LSOOl £919 ISL O1BE BIEL I19EZ HBL ZOLT I9F% BEEZ 008) TZ OW DISN
SOL 7@EPS 98H TIE IL7Z HL Be BBrPl FHLZ ONL It) LOZILSAW
S876 £96 bhL9 995b 9981 SE6T CLE Seve 0€ OZILSAW
6588 O0'7L 9619 Ol bh ESZ7l GLIE CEOE 137 1 6¢ 082 Ul
OTIE O64LL 9S6L SLer ODTE POET 866T soot 69:97 7 U
trotl =IZSL (91 6b 1-06089 DOUL-OVHZ
INZ DNOH
00'cS 0 v 81r6 IpSL I9Lp OBE ChhE STOE 90H LI Bt eusonzy

ooo! O€ZI _ _.

(44 f4 07 6r gr ZU oT ST lag €1 zr Il al 6

war) TVA VIONVLISIG YVTIOO

AdALONAD

“BuLMos €]0Z SUNS dy) UI BOLI Jo SacAjoued oy Jo DoURISIP 1e]]0D'9 21g XIpuoddy


115

SLI9 I91L S98 LS OF

SLES £908 6€98 LIE9 89% 61%
€€00l OOO! 1679

096 LOOZL LESOL @6Sb COTE
OCPrOlL LOT6 OPES

y96Sl CEST O6TFI

Pell vOLE C091 v69% 89 EC TO: I--¢-G-€-£02 SVM
E96£ 6901 BL9T BEL 80'PE 192: VMITSHVS
OS6p L8EE Chol LB SLI 81 od aSd
pS8E OPOL thOE 61 OI 8s€LZ ZZ 9° OISN
g97S BOLI BISE BOL 6TLE L OZLLSAIN
CCLEL PIZEL I9L8 989L Ip bZ OO'EP 8907 0€ OZLLSAW
OZIb 8069 SSEE OOIZ 8595 HIZZ 8s90€ 082 UI
O00] S619 @L6r €98E LObL IES~ ELSZ tL Ul
P6TLI ZELIL 16S 1-06089 DDUL:OVHZ INZ NNOH
S6OvIl €€8S L867 1-17089 ODUI8915 F
ECL S09 GOIS SBEE ELSb eusonzy
€1 aT 01 6 ;
AdALONID

(aa) TVA VAONVLSIC UVTION

6. 8I rae 91 $I br

‘Buimos ¢1 07 Jaquiaydas ay) ul sou Jo sacKjoued oy} Jo soURISIP Ie]]OD‘z aIqUL xipueddy


116

<+— Phytomer 1
A hy,
Ak pet

Appendix Figure 1. Illustration of a grass plant showing developing tiller arrangement
of phytomers. A grass plant is a collection of tiller that arise from a single
Uller or crown and are of the same genotype. Adapied from Moore and

Moser Crop Science 35:37-43 (1995).


117

Appendix Figure 2.Chronological development of new leaves of cereal crops.Adapted
from Science of the Rice Plant (1993).

Appendix Figure 3. The experimental area in BG-10 greenhouse of IRRI.

Appendix Figure 4.The LVDT setup. Left photo showing a clip attached to the
expanding leaf with a fixed reference carried by another thread: middle photo
showing the setup of 8 units of LVDT; and right photo showing a clip attached
to the expanding leaf with another clip attached to reference leaf n-2.

119

B
A 20
. 18 a
. 16
8 ” S38 *
‘ ea ae
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 © 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400

SumT ('Cd) SumT ('Cd)

Appendix Figure 5a.General linear model of Mestizo 30 leaf appearance rate using
probably complete data set of June (A) and September (B) sowing.

B
20
18 * 18 ‘4
16 . 16
14 Pod 14 .
bar . Ss :
4 AS
o 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400

1200 1400
SumT ("Cd) SumT (°Cd)
Appendix Figure 5b.General linear model of Mestizo 7 leaf appearance rate using

probably complete data set of June (A) and September (B) sowing.

18 A Hi B
16 _— 16 -
14 wt b3<0007 14 —
12 P43 12 | Ea
ae . o 6 .
4 a aa PI , fy 0
2f 2«
° o
© 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 400

SumT (°Cd) SumT (°Cd)

Appendix Figure 5c.General linear model of IR 780 leaf appearance rate using probably
complete data of June (A) and September (B) sowing.

120

eaf Rank

LeafRank

200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 160¢ © 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400
sumT ("Cd) SumT ("Cd)

Appendix Figure 5d.General linear model of Azucena leaf appearance rate using
probably complete data set of June (A) and September (B) sowing.

LeafRank
Leaf Rank

0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 © 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400

sumt ("Ca sumt (‘Cd)
Appendix Figure Se.General linear model of Hong Zui Zhao leaf appearance rate using

probably complete data set of June (A) and September (B) sowing.

Leaf Rank

© 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400
sumT (°Ca)
Appendix Figure 5f.General linear model of E 5168 leaf appearance rate using probably
complete data set of September (B) sowing.

121

A ms B
- 16 m
12 .
5 = 5 10 -

6
at oy

200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 © 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400

sumt ("Ca) sumt (°Cd)

Appendix Figure 5g. General linear model of PSB Re 18 leaf appearance rate using
probably complete data set of June (A) and September (B) sowing.

B
s A 20
18
16 .
s mr .
x45 a = 2
3 = 10 -
$1 rod Soa
4
0 °
© 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 © 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400
sumt ("Cd) sumt (Ca)

Appendix Figure 5h.General linear model of Sahelika leaf appearance rate using
probably complete data set of June (A) and September (B) sowing.

oy

i
oy

Les

