abba ECOL EHEUT
MARIN CD OREL REL


UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS

Master of Science in Environmental Science
MA. CECILIA C. CARRANZA-MARZA

ECOSYSTEM SERVICES OF RUBBER PLANTATIONS IN MOUNT
MAKILING FOREST RESERVE, PHILIPPINES

CARMELITA M. REBANCOS, Ph.D.

Adviser
can be made available to the general public (Fe pNO
This thesis can be accessed only after consultation with the author and | YES or NO
thesis adviser

This thesis can be accessed only by those bound by confidentiality YES or NO
agreement

Helin). -Marae/
MA. CECII/IA C. CARRANZA-
y U

CARMELITA M. REBANCOS, Ph.D.


ECOSYSTEM SERVICES OF RUBBER PLANTATIONS IN MOUNT
MAKILING FOREST RESERVE, PHILIPPINES

MA. CECILIA C. CARRANZA-MARZA

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF THE GRADUATE SCHOOL
UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE
DEGREE OF

MASTER OF SCIENCE
(Environmental Science)

DECEMBER 2016

STI-18-1283,

The thesis attached hereto, entitled “ECOSYSTEM SERVICES OF RUBBER
PLANTATIONS IN MOUNT MAKILING FOREST RESERVE, PHILIPPINES”
prepared and submitted by MA. CECILIA C. CARRANZA-MARZA, in partial
fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of MASTER OF SCIENCE

(ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE) is hereby accepted.

Ue
ons A Ce ART! (MeAaonro
Member, Guidance Committee Membet, Guidance Committee
Date Signed Date Signed

CARMELITA M. REBANCOS
Chair, Guidance Committee

Date Signed

Accepted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of MASTER OF

SCIENCE (ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE).

DECIB: '. ESLAVA
Dean, School of Environmental Science and Management

Date Signed

JOSE V. CAMACHO, JR.
Dean, Graduate School
University of the Philippines Los Bafios

Date Signed

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

‘The author is the third child and one of the two daughters of Mr. Jupiter Calicdan
Carranza and Ms. Rebecca Carcido Camero. She came out of her mother's womb on the
19" day of January 1986, in Brgy. Pilar, located in the Island of Santiago in Bolinao,

Pangasinan.

She obtained her primary education in Pilar Elementary in 1999 and her
secondary education in Pilar National High School in 2003. She attended Summer Bridge
Program of the UPLB Learning Resources Center in 2003 and started her BS Forestry
course in the University of the Philippines Los Bafios in that same year. She earned this
degree in Summer 2007 with major field in Silviculture and Agroforestry specializing in
Forest Soils. She was privileged to study under reduced fee (STFAP) and a diligent
student assistant during that period. Right after graduation, she worked as a Research
Assistant (RA) and passed the Forester’s Licensure Exam in 2008. While working as RA.
she pursued her masteral degree in Environmental Science in 2010 under the DOST-SEI-

ASTHRDP, in UPLB Graduate School.

Currently, she is working as a University Research Associate |, maintaining and
operating the Soils Laboratory of the Institute of Renewable Natural Resources in CFNR-
UPLB. Accordingly, the best part of her life so far was experiencing poverty and crying
in pain as a result of wrong decisions that with the help of these bad times, she got to

know Jehovah that does not give trials to anyone (James 1:13) instead provides true

guidance for the real happiness (Isaiah 48:17). For this, she became a happy wife of Mr.
William Uniforme Marza, a loving mother of John Willis and Juvic Cyrus, a hard-

working employee, a friend to rely on and child for her parents and in-laws.

A beat

Mal CECILIA C fon MARZA

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The author would like to express her profound gratitude to her Academic Committee Chair, Dr. Carmelita M
Rabancos for the technical, emotional and moral support, without her dedication for the welfare of graduate students,
this final requirement may not be accomplished. To the Academic Committee Members, Dr. Antonio J. Alcantara and
Dr. Arturo SA Castillo, for the suggestions, comments and cheerful motivations that lifted the author up to fook forward
and work harder. And also, to the two great mentors and top caliber professors, Drs. Eduardo P. Paningbatan, Jr. and
Lorreto U. Dela Cruz, for wisdom and teling the author that sol is one of the most amazing ecosystem created by God

To the Department of Science and Technology-Accelerated Science and Technology Human Resources
Development Program (DOST-ASTHRDP) for her scholarship program and thesis grant and the University of the
Philippines ~ Graduate Mentoring and Apprenticeship Program (GMAP) for the additional skils eared,

To Dr. Marco A. Galang and Dr. Diomedes A. Racelis, for allowing the author to be a part-time student. Dr.
‘Antonio F. Gascon, for sharing theories on ecosystem services. Mr. Danilo T. Puerto and Mr. Angelito E. Replan for
providing over the counter tools and equipment and Ms. Myrla B. Palion for assisting the author in administrative
requirements, For. Albert Sanfuego and For. Jan Joseph Dida “sa mga ganap bilang alalay ng mga researchers
hhabang gumagawa ng ating mga research’ and the faculty and staff of the institute of Renewable Natural Resources
for accepting her as part of the family, who provided laboratory, work space and time to accomplish this manuscript

To the faculty and staff ofthe Schoo! of Environmental Science and Management, Tita Malou and Tito Nilo
for providing extra “pakisuyo", the UPLB-Graduate School, Tita Pinky, Tita Cha, Tita Loty and Tita Joji, the Making
Center for Mountain Ecosystems and the Offce of the Vice-Chancellor for Research and Extension, your
‘administrative and technical assistance are very much appreciated

To the Order of the Grand Environmental Advocates (OGEA), Chen, Nems, Lylee, Mamajegs, Milben, Nabi,
Kress, Rox, Shei, Kuya Boni, Meycel and Gilian, for technical and material assistance and for being the best buddies
and batchmates ever; To UP Palaris Confraternity, Kuya Neil, Ate Amira, Kuya Jeff, Aize, Che and Ate Rachel for
being my housements, brods and sisses!

To Tatay Jupiter C. Carranza, Nanay Rebecca Camero-Carranza, siblings Amor, Emie and Francis, and
college siblings, Ara Gendrano, Bea Parungo, Yvette Baulista, Eds Barua and Hnormie Sivila, for constant moral
‘support and financial assistance;

To Wiliam U. Marza, my dearest and ever supportive husband, who is always ready to collect samples and
assistance during laboratory analyses;

To the External Reviewer, forthe very helpful comments that improved this manuscript; and
To the El Danda Congregation of the Jehovah's Witnesses for being my spiritual family: and
To those whose name were not mentioned, slap me the next time we meet and remind me of tis.

Finally, to Jehovah, the Almighty God who created these amazing things thal tickle my research interest
every single day and making al things possible. ABAW A SALAMAT!

DEDICATED TO
Forester MARIZZA B. RABAGO

Tatay JUPITER C. CARRANZA

Nanay REBECCA C. CAMERO

TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHAPTER
Title Page
Approval Page
Biographical Sketch
Acknowledgement
Table of Contents
List of Tables
List of Figures
List of Appendices

Abstract
1 INTRODUCTION

Background of the Study
Statement of the Problem
Objectives of the Study
Significance of the Study

Scope and Limitation of the Study

Il REVIEW OF LITERATURE

Importance of Trees and Tree Plantations
Importance of Soil Organic Matter

Ecosystem Services of Forests and Tree Plantations
Effects of Soil Organic Carbon on Ecosystems Services
Status of Rubber Industry in the Philippines

Plantation Management Practices in Rubber Plantation
Allometric Equations and Forest Conservation

vi

PAGE

xiii

Ces

ll
13
7
19
21
23

CHAPTER

Ill THEORETICAL AND CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

IV MATERIALS AND METHODS.

Duration of the Study

Overview of the Sampling Plots
Assessment of Supporting Services
Assessment of Regulatory Services

Statistical Analysis

V RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Description of the Study Site
Biophysical features of the sampling sites
Climate
Rainfall and schedule of activities
History and background of rubber plantations in MMFR
Soil physical properties and rubber tree requirement
Ecosystems Services of the Rubber Plantations in MMFR
Supporting services
Regulatory services
A. Erosion regulation
B. Climate regulation

VI SUMMARY, CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION
Summary

Conclusion
Recommendation

27
27
29
30
35

36
36
37
38
39
43
47
47
$7
38
63

75
78
19

CHAPTER

VII LITERATURE CITED

VIIL APPENDICES

viii

PAGE

84

94

TABLE

LIST OF TABLES.

Soil fertility parameters and their corresponding laboratory analysis
Monthly rainfall data obtained from the UPLB Agromet Station

List of tree species in the old stand with corresponding standing
biomass and carbon stock (Jan-Mar 2010)

Soil physical properties of the two rubber plantations in MMFR
(May 2016)

Mean differences of bulk density (BD) of the young and old stands.
Soil chemical properties of the two rubber plantations in MMFR.

Mean differences between the amount of soil organic matter (SOM)
of young and old stand

Mean differences between the soil pH of the young and old stands.

Mean differences between the soil nitrogen percentage based on
SOM of young and old stand.

Factors that could affect topsoil retention and surface run-off (May
2016).

Mean differences between the vegetative mats on the soil surface of
young and old stands.

Mean differences of surface litter between the young and the old
stand,

Aboveground standing biomass and carbon stock of 3-year and 50-
year old rubber plantations in MMFR (May 2016).

Standing root biomass and carbon stock of 3-year and 50-year old
rubber plantations in MMFR (May 2016).

Mass of soil organic carbon (SOC) stored at the two rubber
plantations at 50 cm soil depth (May 2016)

PAGE
29
39

41

44

45
48

49

52

54

58

60

60

63

67

68

Mean percentage of soil organic carbon (SOC) of young and old
stand (May 2016),

Total belowground carbon stock of the two rubber plantations in
MMER (May 2016).

Total estimates of carbon stock on the two rubber plantations in
MMFR (May 2016).

PAGE

69

70

2

LIST OF FIGURES

FIGURE PAGE
1 The conceptual framework of the study. 25
2 Sampling layout for the young stand. 28
3 Sampling layout for the old stand. 28
4 Location map of study sites. 36
5 Mixed mature stand of rubber trees in MMFR (May 2016). 40
6 Young stand with rubber tree (A), malapapaya (B), and 42

batino (C) in MMFR Buffer Zone.

7 Mean % SOM of the young and old stands with 50
corresponding soil depth (May 2016)

8 The qualitative amounts of NPK between the two 56
plantations (May 2016)
Young stand showing thick weeds in May 2016. 65
10 Differences of % carbon stock of various plantation B

components of the two stands (May 2016).

xi

LIST OF APPENDICES

APPENDIX

Statistical analysis of bulk density (BD) of the young and old rubber
stands in MMFR.

Statistical analysis of soil organic matter (SOM) of the young and old
stands in MMFR.

Statistical analysis of soil pH of the young and old stands in MMER.

Statistical analysis of %Nitrogen based on %SOM of the young and
old stands in MMER.

Estimation of soil surface area covered by live vegetation parts
(vegetative mats) in young and old stands of MMR.

Estimation of mean forest litter of young and old stands in MMFR.

Statistical analysis of forest floor litter of young and old rubber stands
in MMER.

Above and below ground biomass in the young stand,
Estimation of undergrowth biomass in th young and old stands.

Soil organic carbon for surface and sub-surface soil of the young and
old stand.

Statistical analysis for the amount of carbon stored (tor/ha) at 50cm
depth of soil.

Statistical analysis for percent soil organic carbon of thw two rubber
plantations.

xii

PAGE

95

96

97

98

99

100

102

103
105

106

108

109

ABSTRACT

MARZA, MA. CECILIA C. University of the Philippines Los Bafios. December 2016.

Ecosystem Services of Rubber Plantations in Mount Makiling Forest Reserve,
PI

Major Adviser: Dr. Carmelita M. Rebancos

The general objective of the study is to assess the supporting and the regulating
services of the two rubber plantations in Mt. Makiling Forest reserve. The two plantations
studied were the old rubber plantation inside the Molawin-Dapalit subwatershed and the
young stand located in MMFR Buffer Zone near the boundaries of PCC and DTRI. The
methodologies to attain the objective are: 1) field reconnaissance survey, plot
establishment and data collection; 2) assessment and comparison of the two sites in terms
of their soil fertility, coverage of vegetative mats, amount of litter and above and below
ground carbon stock of vegetation, and soil organic carbon at 50 cm depth; and 3)
literature review.

In terms of supporting service through soil fertility, the old stand was found to be
fertile in terms of the available amount of phosphorus, sufficient amount of exchangeable
potassium and amount of nitrogen than the young stand. In terms of the amount of soil
organic matter in the surface soil (0-20cm), the young stand had significant higher
amount at 5.84% than 4.46% in the old stand while in the sub-soil the values are lower
and were not significantly different between the two sites. The soil reaction in the surface
soil was also significantly higher in the young stand at pH 5.95 than in the old stand at
pH 5.10 and their sub-surface soil pH were not significantly different

In terms of regulatory services through erosion regulation, the two stand were not
significantly different in this function, although vegetation mats composition were very
different between the young and the old stand. Another regulatory service was climate
regulation through carbon storage and it was found out that the total estimated stored
carbon of the old stand was 375.69 tons/ha significantly higher against the young stand at
131.62 tons/ha.

The ecosystem services of the young and old stands differed primarily due to their
age gap, species composition and management scheme.

Keywords: Ecosystem services, rubber plantation, Mt. Makiling Forest Reserve

xiii

CHAPTERI

INTRODUCTION

Background of the Study

‘An ecosystem is an active functional unit composed of plants, animals,
microorganisms and the surrounding non-living environment portion having strong
interaction among each component and with weak interaction across its boundary
(UNEP). Through these interaction and natural processes; organisms, between organisms
or between the organism and its environment, ecosystems services are produced. These
services are complex in nature, those that are directly enjoyed and eam market values like
timber and latex could be easily monitored. On the other hand, life-support services like
regulation of climate and regeneration of soil fertility had been less appreciated than the

former examples (ESA, 1997).

Forest ecosystem is one of the most important ecological systems because of its
diverse functions like carbon storage, modification of microclimate, enhancement of
water infiltration, and providing several goods and services. Rehabilitating degraded
uplands dominated by grasslands could mean enhancing plant biomass that potentially
increases soil organic matter that later could improve nutrient cycling, top soil retention,

water infiltration and carbon storage.

Centuries of anthropogenic activities lead the rapid land-use change and high
emission of GHGs. Carbon dioxide is one of the GHGs emitted by burning fossil fuel and
forest litter. It can also degrade ecosystems services (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment,
2003) and lead to serious environmental problems like extreme flooding and drought. In
the Philippines, the 1990 national GHG inventory revealed forests arc the largest
contributor of GHG emissions among all other sources (Pulhin and Lasco, 2003). Once
emitted all greenhouse gases will be accumulated in the atmosphere for a certain time.
Unless a mechanism or mitigation is done to store them somewhere elsem, so that it will
not further affect all other biogeochemical cycles on the planet that endangers ecosystems
services. Ecosystems degradation can impair ecosystems services or even result to
societal downfall. Briones (2009) reported that problem soils in the Philippines covered
an area of about 22.6 million hectares which is 74.9% of the country’s total area. The loss
of natural cover and watershed associated degradation reduces freshwater availability and
affects water quality negatively. Problem soils and deforestation in the upland ecosystems
declines lowland productivity as a result of landscape connectivity. According to CIFOR,
rehabilitation of these degraded forested areas in the upland will help recover the lost

ecosystems services.

The CALABARZON became a niche of rubber plantation since the establishment
of a stand in the Mount Makiling Forest Reserve in 1961. Currently, the area is
disseminating on public domains through the efforts of the National Greening Programs
(NGP) of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) and on private

lands through the Rubber Fields Inc. and the Southem Tagalog Rubber Producers’

Cooperative (STRPC) with RA 10089 also known as Philippine Rubber Research
Institute Act of 2010 under the Department of Agriculture as guiding principle. Unlike in
some countries in the Southeast Asian Region, in the Philippines non-traditional rubber
plantations are being established in degraded forest land and up to the present no natural
forests are being cut down to be replaced by rubber trees in CALABARZON.
Reforestation and afforestation using this tree could enhance ecosystems services of
degraded uplands through the enhancement of vegetation cover that contributes
significant amount of organic matter. It is also important to consider that rubber tree is,
favoured as a crop primarily for latex production; and secondly, when latex production
declined due to age, it could be cut down and rubberwood is produced. This wood is a
good material for light furniture and fixtures. These provisioning services of rubber
plantation will not be included in this study. Thus, this study will focus on the positive
impacts of mixed rubber plantations on regulating and supporting services to help local

farmers realize the environmental benefits of rehabilitating degraded forestlands.

Statement of the Problem

The growing scale of human enterprises and mismatching short-term needs and
long-term societal well-being threaten ecosystems services. With a vast area of denuded
uplands, establishing rubber plantations in these areas could address the short-term needs
and long-term environmental concerns. Rubber tree is a potential crop that could alleviate
upland poverty and its technology is already well-documented locally especially in the
Island of Mindanao were vast plantations are already productive. Rubber trees are valued
only for its latex producing ability and its rubberwood but as a tree it can also contribute
numerous indirect benefits that could stand the long-term goals of environmental
sustainability. Aside from the latex production, the plantations could also act as carbon
sinks and being deciduous, rubber trees could significantly contribute litter that may
serve as soil surface cover. Soil organic carbon is one of the key components of soil
quality (Bajoriene et.al. 2013) and with the presence of good amount of organic matter,
regulating and supporting ecosystems services could be enhanced making a long term

sustainable productivity.

Addressing the incompatibilities of human needs and environmental conservation,
it is a good start to understand some of the influences of trees that can modify their
surroundings and can produce tangible benefits like wood and latex at the same time.
Since the rubber stand established in MMFR is the oldest in the CALABARZON,

assessment of the regulating and supporting ecosystems services of this stand can give a

picture on the possible services that the new stand in the region could offer. Also, there is
no existing study that could provide information about the two ccosystems services

mentioned specifically for rubber plantations in the region.

The presence of rubber plantation under various ages in MMFR will provide
information on how supporting and regulatory services differ between the plantations
juvenile stage until it will reach its mature state. Regulating and supporting ecosystems
services are sometimes misunderstood and neglected. Dealing with this two concepts and
investigating real examples could educate the stakeholders on the importance of this two
services. Based on this, the study will aim to answer the following questions: (1) What is
the present status of the two rubber plantations in Mt, Makiling in terms of biomass and
amount of soil organic carbon; (2) What are the evidences that trees affect soil fertility,
top soil retention and carbon storage; and (3) What are the possible management schemes

that could be drafted from the information generated on this study?

Objective of the Study

The main objective of the study is to assess the supporting and the regulating
services of two rubber plantations in Mt. Makiling. Specifically it aims to:

1. Assess and compare the two rubber plantations in their influence in the amount of
soil organic matter and relate it to soil fertility as a measure of supporting service
and top soil retention as a measure of erosion regulation;

2. Assess and compare the two rubber plantations in their influence to climate
regulation by estimating the plantations carbon stock; and

3. Provide basis for recommending appropriate plantation practices that could
enhance ecosystem services of rubber plantations in Mt. Makiling and in the

CALABARZON.

Significance of the Study

Mount Makiling Forest Reserve plays significant role in the landscape continuum
from Peak 2 to Laguna de Bay and a model habitat for diverse species of plants and
animals. The forest reserve is highly regarded for its conservation importance and
undergone successful rehabilitation activities that further enhanced the diversity of the
mountain ecosystem. Currently, it is an important watershed supplying domestic and
industrial needs of its surrounding lowlands and an important venue for local and
international research on various components of tropical rainforest. The cultural
importance of MMER are well-known and the tangible products of rubber trees, like
latex, could easily be evaluate due to the numbers of visitors that regularly visit the forest
reserve and the market value of latex. The role of trees for societies are now taking
center-stage after most of their populations were gone leading to environmental
catastrophe and rehabilitation efforts by tree planting on denuded and urban areas are the
best campaigns to restore their services. So, the presence of old and young stand of
rubber plantation in the forest reserve could demonstrate possible ecosystems services

that could be enhanced when denuded upland areas are planted with rubber trees.

The results of this study will give examples on how supporting and regulatory
services of a given ecosystem could contribute to the whole ecological services of the
mountain landscape. It can give an on the spot temporal data on what could happen to a
mixed rubber plantation from its juvenile stage and after its fifty years of existence. This

study will provide a simplified view on the complex nature of ecosystems services and

will help set up policy that could conserve the natural resources for the benefit of short-

term economic gains while working towards the long-term goal of healthy environment.

Scope and Limitations of the Study

This research will use two rubber plantations in Mt. Makiling Forest Reserve. One
of the plantations is on its juvenile stage and other on its mature stage. The primary
consideration in choosing these areas is accessibility and data availability. The two
plantations will represent two scenarios on estimating possible contribution of rubber
plantations on supporting and regulatory services. Data collection will be done during the
dry season from February 2016 to May 2016. All laboratory activities will be done at the
IRNR-Soils Laboratory right after sample collection. All historical data will be based on
the information provided by the Makiling Center for Mountain Ecosystems (MCME).
Necessary climatic data will be gathered from the UPLB Agromet Station due to the

absence of on-site weather station.

CHAPTER II

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

Importance of Trees and Tree Plantations

Trees are living conduits that connect atmosphere and_ lithosphere
(http://forestlearning.edu.au/). Several non-profit organizations and other advertisements
provided 22 important reasons to plant trees but their importance is due to their capacity
to produce food, materials and services with the aid of photosynthesis (Wikipedia). With
this process plants were able to produce oxygen, store carbon, enrich the soil, feed human
and animal population and even give medicine to the sick. Trees can provide livelihood,
they can increase property values, they can modify the microclimate of an area, they can
be home for wildlife, and they can provide protection and can enhance human well-being.
These are the evidences that trees are wonderful creations of Jehovah (Genesis 1:12), for

human satisfaction.

Trees are wonderful machines because they have the ability to absorb and
assimilate carbon into their foliage and then store it as carbon rich organic compounds
like cellulose, hemicelluloses, lignin, starch, lipid and waxes that are located in their bole,
large roots and even in their foliage, branches and fine roots (Unwin and Kriedemann,
2000). Carbon is found in all parts of the trees and it is approximately half of the dry

weight of the biomass (Johnson and Coburn, 2010; IPCC, 2006). The net carbon

10

sequestration in forest trees was discussed by Unwin and Kricdemann (2000) in three
components: (1) carbon uptake and assimilation through photosynthesis and respiration;
(2) carbon transport, allocation, partitioning of carbon for storage, structural and
metabolic use in above- and below ground parts of the trees; and (3) return of forest
carbon to the atmosphere by oxidative process both natural and anthropogenic like food

chain, biological decay, and combustion of forest biomass and forest products.

Planting trees on marginal and denuded areas if properly stocked will create sinks
that will counteract carbon emission, it can also support environmental improvement like
additional soil organic matter that further enhance carbon storage in the soil, create
wildlife habitat, give aesthetic value and livelihood (Johnson and Coburn, 2010; Lal,
2005). As cited by Jobbagy and Jackson (2000) forest ecosystems are better carbon sinks
than grasslands due to their lignin content which control decomposition rates of forest
litter. Meaning, the higher the lignin content the longer the carbon storage. The website
project7.com/save-the-forest advertised to purchase their product to help them plant 2
million fruit-bearing trees. According to them, this number could provide 15 billion
pieces of fruits good enough to make 2 million fruit pies; 520,000 Ibs of oxygen per year
that would keep 17,000 athletes of 2012 Olympics breathing casily for 76 years; could
add 200 million gallons of water into the air enough to supply lifetime needs of 13,000
people; and could sequester carbon dioxide output of a gas guzzler travelling 52 million
miles which is equivalent to a roundtrip from Earth to Venus and back to Earth. So
woody aboveground like rubber tree plantations intercropped with fruit trees could

increase SOC storage in surface soils compared to grasslands. Evans et.al (2013) cited

in)

that trees sequester carbon both in their above and below ground biomass. Over time, soil
organic matter develops through litter and root exudates and decay and later will
improve soil structure, productivity, and water infiltration and storage. Plantation
establishments on marginal areas enhance connectivity and overall coverage of forest
ecosystems influencing delivery of large-scale services like habitat provision for aquatic

species or wildlife with large scale home ranges (Evans et. al, 2013; Layke, 2009).

Importance of Soil Organic Matter

Soil organic matter affects all soil functioning (USDA, 2014) and it is abundant in
the top soil. Every manager of cultivated soils like rubber plantations must appreciate this
idea through the application of top soil conservation measures. Brady (2002) stressed out
the importance of developing and maintaining stable surface soil to attain physical,
chemical and biological conditions favorable to plant growth. Soil organic matter (SOM)
is a major terrestrial pool for carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus and sulfur (Tisdale and
Nelson, 1970; Liu et. al, 2006) which can be found on the top soil enriched by plants,
animals and people managing such areas. So, Liu et.al (2006) agrees that SOM primarily
improves the physical properties of soil leading to water conservation through enhanced
infiltration (Brady, 2002), and increases available nutrients for greater biomass and crop
yield. It also increases the cation exchange capacity of the soil (Tisdale and Nelson,
1970). When soil organic matter decomposes and tumed into humus, this soil component

could directly affect the plant growth by stimulating root initiation and root cell wall

12

clongation leading to accelerated water and nutricnt uptake, enhancing seed germination
and overall growth of plant shoots and roots (Brady, 2002). In addition, SOM provides
energy for microorganism activity, sustaining decomposition and nutrient fixation for
plant use (Tisdale and Nelson, 1970; Brady, 2002). Further, it improves soil fertility, soil
tilth (Brady, 2002; SARE), crop production and overall soil sustainability, minimizing
environmental impacts while enhancing carbon sequestration. It is important to
understand that SOM releases carbon dioxide for plant use and in the other way, stores

carbon in the soil through soil organic carbon (ESA, 2000; Carson, 2015).

In summary, FAO (2005) listed the benefits when SOM is properly managed,
these are: (1) increased soil moisture; (2) reduced soil erosion and improved water
quality; (3) increased plant productivity; (4) increased fertilizer efficiency; (5) reduced
waterlogging; (6) increased yields; (7) reduced herbicide and pesticide use; (8) increased
biodiversity; and (9) improve soil resilience. These benefits are the results of the
functions of the organic matter. The ability of the soil to provide moisture for plant use is
influenced by the combination of soil texture, soil organic matter, size and volume of
pore spaces within the soil profile and the landform where the plants are established
(Richards, 1993). Fenton et.al (2008) stated that there are physical, chemical and
biological benefits of stable soil organic matter that with careful management, it can
improve soil productivity that will result in greater farm profitability. These facts that are
results of various studies suggests that soil health enhanced by management of soil
organic matter could lead to greater farm productivity and even soil organic carbon

sequestration.

Ecosystems Services of Forests and Tree Plantations

Ecosystems services

Ecosystems services are multiple benefits that people obtain from particular areas.
They are the end-products of ecosystems functions and processes that are directly
enjoyed, consumed or used for human well-being (Boyd, 2006). These services provide
basis for human life like food, water, shelter, clean air and health security that are
sometimes taken for granted (ESA, 1997). These are grouped into four categories
namely: (1) provisioning; (2) regulating; (3) cultural and; (4) supporting (UNEP, CCI and
BirdLife International, 2011). This technical grouping is naturally interlinked through
energy flow and biogeochemical cycles and with the advent of external forces like land
conversion, the bond sometimes becomes weak and the ecosystem services decline
(Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2003), and both support and depend on the

biodiversity (Kremen and Ostfeld, 2005) affecting human welfare and well-being.

Ecosystems Services Provided by
Mount Makiling Forest Reserve

Mount Makiling Forest Reserve (MMFR) is a legendary mountain and a symbol
of pride for the country by its declaration as the 33 ASEAN Heritage Park (Villanueva,

2013). The five important roles of MMFR (Abraham as cited by Pulhin and Tapia) are (1)

14

protective services and influence; (2) education and scientific services; (3) psycho-
physiological influence; (4) consumption of plants, animals and derivatives; and (5)
source of land and living space. It is also known specifically as a habitat for a diverse
number of woody plants and animal species both indigenous and exotic. The watershed
provides water to five water districts authorities within its vicinity. It supports geothermal
operations producing electricity and provides hundreds of recreational facilities with hot

springs. And also a well-known tourist attraction and ecotourism spot.

As urban sprawls along the vicinity and even within the buffer zones of MMFR,
regulatory services offered by the trees are much appreciated like the services like the
following from www.envirothon. org. and were also supported by others (Lasco and
Visco, 2003; Bowden 1996): (1) trees reduce stormwater flow by intercepting rainwater
‘on leaves, branches, and trunks; (2) trees also reduce storm flow, reducing the volume of
water that a containment facility must store; (3) tree cover helps intercept rainwater,
reducing amount and speed of stormwater while filtering associated pollutants; (4) trees
remove pollutants from the atmosphere like NO2, SO2, O3, CO and particulate matter of
ten microns or less (PMio); (5) trees are able to absorb atmospheric carbon, reducing.
GHGs; (6) trees cool its surroundings during summer and can help save money on energy
costs and related air pollutants. In terms of carbon sequestration, older trees have more
total stored carbon in their wood but in a yearly basis, younger trees sequester more
carbon until they reach their productivity equilibrium (Lapitan, unpublished). These
environmental tags are the reasons why exclusive subdivisions, plantation estates and

haciendas of fruit orchards fetch very high market values. Water pumping facilities

15

supplying domestic water also increase their interests of trees due to these regulatory
benefits. But viewing the overall impacts of landuse change and encroaching informal
settlers within the MMFR, these regulatory services are most of the time neglected

(CIFOR; UNEP; Boyd, 2006) due to the absence of information disseminations.

Ecosystems Services and
Tree Plantations

The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (2003) stated that forest and woodlands
are very important land-uses because they provide ecological, social, amenities,
biospheric and resource services. Accordingly, forest covers are the major stabilizing
component of natural landscape, protecting soil and water, households and fields, and
reducing or preventing floods in lowlands and landslides in sloping areas. They can also
regulate the hydrological cycles and processes. Both of these major services of the forests
highly depend on the area and spatial distribution of forests over landscapes. Based on
the gathered data of the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (2003), deforestation
occurred in the tropics resulted to serious impact on the carbon cycle. It is identified that
forest biome across the planet are the major carbon sinks that regulate the climate. For
this, reforestation by plantation establishments like in Costa Rica are credited with
income for the carbon sink and watershed protection services provided. CIFOR also
enumerated various ecosystems services of forests which are complex in nature and

highly site-specific in which society is benefitted but the ecosystem is not paid which is

16

seen on the degree of degradation.

In Hainan, China, a tropical island, rubber state plantations were being established
and monitored as a respond on the growing need of rubber and wood (Zhou ct.al, 2012).
Researchers have found that edaphic and climatic are the main factors affecting the
growth and development of rubber trees. They also agreed that intercropping and cover
cropping are good for the plantations to conserve soil and water, enhance soil fertility,
improve biodiversity, promote growth of trees and improve latex yield. Establishment of
shelter-belts is also favourable in this area to reduce the impacts of natural disasters and
protect the trees from wind. Rubber plantations in Hainan, China were developed
according to ecosystems management producing strong ecological service functions in
soil conservation, water saving, fixing of carbon dioxide and release of oxygen (Zhou
et.al, 2012). In the case of Indonesia, conversion of natural forest into monoculture
rubber plantations significantly reduce the fauna in the same area and tree species
diversity became zero. In Sumatra and Kalimantan, jungle forest is the most common
tubber stand resembling secondary forest (Cotter et.al, 2009). These case studies could
help to build rehabilitation strategies for denuded areas to restore their ecosystems

functions and services.

Effects of Soil Organic Carbon on Ecosystems Services

Human activities significantly alter the face of the Earth since the beginning of
human settlements. Great impacts have been made through land-use change by shifting
forested lands to cultivated lands (Lal, 2005). Since then, cultivation and land-use change
influenced some of the ecosystems dynamics, resulting to environmental disturbances
and setting new equilibrium. Soil is a part of ecosystem that experienced such
disturbance. Its dynamic characteristics like the amount of soil organic carbon is rapidly
reduced until such time that it will reach its new equilibrium. Liu et.al (2006) stated that
monoculture reduce soil health because the amount of carbon, nitrogen and some soil
enzymes deteriorate. Soil organic matter is the main source of soil organic carbon, so
whatever activities that reduce this organic matter in the soil, organic carbon will be lost
or emitted to the atmosphere. When biomass production is decreased, eventually organic
matter supply will be decreased (FAO, 2005) and this happens when plantation
managers’ goal is affected by the high demand for food production. To supply the
demand, several interrelating activities were done and enumerated by FAO (2005) like,
change of perennials to annuals, natural mixed vegetation are cleared then subjected to
monocropping, and increasing organic matter decomposition rate by tillage (Liu et.al,
2006; Marks et.al, 2009). To counteract this loss, FAO (2005) also stated favorable
activities that could enhance soil organic carbon like cover cropping (Ding et. al, 2006),
stand improvement, agroforestry, reforestation and afforestation (Lal, 2005), and

regeneration of natural stand to increase biomass production. Aforementioned activities

18

are sources of organic matter supply and some other activities on tree plantations could
be fire protection (Lal, 2005; Marks et.al, 2009), crop residue management, mulching and
applying carbon-rich wastes (Lal, 2005; Bajoriene ct. al, 2013) could increase organic
matter supply. Litter input and soil organic matter loss rates (IPCC, 2006) could influence
soil organic carbon stock. By enhancing litter input by planting trees, carbon
sequestration ability of the soil could also be enhanced. According to Castillo and Reyes
(2010), rubber trees could sequester carbon three times in secondary forests and ten times
of the mature forests if managed properly and grown in a good site conditions. Alcala
(2005) mentioned that low yield per hectare of some rubber plantations are attributed
from poor management practices and poor nutritional conditions of the soil. Given the
dynamics of soil organic carbon, proper management is therefore needed in rubber
plantations to optimize their economic and environmental contribution especially carbon.
sequestration. Several practices were already applied in Mindanao (Alcala, 2007; Igot,

2005) but in the CALABARZON, these practices were still under refinement.

In rubber plantation, it is important to understand the distributions and controls of
soil organic carbon to predict and ameliorate the effects of global change (Jobbagy and
Jackson, 2000) in local situations (Ingram, 2014; Donovan, 2013). Human activities
(Marks et.al, 2009) as one of the key factors to affect soil carbon stocks must be
considered when looking at how to enhance the soil organic carbon of rubber plantations
because management could modify its accumulation. If soil carbon is one of the best
factor to be included in measuring soil health and quality in establishing these areas, then

it is better to put it in an equation (Liu, et al., 2006) wherein, soil quality is affected by

19

distinct management scheme, environmental considerations to a specific location and
explicit considerations factoring in the social, economic, biological and other value

judgments of stakeholders.

Status of Rubber Industry in the Philippines

Para rubber (Hevea brasiliensis) produces latex which is a raw material in the
manufacture of rubber-based materials. It is a tree that is profitable, versatile, sustainable
and environment-friendly (Alcala, 2005). It is one of the most popular agro-industrial
crops in the world and classified as high value crops of DA under RA 7000 (DA, 2013).
In 2013 the county is ranked 12" in terms of rubber production with 0.9% share to the
world market (www.factfish.com/statistics). Most of the plantations were established in
Mindanao, 90.10% of the country’s production of 425, 705 MT in 2011 came from
Zamboanga Peninsula, SOCCSKSARGEN and ARMM (DA, 2013). However, this
production is still insufficient because in 2014 rubber manufacture imports cost US$ 311
million way behind the natural rubber export of US$ 79 million. Within Laguna province
there are 124 ha of rubber farms that are already established (Castillo II et al, 2014). The
rubber production of CALABAZON in 2014 reached 63.95 MT. In 2015, the region has
293.30 hectares rubber plantation established by individual farmers or cooperatives and
out of this area, a total of 183.30 hectares are already tappable. The National Greening

Program (NGP) of DENR also funded rubber plantation establishments and in 2015,

20

2,346 hectares was the reported accomplishment in the region. However, Castillo (2016)
stressed out that these areas planted with rubber trees need further monitoring to assure
high survival. Accordingly, enhancing these areas through ficld budding is needed to
improve their latex yield in the future. With the Philippine Rubber Research Institute
created by RA 10089, rubber industry is envisioned to be self-reliant controlled by
Filipinos, realizing the goals of human empowerment and economic development in the

country side.

Rubber tree plantations are favoured under Clean Development Mechanism
(CDM) because the tree is a living conduit that could fix carbon to its biomass or store it
in the soil. One example of this is the Natural Latex Carbon Negative model
(Tillekeratne, 2010) introduced in Sri Lanka by Nippon Nature Foams Intemational. The
concept behind this is absorption of significant amount of CO, during the latex
production with less emission during the manufacturing process. Rubber tree is a good
afforestation species due to the fact that it is a pioneer species and matures as a secondary
forest stand in its original Amazonian habitat (van Noordwijk, et.al., 2012) that can
promote progress and can alleviate poverty even in a former war zone in Mindanao
(Solera, 2014). With favorable climate rubber-based agroforestry systems could be
established like in Davao del Sur and Laguna (Cayabyab ct.al, 2014; Paelmo et.at, 2014)
and could ear substantial amount of income (Bagaforo and Camacho, 2014). The rubber
industry in Luzon and Visayas are still on its infancy and was established through the
effort of the government and private individuals. Together with the international and

local linkages the industry could prosper and would contribute to socio-economic growth

21

(Castillo, et.al, 2014) and with rubber forest ecosystem (Zeng, et.al, 2010) and rubber-
based agroforestry systems (Paelmo, ct.al, 2014) social and environmental benefits could

be reap simultaneously.

Plantation Management Practices in Rubber Plantation

Para rubber is native in Brazil and was introduced in the Philippines in 1912. It is
a perennial species of medium-sized tree that can reach a height of 20 m and diameter of
50 cm. It can be propagated sexually and asexually. Its sap contains latex that becomes
rubber when coagulated and wood that could be source of particleboard and light
construction materials (ERDB, 1991). Practices in the rubber plantations are usually
composed of intermediate silviclutural treatments and soil and water conservation

measures to assure robust tree growth, high latex yield and favourable surroundings.

Plantation practices conducted are divided mainly by two periods. First is during
its immature stage, from newly out-planted in the field up to 6 years and second is its
mature stage from 3.5 to 35 years, depending on the clones and tappability or its latex
productivity (PCAARRD, 1997). When the stand is still on its immature stage, most of
the activities done are cover cropping, weed management, replanting, fertilization,
pruning, branch induction, intercropping and stand protection against pest and diseases
(Alcala, 2007; PCAARRD, 1997). Cover cropping is mainly done as soil and water

conservation measure, part of weed management, for protection against pest and diseases

22

and partly for income generation (Igot, 2006). This activity if done in rubber plantation
could add up soil organic matter and could be a pool for carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus
and sulfur (Brady, 2002). Intercropping during this early stage (Taungya system) could
give economic retums for farmers and owners when latex is not yet produced (Cayabyab

et.al, 2014; Paelmo et.at, 2014).

Reaching the age of 3.5 after out-planting for high yielding clones or 6 years for
unbudded seedlings, tapping could be started. This time the stand is considered mature.
Tapping is an activity done by controlled wounding to remove the bark, opening the latex
vessels. There are criteria to follow so that the trees would not be damaged (Alcala,
2007). Intercropping would be discontinued during this stage especially when the canopy
closes, unless shade tolerant crops will be planted. Fertilization, weeding, stand
protection and other activities like pruning and thinning could be done depending on the
management scheme of the owner (Alcala, 2007; PCAARRD, 1997). Mulching using
slash from weeds could be done but owner might not have any consideration of adding
other plant residues or carbon-rich wastes as source of nutrients and could minimize the
cost of applying commercial fertilization (Lal, 2005; Bajoriene et. al, 2013). If the slashes
from weeds are bumed or other tree parts are bumed during the plantation maintenance
this could emit carbon to the atmosphere (Lal, 2005). The plantation practices in para
rubber stand could somehow the same on other crops and the decisions of the owner on
how to manage the farm activities could either enhance soil carbon storage or emit carbon

to the atmosphere.

23

Allometric Equations and Forest Conservation

Allometric equations are used in forest inventory for biomass and carbon
assessment. The physical characteristics of the trees like diameter at breast height, height
of the tree trunk, total height of the tree, crown diameter, and tree species are considered
for establishing allometric equations (Yuen et.al , 2016; Vashum and Jayakumar, 2012).
Allometric equations for biomass estimation must be used based on their applicability
and suitability. It is important to consider some characteristics of these equations like
(Vashum and Jayakumar, 2012): (1) being designed for specific species ; (2) being
designed for specific site and condition; (3) tree diameter range limitations; (4) scale
limitations (plot scale which are too specific, or regional and global scales which are too
generalized); and (5) validity of equations. Site specific allometric equations are more
accurate because of factoring in the site effects. The environmental and structural
parameters of forest and trees could improve diameter-height allometries (Feldpausch
et.al 2011 as cited by Hunter et.al 2013). When using allometric equations in estimating
tree biomass, several errors could be encountered like height measurement errors and
overestimation of tree height due to slope and obstacles, and miscalculation could affect
the result (Hunter et.al, 2011). Behind the possible errors, Hunter et.al (2011) emphasized
the importance of height data which could improve biomass estimation compared to
diameter only allometric equations for tropical forest trees. Destructive sampling for
determining tree biomass is time consuming, costly and sometimes illegal and beyond the

goals of forest conservation (Yuen et.al, 2016). For these reasons, allometric equations

24

are favourable even with limitations, initially because of being non-destructive. Second,
there are equations that are useful in estimating forest biomass whose structures are very
diverse. Finally, this indirect method of estimation is less time consuming, cheaper

(Vashum and Jayakumar, 2012), and promotes forest conservation (Yuen et.al, 2016).

CHAPTER III
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The concept of this study starts on the Net Primary Productivity, from absorption
of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere by photosynthesis and releasing it back through
respiration. The rubber plantations under study are within the Mount Makiling Forest
Reserve. The main vegetation in this stand is merely composed of rubber trees, other
trees and understory (shrubs, herbaceous plants, wildlings, ferns and grasses).

RUBBER Above-and

PLANTATION below ground :

Piomess, Regulatory |
Services

Climate

»il c ni regulation
Litter : “(carbon »)|

Erosion

|
regulation |

Wipittes soil

MMFR
Figure 1. The Conceptual Framework of the study.

Figure 1 shows the conceptual framework of the study in which the solid arrow
lines will be dealt directly while the dotted arrow lines will be indirectly addressed. This
study will try to simulate the systems approach and MMER will be the boundary where
the two rubber plantations are located. The ecosystems services provided by the

plantations will contribute to the whole landscape of the Makiling Watershed.

The vegetative cover has the ability to contribute ecosystem services in different
forms. Rubber plantations has two components which are the aboveground composed of
trees, understorey, surface litter and live plant parts that are in contact with the surface
soil, while the belowground component is composed of live roots and organic matter. In
this study, supporting services in the form of soil fertility based on the amount of organic
matter will be evaluated. The regulatory services that rubber plantation could contribute
are climate regulation and erosion regulation. To assess the climate regulatory services of
the two rubber plantation, carbon stock will be evaluated. To assess the erosion
regulatory service of the two rubber plantation, the ability of the vegetation and litter to
protect and retain the top soil will be evaluated based on the presence of such

components.

Rubber plantations could sequester and emit carbon dioxide as they grow older
and in this process ecosystem services will be generated and could contribute to the

whole ecosystem function of Mount Makiling Forest Reserve.

CHAPTER IV

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Duration of the Study

The study was conducted from February to May 2016, covering the period of dry
season. Most of the activities made were mostly field work and laboratory activities. On
the month of February, site visitation and geo-tagging was done. Third and fourth weeks
of February until the first two weeks of March, plot establishment and sample collection
including tree measurement were done. Latter part of March was dedicated for laboratory
analysis of soil, vegetation and litter samples. Simultaneously after the laboratory

analysis, results were then evaluated and interpreted until the second week of May.

Overview of the Sampling Plots

Sampling and field measurements were done only during the dry season of 2016.
One hectare plot each for the old and young stand was surveyed and sampled. Four (4)
plots of 20m x 20m were randomly established on each study site, covering a total of
1600m? sampling plot, laid from downslope to upslope terrain. Within each 400m’, 3

plots of 1m x Im were randomly established | meter away from a rubber tree and within

28

each plot 0.5m x 0.5m frames were randomly laid. These plots were geotagged for future

a a

references.

50m

} 200m
Legend: |_!20m x 20m plot; ill1m x 1m plot; {£l10.5m x 0.5m plot

Figure 2. Sampling layout for the young stand.

me
Joppa

'— —_ 200 m |
Legend: | 20m x 20m plot; {illfim x Im plot; fillf0.5m x 0.5m plot

Figure 3. Sampling layout for the old stand.

29

Assessment of Supporting Services

Soil fertility

Soil samples were collected from Im x1m plot at specified depth of 0-20cm
representing the top soil and 20-S0cm for the subsoil. Samples were analyzed to
characterize the soil fertility of the two plantations. The analysis was done at IRNR-Soils

Laboratory. Below is the summary of analysis done:

Table 1. Soil fertility parameters and their corresponding laboratory analysis.

PARAMETERS LABORATORY ANALYSIS
Soil organic carbon Walkley-Black Method
Soil organic matter Walkley-Black Method
Soil pH Potentiometric Method
Bulk Density Undisturbed Core Sampler
Soil Textural Class Hydrometer Method
Available P Rapid Assessment
Exchangeable K Rapid Assessment

Nitrogen % based on SOM


30

Assessment of Regulatory Services

Erosion Regulation

Erosion regulation service of the two plantations was described mainly by the
presence of permanent cover and erosion maps generated by MCME. The presence and
absence of living plant parts under litter layer, soil organic matter at 0-20 cm and amount
of forest floor litter was also described. Description of living plant parts under the litter
layer (surficial root mats, runner, vine stems) was done within the 0.5m x 0.5m frame
after collecting the litter and was photo-documented. A total of 12 0.5m x 0.5m frames
were established within the | ha study area both for the young and old stand. Estimation
of area covered by living plant parts was done by multiplying the average % area covered
by a hectare. To do this, the 0.5m x 0.5 m (0.25m?) frame was divided into grids with
10cm x 10cm dimensions, this has a total of 25 cells representing 4% of the 0.25m?
frame. To get the % area covered, the number of cells with vegetation in contact with the
soil is multiplied by 4%, then the mean percentage of 12 frames represented the area

covered in | hectare.

31

Climate Regulation

A. Aboveground Carbon Stock Assessment

1 qT

Tree population consists mainly of rubber trees (Hevea brasiliensis)

and other secondary growth forest species. All trees within the 400m? plot with dbh >Sem
were measured and identified. Diameter at breast height (dbh) was measured 1.3 meter
above the ground using diameter tape, total height was also recorded using measuring
stick since the trees in the young stand were less than 12 meters high. The trees in the old
stand were not measured as instructed by MCME but the 2010 data generated by Castillo
and Reyes was used for estimation. The tree biomass density (TBD) was computed using
the allotmetric biomass equation developed by Brown (1997) for broadleaf species with
the following fomula:

TBD = exp [-2.134 + 2.530 * Ln(dbh)}
To get the tree biomass density in a hectare, the tree biomass density in kilogram

or by simply

was converted to ton per hectare using this conversion unit of (
multiplying the TBDpin’) by 10. In formula: TBDwownay = TBDeagin)X 10

To get the carbon content of the tree biomass, IPCC default value %C = 45% was

used:

45%

Crt: = TBD ons") 2S

32

2. Understorey. The understory (UH) were mainly seedlings, shrubs, grasses

and herbaceous vegetation, growing under the trees with <Scm dbh. The biomass of this
aboveground component was determined by destructive sampling collected inside the 1m
x Im plot. A total of 12 Im x1m plots were established within the | ha study area both
for the young and old stand. Fresh weight was determined then 300g was retained and
brought to the IRNR-Soils Laboratory and was oven-dried at 80°C until constant weight
was attained (for 24 hrs or longer). The total dry matter or biomass density (UHBD) of

the understorey was computed using the formula:

total fresh weight (kg) ___ subsample dry weight (g)
Subsample fresh weight (9) ‘plot area (mm?)

UHBDagm)

To get the understorey biomass density in a hectare, the understorey biomass

density in kilogram was converted to Mg per hectare using this conversion unit of

(

or by simply multiplying the UHBDign’) by 10. In formula:

UHBD ona) = UHBD kgm’) X 10

To get the carbon content of the understorey biomass, IPCC default value

(conservative)

%C = 45% was used: Cun, = UHBDonnay £2
3. Forest floor litter. Litter inside the 0.5m x 0.5m frame was collected, these

includes all fallen debris like leaves, branches, twigs, fruits, flowers, seeds and barks. A

total of 12 0.5m x 0.5m plots were established within the | ha study area both for the

33
young and old stand. The total fresh weight was measured then 300g was retained and
was brought to IRNR-Soils Laboratory. Samples were oven-dried at 80°C until constant
weight was attained (for 24 hrs or longer). The total dry matter of litter (LBD) from the

sampling plot was computed by:

total fresh weight (kg) _ subsample dry weight (g)

2
LBDayin = Sosample fresh weight (@) lot area (m?)

To get the litter biomass density in a hectare, the litter biomass density in

kilogram was converted to ton per hectare using this conversion unit of ( ) or by

simply multiplying the LBDjyn?) by 40. In formula: LBDuonna = LBDixgin’) X 40

To get the carbon content of the litter biomass, IPCC default value (conservative)

%C = 45% was used: Curie = LBDoonnay X=

4, The total aboveground carbon stock (AGCS) of the two sites was

generated by adding the three components: AGCS = Crrrt:+ Cun + Curter

B. Belowground Carbon Stock Assessment

1. Roots. Root biomass density was estimated based on the aboveground
biomass density of trees (TBDjym?)) with the following equation developed by Cairns et.
al, (1997): RBDy rex: = exp[-1.0587 + 0.8836 *Ln (TBD)

and for understorey biomass density (UHBDagn’)) with the following equation:

RBDuni = exp[-1.0587 + 0.8836 *Ln (UHBD)].

34

To get the root biomass density in a hectare, the root biomass density in kilogram

was converted to ton per hectare using this conversion unit of (= or by simply

multiplying the RBDggin’) by 40. In formula: RBDuonnay = RBDigin’) X 40.

To get the carbon content of the root biomass, IPCC default value (conservative)

%C = 45% was used: Croor = RBDiton ha!) =

2, Soil Carbon. Soil samples were collected within the Im x Im plot at 0-20
em and 20-50 em depths. There was a total of 24 samples from each of the study sites
The samples were placed in labeled plastic bags and were analyzed following the
Walkley-Black Method. At the same plot, soil core samples were also collected covering
the depths of 0-20 cm and 20-50cm. The density of the soil core samples and
determination of soil carbon was done at the IRNR-Soils Laboratory following standard
protocols, In computing soil carbon at 0-20 cm and 20-50 cm depths, the procedure by
Woomer et.al (2001) was followed with the equation:

Soil Mass oats) = BD x 222007" x depth (m)

Soil C anna) = Soil Mass (nna) Se

The carbon stock 50 cm below the ground was estimated by summing the

representative rooting depths:

Total Soil C (agnay = Soil C at 0-20cm + Soil C at 20-50cm

35
The total belowground biomass carbon stock (BGCS) was computed with the

following equation: ~BGCS = Croors + Csont

3. The total carbon stock of the two rubber plantations during the dry months of
2016 was estimated by:

RUBBER PLANTATION C STOCK = AGCS + BGCS

Statistical Analysis

To find the significant difference between the variables of the two rubber plantations,

Independent samples t-test at p =0.02 using MS Excel.

CHAPTER V

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Description of the Study Site

Biophysical Features of the Sampling Sites

Figure 4. Location map of study sites ( @)

37

Figure 4 shows the site location of the study and the sampling sites. Site 1 is
located on the buffer zone between the Learning Laboratory for Agroforestry (CFNR)

Site 2

and the Philippine Carabao Center (CA), below the so-called “Makiling Heights.”
is located at the MMFR inside the Molawin-Dapalit Subwatershed (Boot Subwatershed
as described by Tumaneng and Galang, 2012), above the so-called “Valmayor Ville.

Both plantations are located on the northeast portion of MMFR.

The geological formation in both sites dates back during the Pliocene-Quatemary
period. The soil textural type of both study sites belong to the Steep Phase Macolod Clay
Loam. This type of soil is underlain by weathered andesites classified as Typic
Dystrudepts, a soil formation with brown in color, having clay loam surface soil texture
with abundant coarse skeleton made of fine rounded and sharp angular, weathered
andesite; has good internal drainage, with 10-15 cm thick surface soil, brown to grayish
brown, plastic and sticky; the subsurface soil down to 65 cm depth is light reddish brown
with slightly compact clay (Carating, 2014). Site 1 is classified as cultivated area
dominated by perennial crops while Site 2 is classified as open forest dominated by

sparse distribution of broadleaved forest species.

Climate

According to climate-data.org (http://www climate-data.org), the province of

Laguna, specifically the town of Los Bafios, has a tropical monsoon climate (Koppen-

38

Geiger). The climate is tropical and rainfall is significantly distributed all year due to the
short dry season. The average temperature is 27.1°C, the warmest month is May with
28.8°C and coldest is January with 25.3°C. the annual precipitation is 1942 mm and July
has the highest precipitation reaching the average of 280 mm while the driest is February.
According to the Modified Coronas Classification of Climate, This part of Laguna
province is classified under Type III described as no very pronounced maximum rain
period, with a short dry season lasting only from one to three months, either from

December to February or from March to May.

Rainfall and Schedule of Activities

The data collection was done during the months of February to May 2016. Table
2 shows rainfall data from UPLB Agromet Station during this period and according to
PAGASA, when the precipitation is below 50 mm per month, this is considered as dry

month.

Table 2. Monthly rainfall data obtained from the UPLB Agromet Station.

|ONTH 2016 PRECIPITATION (mm)
February 394

March 3.9

April 46.6

May 45.5


39

Based on the Table 2, the period of the study was covered by dry season. During the
month of February 2016, site visitation and plot establishment were done. March 2016
was the driest month according to the rainfall data and this was the time when the soil,
litter, undergrowth and tree measurement sampling were done. April 2016 was devoted

for laboratory analysis and May 2016 was for vegetation mat observation.

History and Background of Rubber
Plantations in MMFR

A. The old stand of rubber. This stand is located between the elevations of 120

to 250 m asl with slope range of 20% to 30% (Tumaneng I and Galang, 2012). The

establishment of this stand in 1961 was due to the possibilities of producing latex in
Luzon. This was also the same year when rubber plantations in Mindanao were spreading
because of the promising income from latex. It is located in Zone 6 of MMFR with initial
land area of 14 hectares (Castillo and Reyes, 2010) and according to MCME, based on
the inventory conducted by Tumaneng I and Galang (2012), this rubber plantation has the
highest number of species present compared to mahogany plantation and the second-
growth forest within the Boot Subwatershed. In 1991, the plantation was tapped by a
private enterprise under a Memorandum of Agreement with the University of the
Philippines Los Bafios. The said operation was stopped due to the private enterprise's
violation of some conditions in the agreement. In 2009, the plantation received

rehabilitation efforts and since then, tapping started again and monitored by CFNR-

40

MCME. This plantation is a significant source of seeds and wildlings of RIMM 600. It is
also a demo area for short courses on rubber technologies like tapping and an area that
serves as a significant venue for academic and research endeavors. Table 3 shows the
common tree species that could be found on the old rubber plantation in MMFR while

Figure 5 shows old rubber trees, understorey and regenerants of other species.

Figure 5. Mixed mature stand of rubber trees in MMFR (May 2016).

41

Table 3. List of tree species in the old stand with corresponding standing biomass and
carbon stock (Jan-Mar 2010).

SPECIES SCIENTIFICNAME DENSITY VOLUME BIOMASS CARBON

(trees/hay (m'/ha) (ton/ha) (ton/ha)
Rubber Hevea brasiliensis 258 166.40 185.60 83,52
Big-leafed Swietenia macrophylla 158 129.47 153.23 68.95
Mahogany
Igyo Dysoxylum NM 30.41 39.74 17.88
gaudichaudianum
Rarang Erythrina subumbrans NM 29.50 25.58 11.51
Palosanto Triplaris cumingiana 42 24.32 20.09 9.04
Tibig Ficus nota 32 13.59 13.03 5.87
Kalantas Toona calantas 42 13.52 11.56 5.20
Bagtikan Parashorea malaanonan NM 951 7.42 3.34
Anubing Artocarpus ovatus 24 8.45 681 3.07
Magabuyo Celtis luzonica NM 6.25 6.13 2.76
Hang-ilang Cananga odorata NM 5.43 5.86 2.64
Amugis Koordersiodendron NM 4.98 5331 2.39
pinnatum
Amuyong Goniothalamus amuyon NM 4.42 4.65 2.09
Banuyo Wallaceodendron NM 440 448 2.02
celebicum
Binuang Octomeles sumatrana NM 3.74 424 191
Kalomata Clausena brevistyla NM 1.82 1.80 0.81
Kalios Streblus asper NM 1.47 LSI 0.68
Alupag Litchi chinensis NM 141 1.03 0.46
hilippinensis
Dungo Ficus pubinervis NM 1.34 0.94 0.42
Antipolo Artocarpus blancoi NM 118 0.81 0.37
Butli Ficus gul NM 56 0.55 0.25
Hamindang — Macaranga bicolor NM 0.34 0.48 0.22
Aplas Ficus irisana NM O19 0.36 0.16
Basikong Ficus botryocarpa NM 0.19 0.22 0.10
Anuling Pisonia umbellifera NM 0.09 0.19 0.08
Upling gubat_ Ficus ampelas NM 0.07 0.10 0.05
Santol Sandoricum koetjape NM 0.06 0.10 0.05
Tuai Bischofia javanica NM 0.04 0.08 0.04
Katap Trigonostemon NM 0.04 0.08 0.04
acuminatus

Miscellaneous _(Unidenti
Adopted from: Castillo and Reyes, 2010

NM 12 0.19 0.08
NM = not mentioned in the report


42

B. The Young Stand. This stand was established in 2012 through the research
grant of DA-BAR and UPLB-CFNR to determine the early growth performances of
rubber trees and indigenous species like batino (Alstonia macrophylla), batikuling (Litsea
Jeytensis), malapapaya (Polyscias nodosa), and cacao (Theobroma cacao) together with
agricultural crops in a mixed agroforestry system. Before the project, this area was used
as an experimental site for growth performance of tubang-bakod (Jatropha curcas) and

antsoan-dilaw (Senna spectabilis).

Figure 6. Young stand with rubber tree (A), malapapaya (B) and batino (C) in MMFR
Buffer Zone (May 2016).

Other species that dominated the area even before the plantation of tubang-bakod
were paper mulberry (Broussonetia papyrifira), igyo (Dysoxylum gaudichaudranum),

ipil-ipil (Leuceana leucocephala) and lipang kalabaw (Dendrocnide meyeniana), At

43

present, the plantation serves as a laboratory area for CFNR students. The stand during
data collection is shown in Figure 4 with indigenous trees intercropped and lush

undergrowth.

Soil Physical Properties and
Rubber Tree Requirement

Rubber trees are considered plantation crops rather than tree species for site
rehabilitation (DA-BAR; PCARRD, 1997). The requirements to attain its full potential as
a crop according to DA are: fairly deep surface soil of at least 1.0 m, with undulating to
rolling terrain, and good drainage. Based on the assessment done on the two rubber
plantation, the average soil textural class (using hydrometer method), average percent soil
separates, average bulk densities (using undisturbed core sampling), and soil moisture
(using gravimetric method) of two rubber stand with soil depth divisions of 0-20 cm for

top soil and 20-50 em for sub-soil are presented in Table 4

Soil texture determines the total amount of pore spaces available for the retention
of water and nutrient. It also dictates air and water circulation through the soil (Brady,
2002). The soil characteristics on both sites have the same textural class in two soil depth
division. At 0-20 cm, both plantations have Clay Loam textural class (medium-textured
(USDA, 2014) and at 20-50, it is Sandy Clay Loam (coarse-texture (USDA, 2014). Based

on the assessment and Philippine Recommends (PCARRD, 1997), the areas conformed to

44

the needs of rubber plantations in terms of physical properties of the soil. However, there
are areas in the plantation that is less than | m depth especially those that are located in
very steep top ridges which are very common in the old plantation. In establishing rubber

plantations it is better to avoid areas with thin soil or having thickness less than | m.

Table 4. Soil physical properties of the two rubber plantation in MMEFR (May 2016).

PHYSICAL SOILDEPTH YOUNGSTAND OLD STAND
PROPERTIES. (cm)
Soil Textural Class 0-20 Clay Loam Clay Loam
20-50 Sandy Clay Loam Sandy Clay Loam
%Clay 0-20 28.16 34.76
20-50 30.37 31.94
%Silt 0-20 27.86 21.28
20-50 21.34 20.46
%Sand 0-20 43.98 43.96
20-50 48.29 47.60
Bulk density (g/cc) 0-20 17 1.23
20-50 1.12 1.16
%Soil Moisture 0-20 20.44 24.63

Bulk density is a soil quality indicator (USDA, 2008) of soil compaction
Collecting representative samples using undisturbed core sampler, this indicator was
calculated based on the dry weight of the soil divided by its volume in g/cc. It is affected

by soil texture, amount of organic matter and soil aggregation (USDA, 2008; Brady,

45

2002) affecting soil functions on regulating water and solute flow and physical stability

and support (USDA, 2008).

The surface soil of the two areas has higher bulk densities than the subsurface soil
(Table 5). The old stand has higher mean BD on the topsoil than the young stand, 1.23
g/cc and 1.17 g/ce respectively while on the subsoil, the old stand also higher value at
1.16 g/ce compared to the young stand at 1.12 g/cc. To find the statistical significance, an
independent samples t-test at a=0.02 was conducted and the results suggest that these

values are not significantly different between the two stands.

Table 5. Mean differences of bulk density (BD) of the young and the old stands.

BD NUMBER OF MEAN STANDARD STD ERROR
SAMPLES DEVIATION MEAN
Young Old Young Old Young Old Young Old
Surface
Soil 12 12 1171.23 0.06 0.10 0.02, 0.03
(0-20)
Independent t-test result Statistically not significant
Sub-
surface 12 12 112 116 0.03 (0.05.01 0.01
soil
(20-50)
Independent t-test result Statistically not si

For Clay Loam (0-20 cm depth) soil with mean BD of 1.45 g/cc while 1.63 g/cc
for Sandy Clay Loam (20-50 cm depth) (USDA, 2014), this result is still favorable and

within the range of optimum root growth, water infiltration and solute flow. In general,

46

bulk density increases with soil depth due to reduced organic matter, aggregation and root
penetration and also with the weight of the overlying top soil (Brady 2002) but based on
the assessment, the results were in the opposite. This might be due to the nature of the
study sites. The old plantation was tapped regularly in 1991 for commercial purpose but
was eventually stopped and later this 2012 to present, tapping was being carried out for
research purposes. This value of bulk density resulted from the soil compaction due to
frequent activities and will have future impacts on the other soil properties and even
water and nutrient availability. In rubber plantation, trampling the top soil by human feet
is inevitable especially when tapping commences commonly at age 6. Having BD values
of 1.17g/cc at juvenile stage which is higher than the ideal, there is a tendency that as the
plantation grows older, soil compaction could be observed based on the mean values
gathered from the old plantation at 1.23g/cc. In addition, these results show that in rubber
plantations, soil compaction is common and interventions are indispensable to avoid
restriction of plant growth, water infiltration and limiting soil and nutrient availability
especially for the next cycle (about 40 years). In this study, soil texture and bulk density
are good physical soil quality indicators (USDA) affecting soil fertility and ecosystems

services.

47

Ecosystems Services of the Rubber Plantations in MMFR

Supporting Service

Supporting service is one of the four services that an ecosystem could provide
through natural processes that support provisioning and cultural services (UNEP, ESA,
1997; Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2003; Boyd, 2006; Layke, 2009; CCI and
BirdLife International, 2011; Busch et. al, 2012; Faber and van Wensen, 2012; Everard
and Waters, 2013). Degrading these processes like nutrient cycling (Layke, 2009), could
affect latex production in rubber plantations. According to Faber and van Wensen (2012),
nutrient cycling could be indicated by available phosphorus and exchangeable potassium
together with soil organic build-up and maintenance. This service could be measured by
describing soil fertility level based on the requirements of rubber plantation of soil
quality with pH range of 6.0 to 6.8, although it can tolerate pH 5.0 and macronutrients
level must at least 4.5% nitrogen, 20 ppm phosphorus and 150 ppm potassium

(PCARRD, 1997).

One way of determining soil fertility is the use of rapid assessment using soil test
kits and this method is commonly used by rubber plantation managers in the
CALABARZON to help them decide for fertilizer application. Since soil test kit involves

chemical analysis that measures the amount of nutrients available to plants, this tool

reduces cost for laboratory tests, providing results available in just an hour with

accompanying fertilizer recommendation for rubber trees at various ages. The amount of

48

organic matter in the soil is also another way by which soil fertility could be assessed
(Karlen, et. al, 1997) because its amount could be used to estimate the amount of
mineralized nitrogen, phosphorus and sulfur available for crop production (Tisdale and
Nelson, 1970; Liu et. al, 2006; USDA, 2014). Good amount of soil organic matter
improves crop production and overall sustainability of rubber plantations. On the other
hand, SOM releases carbon dioxide for plant use and in the other way, stores carbon in
the soil through soil organic carbon (ESA, 2000; IFPRI, 2009; Carson, 2015) and it
affects all soil functions, and one of the most important indicator of soil health (USDA,
2014). Table 7 shows the result of chemical analysis and rapid assessment of soil fertility

of the two rubber stands.

Table 6. Soil chemical properties of the two rubber plantations in MMFR.

CHEMICAL SOIL DEPTH YOUNG STAND OLD STAN
PROPERTIE: (em
Soil organic carbon (%) 0-20 3.39 259
20-50 0.94 081
Soil organic matter (%) 0-20 5.84 4.46
20-50 1.62 1.40
Soil pH 0-20 56-64 46-54
20-50 49-58 47-53
Available P (ppm) 0-20 6-15 (low) 16-24 (medium)
20-50 0-5 (very low) 16-24 (medium)
Exchangeable K (ppm) 0-20 144-295 (sufficient) 144-295 (sufficient)
20-50 46-83 (deficient) 46-83 (deficient)
Nitrogen (% based on OM) 0-20 0.29 0.22
20-50 0.08 0.07
Nitrogen (rapid 0-20 Low High

assessment) 20-50 Low Medium,

49

Based on the chemical analysis shown in Table 6, soil organic matter was
significantly higher in the young stand than in the old stand. This might be attributed to
the absence of cnough moisture for soil organic matter decomposition during that time
(USDA, 2014), the nature of annual plants that dominated the area as ground cover which
contributed organic matter, unknown population of soil microfauna, absence of bigger
trees that could exploit the organic matter and the past activities done in the site like
putting up soil and water conservation measures, and regular clearing of the area to
remove weeds that were also used as mulch in the area. To compare the difference, an
independent t-test was conducted (Table 7) and the result found out that the young stand
has 5.84% organic matter on its topsoil, which is higher than the present amount found in
the old stand at 4.46%.

Table 7. Mean differences between the amount of soil organic matter (SOM) of young
and old stand.

SOM NUMBER OF MEAN STANDARD STD ERROR
SAMPLES DEVIATION MEAN
Young Old Young Old Young Old Young Old

Surface

Soil 12 12 584 4461.08 0.82031 0.24

(0-20)

Independent t-test result Significantly different

Sub-

surface

soil 12 12 162 140 0.44 «= (0.70013 0.20

(20-50)

Independent t-test result Statistically not significant

50

To compare the significance of organic matter in the sub-soil, independent t-test
was also conducted but found no significant difference between the young stand (1.62%)
and old stand (1.40%). According to Brady (2002), an ideal soil has at most 5% organic
matter, in this manner 5.84% soil organic matter in the young stand is above the ideal
value while the old stand is below this value at 4.46% at soil depth of 0-20 cm. At the
sub-soil (20-50 cm) the amount decreases, the same is true to the old stand. Surface soil
tends to have higher organic matter concentration than the sub-soil due to the fact that
forest litter is above this portion of the soil, so there is a direct contribution of organic
matter to the surface soil than to the sub-surface. The differences of the mean SOM
between the topsoil and sub-soil conformed to the existing norm that OM decreases along

with the soil depth as shown in Figure 7.

| 7 ~
| 6
| * 5
|
|
| S 4
0-20
o 3
220-50
M 2
| 1
'}

YOUNG STAND OLD STAND

Figure 7. Mean %SOM of the young and old stand with corresponding soil depths (May 2016).

51

Figure 7 shows the significant mean differences of SOM between the two stands
at the topsoil (0-20 cm). The mean % SOM of 5.84 found the young stand could
contribute favorable amounts of nutrients under favorable conditions. While the % SOM
of 4.46 in old stand is also an indicator that organic matter is not too low in the area. With
these amounts of SOM, both plantations could maintain a sustained supply of nutrients
for plant use if the soil is not too acidic with 1.2 g/cc bulk density for medium-textured

soil.

Soil pH is a soil quality indicator that influences solubility and availability of
nutrients and the type and population densities of micro-organisms that contribute to the
availability of nitrogen, sulfur and phosphorus in the soil (USDA, 1998). At pH 5.5
availability of calcium, magnesium and phosphorus becomes low and below this value,
these nutrients become limiting and affect the growth of the plants. Based on the data on
Table 6, most favorable pH range was found in the young stand at 0-20 cm with pH range
of 5.6-6.4. However, rubber trees can tolerate pH range from 5.0 to 6.8 (DA,
www.dafu4b.da.gov.ph/pdffiles/ RUBBER_ PRODUCTION. pdf), so, the soil pH under
the two rubber plantations is tolerable by the existing trees. At pH 6 to 7, most plant
nutrients are readily available and at pH 6.6 to 7.3 microorganisms are very active in
contributing nitrogen, sulfur and phosphorus for plants from organic matter conversion

(Brady, 2002; USDA 1998).

52

Table 8. Mean differences betwcen the soil pH of the young and old stands.

pH NUMBER OF MEAN STANDARD STD ERROR
SAMPLES DEVIATION MEAN
Young Old Young Old Young Old Young Old

Surface

Soil 12 12 595 5.10 0.38) 0.38 OTOL
(0-20)

Independent t-test result Significantly different

Sub-
surface

soil 12 12 $33 5.00 040 «0.27, O11 0.08
(20-50)

Independent t-test result Statistically not significant

Highest mean soil pH! was observed in the young stand’s top soil located in the

upslope at pH 6.4 and its sub-soil has pH 5.8, this plot was well-shaded with thick paper
mulberry as undergrowth. The old stand’s highest mean pH level during the sampling
period was only pH 5.4 which is below the favorable pH level for available nutrients and
microorganisms population density but still this value is within the tolerable range of the
rubber trees.

Independent samples t-test was conducted and found out the top soil of the two

study sites were stat

ally different from each other. The young stand has the higher
mean pH at 5.95 against 5.10 of the old stand (Table 8). However, using the same test the
subsoil pH of the two stands were not statistically different. The soil pH in the old stand

both in the surface and sub-surface soil were almost uniform which might be attributed to

53

the depth of rooting zones of the trees (deeper than in the young stand) and the
microclimate affected by the close canopy against the open canopy of the young stand

(USDA, 1998).

Available P and exchangeable K indicate nutrient cycling and both are ecological
requirements of soil fertility (Faber and van Wensen, 2012). Based on rapid assessment
(using soil test kit, provided by UPLB-CA) using chemical tests to determine the
available nutrients for plant use, P and K levels on the old stand were not really affected
by the low pH range. This might be due to some environmental factors that contribute to
the stability and productivity of a forest ecosystem like floral and soil faunal diversity
that were not included in this study. The soil moisture during sampling was found higher
in the old stand at mean value of 24.63% against 20.44% in the young stand (Table 4)
with some plots even higher. On the other hand, the young stand has a lower amount of P
even with favorable mean pH of 5.95 and higher amount of SOM. This might be
attributed to lower mean moisture content of the soil during sampling at 20.44%, the
effects of dominating understorey in this stand which is paper mulberry and the unknown
soil faunal population that are not included in this investigation of soil fertility.
According to USDA (2015) the availability of water could sustain biological diversity
and activity, and site productivity. It aids in storage and cycling of nutrient and carbon. In
addition, the rate of P mineralization from organic matter decomposition could be
affected by rainfall, temperature, soil_moisture and aeration (USDA,
www.nres.usda.gov). So, the differences of microclimate that affects the soil moisture of

the two stands might attribute to the differences of P and K levels in the two stands which

54

was not investigated in this study. Another possibility of having less P and K levels in the
juvenile stand could also be attributed to the condition of tree cover transition (van
Noordwijk, 2012). The disturbance of the land cover from the forest dominated land to
grassland, then rehabilitating through planting of trees could cause ecosystem collapse
and degradation of resources just like the low levels of P and K in the soil even if the
SOM was high. Accordingly, favorable environmental conditions are absent in a
disturbed ecosystems like the condition of the young stand as compared to the stable state
of a closed-canopy forest like the old stand. The limiting number of faunal population in
the young stand could also be considered while the old stand has stable and diverse soil
faunal population due to the absence of disturbance like land use change for 50 years
(Brauman et.al, 2014, van Noordwijk et.al, 2012, Marks et.al, 2009). Soil faunal
biodiversity plays important role in OM mineralization (USDA-NRCS, 2015: Brady.

2002) but was not included in this study.

Table 9. Mean differences between the soil nitrogen percentage based on SOM of young

and old stand.
NITROGEN NUMBER OF MEAN STANDARD STD ERROR
(%) SAMPLES DEVIATION MEAN
Young Old Young Old Young Old Young Old

Surface Soil

(0-20) 12 12 0.29 0.22 0.05 (0.0.04 0020.01
Independent t-test result Significantly different
Sub-surface

soil

(20-50) 12 12 0.08 = 0.07 0.020.030.0101

Independent t-test result Statistically not significant


55

Nitrogen level based on the percentage of organic matter present in the soil,
young stand has 0.29% at the top soil and 0.08% at the subsoil while in the old stand, it

has 0.22% in the top soil and 0.07% in the sub-soil.

Based on rapid assessment done (Table 6), the amount of N in the young stand
was both found low at the topsoil and subsoil while the old stand was found to have high
N (75 to 125 mg N/kg soil for clay soils) at the topsoil and medium N (50-75 mg N/kg
soil) at the sub-soil (soil quality.org.au). This is contradictory with the amount of N based
on organic matter. At the top soil (Table 9), N was found to be significantly higher with
mean 0.29% in the young stand compared with the 0.22% in the old stand. In the subsoil
of the both plantations, the values of N were not significantly different using an
independent samples t-test (Table 13). The differences in the two procedures is that the
rapid assessment measures the available nitrogen for plant use including those that are
present in the mineral soil and organic soil while N based on SOM accounted only what
is present in the organic soil. The availability of N for plant use depends on moisture
availability and the soil faunal population that will mineralize the present OM
(soilquality.org.au). In addition to this, the presence of soil faunal population to convert
OM into available forms of nitrogen is unknown and according to Brauman et. al (2014)
and van Noordwijk et. al (2012) soil functional biodiversity differs between various
stages of forest cover transition and presence of soil microorganisms capable of

decomposing organic matter affects the amount of available N for plant use.

56

Based on this, the results of rapid assessment for NPK suggest that
microorganisms in the young stand has not yet been stabilize to mutually work with the
soil to supply enough nutrients from OM as compared to the old stand. Although this
generalization still needs to be verified by thorough investigation of this matter. With the
present amount of OM on the young stand, managers should be very careful in
conserving the top soil by putting soil and water conservation measures during rubber
plantations juvenile stage because NPK are prone to leaching (soilquality.org.au) and OM
could be eroded easily during heavy rains. A need to enhance soil faunal population
could also be done to mineralize the amount of soil organic matter and make it available

to plant use (Marks, et.al, 2009; Cotter et.al, 2009) by applying bio-inoculants during the

nursery stage of rubber seedlings.
| |
| HIGH =
| mepium |
ap |
Low ak |
veRY LOW i Lo
020 | 050 20-50
YOUNG STAND OLD STAND |

Figure 8. The qualitative amounts of NPK between the two plantations (May 2016).

57

The presence of favorable amount of soil organic matter in the two rubber
plantation indicates that plantations could sustain themselves even left unfertilized as
what happened to the old stand. However, the presence of pH range below 5.5, even
reaching 4.6 would limit NPK availability and microorganism population, making the
soil less fertile and requires higher input to establish a rubber plantation which is a
common situation with marginal areas (Briones, 2009) and was observed in the young
stand. Based on the rapid assessment, the old stand is suggested to be fertile than the

young stand due to the favorable amounts of available NPK as shown in Figure 8

Regulatory Services

Regulatory services are the benefits obtained from the capacity of an ecosystem to
control natural process to avoid environmental degradation and catastrophe (UNEP, ESA,
1997, Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2003; Boyd, 2006; Layke, 2009;CCI and
BirdLife International, 2011; Busch et. al, 2012; Faber and van Wensen, 2012; Everard
and Waters, 2013). This study focuses on (1) erosion regulation and (2) climate

regulation.

58

Erosion regulation according to Layke (2009), deals mainly on the effect of
vegetative cover that regulate rainfall interception and reducing the velocity and intensity
of raindrops that will affect loosening of soil particles. This affects change of surface run-
off volumes and velocities, infiltration and groundwater levels, anchoring, arching,
buttressing and soil reinforcing (Marks, et.al, 2009; Bowden, 1996). Several materials
generated from plants like plant litter in plantation floors, organic matter and living plant
parts on contact with the top soil could regulate soil erosion compared to bare soils or
croplands (Zhang et. al, 2003). Table 10 shows parts of rubber plantation aside from the
aboveground biomass of trees and understorey that played crucial role in maintaining a
“no apparent erosion rate” results based on MCME Erosion map-generated where the two
study sites were located. This result was maintained inspite of the sloping nature of the

study sites.

Table 10. Factors that could affect soil surface retention and surface run-off (May 2016).

PLOT BULKDENSITY AREACOVERED SURFACE LITTER
gee (0-20em) BY VEGETATIVE (ton/ha)
MATS (ha)

50M (0-20 em)

Young Old Young Old Young Old Young Old
121 139-057-060 10.16. 49.23 4.05 5.42
113° 1180.28 0.55 .21.03 20.73 6.50 4.80
124 1.12 030-037 -3.32, 46.03. «6394.34
1101.23, 0600.48 36.67 40.49 6.42, 3.27

aun

Mean 1.17 1.23 0.44 0.50 17.80 39.12 5.84 4.46


59

Table 10 shows the soil bulk density as affected by soil compaction, root penetration and
solute flow (USDA, 2015); the presence of vegetation cover that is directly in contact
with the top soil (vegetative mat), holds the soil physically and adds organic matter as
these die-off; the presence of litter layer that serves as mulch and physical cover that
protects the top soil; and the amount of organic matter that affects soil aggregation and
porosity. The mean bulk densities were not statistically different (Table 5) and within the
range of the ideal value that do not restrict other soil functioning aforementioned. The
soil organic matter on the other hand was statistically higher in the young stand than in
the old stand (Table 8) but both are still within the favorable range (Brady, 2002). The
vegetative mat lying on the soil surface are surficial root mats, grass runners, and vine
stems that are found underneath the litter layer (see Appendix Table 9). The mean value
found in the old stand has higher vegetative mat than in the young stand. In the old stand,
the vegetative mat was composed of 95% surficial root mats and 5% vine stems. There is
no grass runner under the litter layer of the old stand, signifying the close canopy that
hinders the growth of sun-loving species type of undergrowth. In the young stand on the
other hand, the vegetative mat are about 75% grass runner, 20% vine stem and 5%
surficial root mats. Table 11 shows the mean differences of vegetative mat on the soil
surface, The dominant understorey affects the presence of vegetative mat, and also age
and composition of the stand affects this component of the ecosystem (Marks, et.al,
2009). Using independent samples t-test at p=0.02, the old stand has a higher mean
coverage of vegetative mat (mean 0.50 ha) than the young stand (mean 0.40 ha) although

their difference were not statistically significant.

60

Table 11. Mean differences between the vegetative mats on the soil surface of young and
old stands.

VEGETATIVE N MEAN STD.DEV. STD.ERROR
MATS (ha) MEAN

Young stand 12 0.44 0.26 0.08

Old stand 12 0.50 0.20 0.06

Statistical result = not significant at p=0.02

Another component of the forest ecosystem that protects the soil surface from the
erosive forces of rainfall is the presence of forest floor litter that serves as mulch. With its
presence in substantial amount, the soil surface is physically covered and protected
against all kinds of erosion agents at certain point in time as compared to the bare soil
(Brady, 2002). The mean values of surface litter in the two stand was found higher in the
old stand with mean 39.12 ton/ha while the young stand had 17.80 ton/ha as shown in

Table 12.

Table 12. Mean differences of surface litter between the young and the old stand.

SURFACE MEAN STD.DEV. STD ERROR
LITTER MEAN
(tons/ha)

Young stand 12 17.80 13.50 3.90
Old stand 12 39.12 11.74 339

Statistical result = significantly different at p=0.02

61

One factor that contributed to the amount of litter in the old stand is initially the
age of the trees and the presence of other tree species deciduous species like the big-
leafed mahogany at about 3 to 10 cm thick during the collection period (summer). On the
other hand, the amount of litter in the young stand was contributed by mulching from the
slash (done during site preparation for intercropping) and litter of paper mulberry
combined with cover cropping and grasses that die-off annually in thinner layer of about,

0.5 to 3 cm.

The interaction of vegetative mats, litter and SOM are working together not just to
hold the soil but in due time, improve the accumulation of soil organic matter that aids
physical, chemical and biological functioning of the soil (USDA, 2014) and help the
plantations retain the topsoil, reducing surface run-off volume and velocity, and later on
improve water infiltration and aids groundwater recharge. The presence of vegetation
provides direct protection on the soil surface by providing surface litter, live vegetation
mats on surface soil and tap roots that create underground channels for water storage and
habitat of faunal population that together hold soil particles and improve soil functions.
The soil erosion rate in the tropical mountain ecosystems is 10-20 times higher when
these areas are cleared of forest cover than when left undisturbed (Gonzalez, et. al, year).
Ground cover is the chief determinant of erosion rather than the canopy, so, when weeds
and leaf litter are retained in natural forest and swidden cultivation under fallow, the rates
where only 0.3Uha/yr and 0.2Uha/yr, respectively but when the weeds and leaf litter are
removed, a plantation may have a hundred times more erosion than in natural forest at

about 53v/ha/year (Nasi, et.al, 2002). These benefits coming from the combination of

62

monocots and dicots (Zuazo and Pleguezuelo, 2008) clothe the soil and making it a
complex ecosystem with rubber plantations. This shows that rubber trees combined with
other crops to produce multilayer canopy effectively reduce soil erosion, therefore
regulating the loss of surface soil (Cayabyab et.al, 2014; Paelmo et.at, 2014; Cotter, et.al,

2009; Marks et. al, 2009; Dano and Midmore, 2004; Zhang et. al, 2003).

This study does not include erosion rate assessment but the presence of multilayer
canopy, understorey, vegetative mats and litter layer that serves as mulch, the “no
apparent erosion” (erosion map. MCME) under the steep slope of the old plantation is
made possible through the interaction of all vegetative components, soil organic matter,
soil inherent characteristics and plantation management. Attaining an erosion rate lower
than 0.2 ton/ha/yr is possible in rubber plantations as long as these plantations mimic a
natural forest ecosystem and would help in maintaining top soil and soil productivity

(Feintrenie and Levang, 2009; Marks et. al, 2009; Saha et.al, 2009).

B. Climate regulation

The climate regulation on this study focuses on the ability of the rubber
plantations to store carbon both in rubber tree biomass, other trees within the plantation
area and understorey biomass growing in the plantation, litter biomass, root biomass and

soil carbon. To assess this service the aboveground and belowground biomass and carbon

63

stock of the two rubber plantations were assessed using both allometric cquations and

destructive sampling for estimation.

1. Aboveground carbon stock. The aboveground components of the two rubber
plantations are composed of the trees (all plants with dbh greater than or equal to 5 cm),
undergrowth (shrubs, herbaceous vegetation, grasses and trees with dbh less than 5 cm),
and the forest floor litter (including all fallen debris like leaves, branches, twigs, fruits,
flowers, seeds and barks). Table 13 shows the estimated aboveground standing biomass

and carbon stock of the two rubber plantation.

Table 13. Standing biomass and carbon stock of 3-year and 50-year old rubber plantation
in MMFR (May, 2016).

‘ABOVEGROUND YOUNG STAND ‘OLD STAND
COMPONENTS (3 years) (50 years)
Standing Carbon stock ‘Standing Carbon stock
biomass (ton/ha) biomass (ton/ha)
(ton/ha) (ton/ha)
Trees 22.01 9.9045 302.18* 225.9800"
Understorey 1.77 0.7973 3.91 1.7592
Forest litter 17.80 8.0078 39.12 17.6032

TOTAL 41.58 18.7096 545.21 245.3424
*data from Castillo and Reyes, 2010

Using Brown's (1997) allometric equation in estimating the aboveground

biomass, the 3 year-old stand has a standing biomass of 41.58 ton/ha, 52.93% was

64

contributed by the aboveground biomass of standing trees. The tree population measured

is composed of 50% rubber trees (Hevea brasiliensis), 34.62% malapapaya (Polyscias

noodosa), 5.77% cach for batino (Alstonia macrophylla) and ipil-ipil (Leuceana
leucocephala) and 1.92% each for hawili (Ficus hauili) and paper mulberry (Broussoneta
papyrifira). The standing litter on the other hand accounts for 42.81% and the
understorey partake a 4.26% of the standing aboveground biomass of the young stand.

Using the IPCC conservative carbon estimate of 45%, the aboveground carbon stock of

the 3-year old rubber stand is 18.71 ton/ha.

The five decades old rubber plantation on the other hand has a total standing
biomass of 545.21 ton/ha according to Castillo and Reyes (2010) using Brown's (1997)
allometric equation. This estimate was done within the 14-ha old rubber plantation with
50 plots of 100 m* each. According to MCME this estimate was still acceptable until the
new estimate will be released due to the effect of tropical storm “Glenda™ that toppled
down some of the trees in 2014. The trees” aboveground standing biomass was 92.10% of
the total carbon stock estimate. This means that most of the biomass of this plantation is
stored in the trees” biomass and most of the aboveground carbon stock is located in the
trunks. Forest litter is 7.18% of this total standing biomass estimate and 0.72% is found

on the understorey. The total carbon stock of this old plantation is 245.34 ton/ha.

As per recent ocular assessment, the young stand of rubber trees requires brushing
to remove the understorey vegetation (grasses, shrubs and re-growth of paper mulberry)

to free the rubber trees from competition. Weeding will allow the desired species of

65

rubber trees, malapapaya and batino to grow freely and will reach their desired girth for
rubber so that they can be tapped when they reached their fifth year from establishment

Removal of the understorey means reduction of carbon stored in this component of about
0.78 ton/ha. Proper utilization of the slash as mulch (Lal, 2000) or converting it to other
usable items like using it as raw materials in handicrafts could mitigate emission of this
amount of carbon. When cleaning the area, there is a high tendency that the litter layer
will be exposed and this will encourage faster decomposition of the litter (FAO, 2005;
Brady, 2002) leading to the emission of 8.01 ton/ha of stored carbon. To encourage
desirable growth and lessen the competition in this young stand, clearing the understorey
is needed. Using effective silvicultural measures considering lesser carbon emission in
the young stand and establishing cover crops to enhance carbon storage must be designed

to address the issue of carbon sequestration and emission (Lal, 2002)

Figure 9. The young stand showing thick weeds in May 2016.

66

Conservation of the old stand (Nasi, et., al, 2002) is a good consideration as a
management scheme for this area because most of the carbon stock is stored in the tree
biomass and the nature of MMFR restricts cutting of trees. However, fallen trees must be
utilized properly like converting them to furniture to store the carbon in different forms
and avoid emitting it through natural decomposition (IPCC, 2006). The tree composition
is 35.92% rubber trees, 27.95% mahogany and 36.13% all other species (Castillo and
Reyes, 2010).The understorey contributed the smallest portion of the carbon stock with
1.76 ton/ha. Most of these are wildlings of the older trees. The stand has closed canopy
structure having less sunlight that penetrates to the forest floor, this hinders the growth of

grasses and other weeds that are present in the young stand.

The aboveground difference of the two plantations is mainly due to their age gap,
the 50-year old rubber stand in MMER has 96.27% higher carbon stock than the 3-year
old and this explained the higher standing biomass of the old plantation. Establishing
rubber plantation in denuded or marginal areas following the agroforestry system,
multicropping or integrated farming, depending on the objectives of the managers, will
help store carbon in their biomass and may help in mitigating carbon emission as the

plantation aged.

67

2. Belowground carbon stock. The root biomass densities of trees and
undergrowth were estimated using the allometric equation developed by Cairns et.al
(1997). Table 18 summarizes the estimated standing root biomass and carbon stock of the

two rubber plantations in MMFR.

The basis for the estimation of the root biomass density is the aboveground
density. Without destructing the standing trees, this estimate gives an understanding on
how much the root system of the rubber plantations could also store carbon (Caims et.al.

1997).

Table 14, Standing root biomass and carbon stock of 3-year and 50-year old rubber
plantation in MMFR (May, 2016).

ROOT YOUNG STAND ‘OLD STAND
COMPONENTS (3 years old) (50 years old)
Standing root Carbon stock Standing root Carbon stock
biomass (ton/ha) biomass (ton/ha)
(ton/ha) (ton/ha)
Trees 4.1994 1.8897 84.4700" 38.0100"
Understorey 0.0036 0.0016 0.0071 0.0032

TOTAL 4.2030 1.8913 84.4771 38.0132

*Based on the aboveground estimates of Castillo and Reyes. 2010

In a 3-year old stand, there is about 4.2 tons/ha of roots below the soil surface
(Table 14) supporting biogeochemical processes in the forest ecosystem and at the same

time, it can help in regulating the climate from local up to global scale by storing an

68

estimated amount of 1.89 tons/ha of carbon. After 50 years, as shown by the estimates of
the old stand, the root biomass density and carbon stock could increase to 95% or even
higher depending on the management practices that will be applied in the next years. As
shown from Table 14, root network underground increases and become more complex,
supporting complex ecosystems functions that are sometimes unknown to plantation
managers. If a mixed rubber stand at 3 years of age the amount of carbon stored in their
biomass could range from 1.89 ton/ha and could increase up to 39.78 ton/ha after 50
years or even higher in other areas (Corpuz, 2014). As the trees grow, some of their parts
die-off and will contribute to soil organic carbon and when this type of carbon turned into

humus, their storage could last for millennia (IPCC, 2006).

Soil organic carbon is also part of the belowground carbon stock, using of
estimation procedure described by Woomer etal. (2001) the derived values were

subjected to independent sample t-test and results are shown in Table 15.

Table 15. Mass of soil organic carbon (SOC) stored at the two rubber plantations at 50
cm soil depth (May 2016).

SOC (ton/ha) N MEAN STD.DEV STD. ERROR
MEAN

Young stand 12 111.02 22.12 6.38

Old stand 12 92.33 28.87 8.33

Statistical result = not significant at p=0.02

69

Soil organic carbon stored in the two rubber plantations were not statistically

different from each other with mean of 111.02 ton/ha and 92.33 ton/ha for young and old

stands respectively (Table 15). This estimate is only form surface soil down to 50 cm

below (0-50 cm depth). In terms of soil organic carbon stock of cach soil depth

categories. the young stand’s top soil (0-20) has the highest carbon stock during the

period of sampling (Table 16). In general for the both sites and this is contributed to the

direct contact of this soil portion to forest litter layer (Brady, 2002) and past land cover.

Table 16. Mean percentage of soil organic carbon (SOC) of young and old stand (May

2016).
soc NUMBER OF MEAN STANDARD
(%) SAMPLES DEVIATION

Young Old Young Old Young Old Young Old
Surface
Soil 2 12339259 0630.40 0.18 Od
(0-20)

Independent t-test result

Significantly different at p = 0.02

Sub-
surface

soil 12 12
(20-50)

Independent t-test result

0.94 0.82 0.26 0.41 0.07 0.12

Statistically not significant at p = 0.02

The differences between the two sites in terms of SOC (Table 16) might be

attributed to the management schemes that were applied in these areas. The old plantation

is a mixed rubber plantation that resembles the secondary forest of more than 50 years

70

due to secondary succession that allowed other species to exist together with the rubber
trees, while the young stand experienced land cover changes for the same length of time.
In addition, the young stand was cleared of understorey from the first to the second year
after establishment and was intercropped with agricultural crops later on. Removal of
weeds means removal of nutrient consumers that could also reduce the amount of carbon
in the soil (Nasi et.,al, 2002). Young stand has a higher soil organic carbon stock than the
old stand. Table 20 shows that % soil organic carbon at the topsoil is significantly higher
in the young stand (mean = 3.39) than in the old stand (mean = 2.59). In the sub-soil
however, the values were not significantly different through an independent sample t-test

(Table 16).

The total belowground carbon stock of the two rubber plantations is the

summation of C stored in root biomass and soil organic carbon of the two plantations.

Table 17. Total belowground carbon stock of the two rubber plantations in MMFR.

BELOWGROUND YOUNG STAND OLD STAND
CARBON STOCK (ton/ha) (ton/ha)
Root biomass 1.8913 38.0132
soc 111.0189 92.3315
TOTAL 112.9102 130.3447

The old rubber plantation has a higher belowground carbon stock than the young,

stand for about 13.38%. The young stand has a total of 112.91 ton/ha, SOC contributes

7

98.32% on this total amount. On the other hand, the old stand has 130.34 ton/ha
belowground carbon stock. 70.84% of this came from SOC. The result of this assessment
shows that belowground components of rubber plantation help in storing carbon and
could help in mitigating carbon emission. Disturbing this portion of the ecosystem needs
further analysis to avoid emitting 112.91 to 130.34 tons/ha of carbon or even higher back
to the atmosphere. Proper management schemes on rubber plantation to conserve or

enhance these amounts of carbon must take in considerations.

3. Total carbon stock of rubber plantations, The total carbon stock of each
plantation was estimated using the approximations from the aboveground and
belowground carbon pools. These estimates give an instant glimpse on how much carbon
is present on cach components of rubber plantation. The values also describe the
dynamics where the carbon is stored from the juvenile stage to maturity. The findings in
this study supported Corpuz (2014) that even in pure rubber stand, older stand has highest

carbon density than young stand.

Table 18 shows that old stand has higher carbon stock with 375.69 tons/ha, a
64.97% higher than the young stand. The highest contributor on this amount came from
the aboveground carbon stock of trees followed by SOC. Further, this amount of carbon
stock is 65.30% higher above the ground than belowground. The young stand, on the
other hand, has a total carbon stock of 131.62 tons/hectare, in which belowground is

85.79% higher than aboveground.

72

Table 18. Total estimates of carbon stock on the two rubber plantation in MMFR.

CARBON STOCK
PLANTATION Young Stand Old Stand
COMPONENTS _(ton/ha) Share (%) (ton/ha) Share (%)
Aboveground
Trees 9.9045 7.52 225.9800* 60.15
Understorey 0.7973 0.61 1.7592 0.47
Forest litter 8.0078 6.08 17.6032 4.68
Sub-total 18.7096 14.21 245.3424 65.30
Belowground
Trees 1.8897 1.44 38.0100 10.12
Understorey 0.0016 0.001 0.0032 Trace
soc 111.0189 84.35 92.3300 24.58
Sub-total 112.9102 85.79 130.3447 34.70
TOTAL 131.6198 100.00 375.6871 100

*Castillo and Reyes, 2010

In the young stand, the highest contributor on the total carbon stock came from
SOC which accounts for 85.79%, followed by trees aboveground carbon stock with only
7.52% share. This assessment agrees with the current carbon assessment around the globe

(IPCC, 2006).

World's forest accumulated the largest part of terrestrial ecosystem carbon and
deforestation in the tropics has the greatest impact on the carbon cycle than any land
cover/use change (Cunningham and Cunningham, 2007). In the young stand, however.
the amount of carbon stored in the soil might be attributed to the undergrowth which are
grasses and paper mulberry that is being cut yearly and served as mulch. Annuals dic

back and decompose annually which is one of reason why grasslands have higher soil

73

organic carbon than trees whose carbon are tied up in their biomass (USDA, 2014; Brady,
2002). The age gaps of the two stands explain their main differences that affect their
floral and faunal components affecting carbon storage (van Noordwijk, et. al, 2012).
When the stand is young, most carbon is stored in the soil and atmosphere but as
vegetation grows older and natural succession takes into place stored soil organic carbon
is depleted by trees through nutrient cycling and photosynthesis aid in storing CO) from
the atmosphere to the vegetation biomass, so there is a shift of carbon storage from the
soil and atmosphere to the standing vegetation biomass (Evans, et. al, 2013; van
Noordwijk, et. al, 2012; Saha, et. al 2009; Fenton, et. al, 2008; Lui et. al, 2006; Jobbagy
and Jackson, 2000; Unwin and Kriedemann, 2000, Tisdale and Nelson, 1970;) as shown
in Figure 10 summing up the fact that trees are for carbon sequestration (Johnson and

Coburn, 2010).

100%
90%
80%
70% Trees
60% & Understorey
50% = Forest litter
40% Trees roots
30% ™ Understorey roots
20% msoc
10%

0%

YOUNG STAND OLD STAND

Figure 10. Differences of carbon stock percentages of the various plantation components.

74

Data gathered also shows how management and conservation schemes must be
done on both plantations. The findings would tell that since the young stand hold higher
carbon on the soil, this calls for proper soil and water management application during the
juvenile stage to avoid nutrient loss and maintain the steady supply of nutrients for the

plantations’ future use.

Climate regulation through carbon sequestration of rubber stand varies with age
and management practices. Both plantations are considered mixed stands and carbon

storage could be both enhanced in above and belowground.

CHAPTER VI

SUMMARY, CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION

Summary

The ecosystem services of juvenile and mature stands of rubber plantations in
MMER were assessed and compared in terms of supporting and regulatory services.
‘Assessment was done using direct and indirect methods and comparison was done by
subjecting the results to independent samples t-test with p = 0.02. This was done during
the period of February to May 2016. The amount of soil organic matter was considered as
supporting service. And the regulatory services were assessed based on top soil retention

(soil erosion regulation) and carbon stock (climate regulation).
The results of the study were as follows:
‘A. Supporting Service

The two plantations were assessed based on their ability to provide NPK for plant

use, soil organic matter and soil reaction (pH).

J. NPK. It was found out, based on the rapid assessment method using Soil
Testing Kit developed by UPLB-CA, that the old stand is more fertile than the young
stand. The old stand had medium amount of available phosphorus, sufficient amount of
exchangeable potassium and high amount of nitrogen while the young stand had

sufficient exchangeable potassium, low amount of available phosphorus and nitrogen.

76

2. Soil organic matter, It was found out that based on the assessment of SOM

using Walkley-Black Method, the old stand had significantly lower SOM than the young
stand at their surface soil, 4.46% and 5.84% respectively. In the sub-surface soil the

amount of SOM between the two stand were not significantly different.

3. Soil reaction (pH). \t was found out that based on potentiometric method,
the old stand had significantly lower pH at 5.10 than the young stand at_pH 5.95 in the
surface soil while their sub-surface soil were not significantly different at pH 5.00 and pH

5.33 respectively.

B. Regulatory Services

1 Erosion regulation. The ability of the stand to retain top soil were
determined in terms of soil bulk density at the surface soil (BD), area covered by
vegetative mat, amount of forest litter and percentage of soil organic matter on the
surface soil (0-20 cm depth). The results revealed that the two stands were not
significantly different in terms of BD although the old stand had slightly higher value at
1.23 g/cc compared to the young stand at 1.17g/cc. Their area covered by vegetative mats
was not significantly different with area covered by the old stand at 0.5 ha and 0.44 ha in
the young stand. Their main differences was on the vegetative mat composition wherein
the old stand vegetative mat were about 95% surficial root mats and 5% vine stems while

the young stand was composed of 75% grass runners, 20% vine stems and 5% surficial

7
root mats. The differences in terms of top soil retention of these components were not
evaluated in this study. In terms of forest litter, the old stand provided significant amount
of litter at 39.12 tonshha while the young stand only produced 17.80 tons/ha. Their
differences were mainly attributed to their age gap and species composition. Lastly, the
percentage of organic matter was significantly lower in the old stand (4.46%) as
compared to the young stand (5.84%). The relation of SOM on BD, conformed with the
existing norm that with higher SOM, the lower the BD, however, the differences in

porosity was not estimated due to absence of data for particle density.

2. Carbon stock (climate regulation. The amounts of stored carbon of the
two plantations were assessed in terms of their above- and belowground biomass and soil
organic carbon. The aboveground carbon stock was composed of carbon stored in tree
and undergrowth biomass and forest floor litter. It was found out that carbon stored in the
old stand (245.34 tons/ha) is significantly higher than in the young stand (18.71 tons/ha).
Both stand had highest stored carbon in their tree biomass followed by the litter and lastly
the understorey biomass. In terms of belowground biomass, the stored carbon in the root
biomass of the old stand (38.01 tons/ha) was significantly higher compared to the young
stand (1. 89 tons/ha). The root biomass of the trees stored higher amounts of carbon
compared to the roots of the understorey. In terms of stored carbon in the soil (0-50 cm
depth) the two stand were not significantly different, although the young stand had
slightly higher amount at 111.02 tons/ha compared to 92.33 tons/ha of the old stand. The
overall belowground carbon stock of the two stand was found higher in the old stand

(130.34 tons/ha) than in the young stand (112.91 tons/ha).Finally, the total estimated of

78
carbon stock of the two stands was found higher in the old stand at 375.69 tons/ha against

the young stand at 131.62 tons/ha.

Conclusion

This study concludes that the ecosystem services of the young and old stands of
rubber plantation in Mount Makiling Forest Reserve (MMER) differ in terms of their soil
fertility (supporting service), top soil retention (erosion regulation) and carbon stock
(climate regulation). The main reasons of their peculiarities are their age gap, species
composition and management scheme. The nature and management scheme of MMFR
also affects the existence of over-aged rubber stand and undergone secondary succession
that currently resembles as a second growth forest. While the young stand was still in the
transition state that could serve as an example how to rehabilitate a marginal area. As the
rubber plantation aged, its ecosystem services could developed and could reach a climax

stage that could provide opportunity for both economic and environmental.

79

Recommendation

It is highly recommended that further studies must be done on the other aspects
and factors that affect the processes and functions of rubber plantations in other areas of
CALABARZON. Specific studies on microclimate and nutrient cycling could be done to
further explain the supporting services of rubber plantations. Litter decomposition rates
and NPK fluctuations could also be investigated to further explain the supporting services
of the rubber stands. Also, composition and area covered by vegetation mats together
with ground cover and understorey diversity could be studied further to assess their
impacts on the erosion rates of various rubber plantations and rubber-based agroforestry
systems. To monitor carbon sequestration in rubber plantation, it is also advised to have
regular monitoring of tree growth in certain plantations established in the
CALABARZON. The temporal data could also be used in assessing adoptability of

various clones in the region.

If adoption of rubber trees along the MMFR Buffer Zones is done, this will
require all the stakeholders to come up with ordinances that could secure ownership of
the stands and could draft proposals for carbon trading to secure habitat conservation to
enhance protection of MMER while providing livelihood to its surrounding communities.
These areas will also serve as show room and will serve as demonstration farms for those
individuals in the region who wants to venture in rubber farming. Rubber trees
adoptability in marginal lands and its nature as a pioneer species could post promising

outcome for economic and environmental benefits. Choosing between monocropping,

80
compartmentalized plantation or an agroforestry rubber-based must depend on the
plantation owner objectives and as recommended, always think of the best combination

of economic and environmental benefits.

Issues on Supporting and Regulatory Services

Supporting and regulatory services are commonly neglected and not valued as
much as the provisionary services (UNEP; Layke 2009; ESA, 1997). These two controls
the natural processes in nature that without vegetation cover, both will be degraded. The
impacts of degraded regulatory services due to land use change from forested land to
residential areas would mean massive erosion and global warming (Layke, 2009). With
the presence of degraded land in the Philippines (Briones, 2009), rehabilitation using a
species of trees that can tolerate harsh site condition and later on will modify it and will
improve the site’s supporting and regulatory services. The assessment of the two rubber
trees in terms of their soil fertility, erosion regulation and carbon stock gives an
opportunity to the rubber growers in the CALABARZON, to incorporate cover cropping
and mulching because these two practices were being neglected by the farmers according
to them. These practices are simple and practical because in the natural forest like what is
observed in the old plantation, thick litter layer could protect the top soil and eventually
save the important nutrients in it. And when the stand is at its juvenile stage, choice of
beneficial undergrowth like leguminous cover crops could build-up litter layer that

eventually produces organic matter that will help in storing carbon in the soil, produces

81
nutrient supply and even modify some of the physical and chemical properties of the soil
that will enhance the rubber trees’ growth and productivity. Trees are living conduits and
barriers between the soil and the atmosphere. Evans, et.al (2013) summarizes the

advantages of trees as follows: (1) trees sequester carbon both in below and aboveground

and at the same time they enriches soil fertility; (2) trees improved regulation of surface
water quality and quantity; (3) diverse forest has a greater ability to improve ecosystems
services than grasslands; and (4) intact forest are more complex than grassland and
supports greater biodiversity. Forest rehabilitation and restoration using native species
combined with rubber trees could enhance connectivity and overall coverage of forest
ecosystem with careful and systematic objective in establishing this type of agro-
ecosystems. In MMFR ecosystem, mixed rubber plantation is a contributor of its species
diversity and its ability to support economic endeavors while enhancing supporting and
regulatory services that all the communities within its vicinity are unknowingly

benefitting.

Recommendations for Establishing Rubber Plantations

Rubber plantations promise combined economic and environmental benefits
(Cayabyab et.al, 2014; Paelmo et.at, 2014; Feintrenie and Levang, 2009; Saha, et.al,
2009). The best combination could be found in rubber-based agroforestry system or
multi-canopy cropping system with ground cover cropping (Lasco and Visco, 2003). This

type of cropping pattern however is identified under the state of forest cover transition

82
(van Noordwijk, 2014) due to the fact that once forested areas were denuded, their
functions were also lost and when rehabilitated to cultivated areas dominated by
perennial crops these lost functions could not be restored at once. These are some of the
effects of land cover change that accompanying ecosystem functions and processes of
once been sustainable closed forest ecosystem tend to decline resulting to degraded
services (van Noordwijk, 2014; Feintrenie and Levang, 2009; Saha, et.al, 2009; Boyd,
2006). Even though restoration is a longer process than rehabilitation, rehabilitating
denuded areas by planting tree crops could alleviate poverty by providing livelihood and
could maintain land boundaries between private and public lands (Cayabyab et.al, 2014;
Paelmo et.at, 2014). Since agroforestry systems or tree plantations are considered under
the transition stage from grassland to climax closed canopy forest, thorough management
must be applied to protect the vulnerable nature of the soil that provides physical support
and nutrients for survival and later productivity of the crops. It is also important to
consider that para rubber under the family of Euphorbiaceae, is a sun-loving species that
must not be over-topped, so in an integrated farming system, this crop must be the
dominant crown and must not be suppressed during its juvenile stage because this might
not affect is early performance as a pioneer species. Silvical characterization and
physiological concems of other species to be combined with para rubber must be done

with coherence to their habit in their natural environment.

Based on the findings for soil fertility and top soil retention, combined crops will
provide combined effects on the soil and in return, soil could provide the necessities of

the plants, The presence of rubber trees and intercrops of fruit-bearing and timber-

83
producing trees intercept rainfall, reducing the impact of raindrops through their canopy
and stemflow. The agricultural crops, cover crops preferably legumes, mulch (as input for
agricultural crops) and surface litter, reduce the velocity and density of falling water from
the above canopy. Trees will aid nutrient pumping while leguminous crops symbiotically
aid nutrient deficiencies (Brady, 2002). Rubber and fruit-bearing trees provide long term
economic benefits but usually starts after tree maturity (around 5 years). The agricultural
crops being intercrop during the juvenile stage of trees can give economic returns as early
as 3 months and together with cover crops (legumes) weeds and erosion could be
reduced. Overall, this type of cropping system reduced labor and amelioration costs, and

could enhance carbon storage of marginal grassland. Ecosystems services are

enhanced if marginal and denuded areas will be rehabilitated with appropriate measures
and proper choice of species combination, like in the case of Site 1, rubber trees
combined with batino on the lower slope, malapapaya on the midslope and appropriate
designations of fruit-trees depending on their elevation and slope compatibility around
the plantation with agricultural intercrops and cover cropping of leguminous species
before canopy closing could provide food, water, reduce the impacts of heavy rains and
storm and a scenic landscape and habitat for wildlife. This study is highly recommending
the best management practice that will result to the combined benefits of economic and

environmental whether for the MMER buffer zone or in the CALABARZON.

CHAPTER VII

LITERATURE CITED

ALCALA, E.A. (2007). Rubber: Manual for rubber smallholders in the Philippines.
Kabacan, North Cotabato. USM and PRBI. 72 pp.

ALCALA, T.B. (2005). The world of rubber. Paper presented. Training on Rubber
Production and Management. ATI, University of Southern Mindanao,
Kabacan, Cotabato. 13-23 June 2006.

BAGAFORO, R.O., and CAMACHO, E.C. (2014). Rubber-based farming in Souther
Philippines. Paper presented in IRRDB International Rubber Conference
and Annual Meetings. 24-28 November 2014. Hyatt Regency Hotel,
Manila, Philippines.

BAROJIENE, K., JODAUGIENE, D., PUPALIENE, R., and SINKEVICIENE, A.
(2013). Effect of organic mulches on the content of organic carbon in the
soil. Estonian Journal of Ecology 62(2): 100-103 doi:
10.3176/eco.2013.2.02

BRADY,N.C. (2002). The nature and properties of soils. 13" Edition.

BRAUMAN, A.D., GAY, F., MONRAWEE, M., DE MICHEAUX, M.L.,
CHEVALIER, T., CHOMPUNUT, C., ROBAIN, H., CHUTINAN, C.,
SEBAG, D. and SUVANNANG, N. (2014). Impact of rubber tree
plantation on soil functional biodiversity and soil organic carbon. World
Congress on Agroforestry, Delhi, India 10-14 February 2014 downloaded
from:

BRIONES, R.M. (2009).The Philippines Country Environment Analysis. Land
degradation and rehabilitation in the Philippines. Philippine Institute for
Development Studies. Retrieved from:

BOWDEN, R.K. (1996). Earth retention using vegetation. Vancouver, British Colombia.

85

BOYD, J. (2006). Practical Measurement of Ecosystem Services: Can we standardize the
way we count nature’s benefit? National Center for Environmental
Economics. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, D.C.

Retrieved from: |)ti)» ysemit ¢
50) dt) Sfile/ EE-0507-01 px

BROWN, S. (1997). Estimating biomass change of tropical forest. A Primer. FAO
Forestry Paper 134. FAO, Rome, 55pp.

BUSCH, M., LA NOTTE, A., LAPORTE, V. and ERHARD, M. (2012). Potentials of
quantitative and qualitative approaches to assessing ecosystem services.
Ecological Indicators 21; 89-103. doi:10.1016/j.ecolind.2011.11.010

CAIRNS, M.A., BROWN, S., HELMER, E.H. and BAUMGARDNER G.A. (1997).
Root biomass allocation in the world’s upland forests. Oecologia 11 J:1-
11. Springer-Verlag.

CARATING, R.B., GALANTA, R.G. and BACATIO, C.D. (2014) The soils of the
Philippines. Springer, p. 153

CARSON, J. (2015). How much carbon can soil store? Fact Sheet. Downloaded from
soilquality.org.au.

CASTILLO, A.S.A. (2016). Opportunities and challenges of rubber plantation
development and management in the CALABARZON Region. Diamond
Jubilee Professional Lecture. F.L. ROLA Multipurpose Room. CFNR,
UPLB. March 1, 2016

CASTILLO, A.M.A., PAELMO, R.F., RETES, L.P., MALOLES, J.M.,
SANFUEGO A.D. and CARRANZA, M.C. (2014). Production,
processing and marketing of rubber in Laguna Province, Philippines. E&D
Journal 4(2) 38-54, ISSN 2012-3612.

CASTILLO, A.S.A. and REYES T.D. Jr. (2010). Aboveground carbon stock estimates
of rubber (Hevea brasiliensis) plantation at Makiling Forest Reserve.
Proceedings of IRRDB International Rubber Conference. 18-19 October
2010. Sanya, Hainan, China.

CAYABYAB, A., TANUTAN, P., CARDINES, J., ESTELLENA, N., LUPIBA, J.,
and VELASCO., E.R., (2014). Rubber development program: Promoting
rubber production in the indigenous people’s community in Davao
Region, Philippines. Paper presented in IRRDB International Rubber

86

Conference and Annual Meetings. 24-28 November 2014. Hyatt Regency
Hotel, Manila, Philippines.

CCI and BirdLife International (2011). Measuring and monitoring ecosystem services
at the site scale. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Conservation Initiative and
BirdLife International.

CIFOR (2002). Center for International Forestry Research. Forest Ecosystem Services:
Can they pay our way out of deforestation? Retrieved from:
‘ pull-tiles’ Nasi 20 pel, Date retrieved:

March 14, 2016

CORPUZ, O.S., ABAS, E.L., and SALIBIO, C. (2014).Potential carbon storage of
rubber plantation. Indian Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biological
Research 2(2):73-82. ISSN: 2320-9267

COTTER, M., MARTIN, K. and SAUERBORN, J. (2009). How do “renewable
products” impact biodiversity and ecosystem services — the example of
natural rubber in China. Journal of Agriculture and Rural Development in
the Tropics and Subtropics 110(1): 9-22

DA. High Value Crops Development Program (RA 7900). Rubber. Retrieved from
hvedp.da.gov.ph/rubber.htm.

DA-BAR. Philippine rubber industry intensified through R&D. retrieved from:

Rubber production, Retrieved from:

DANO, A.M. and MIDMORE, D.J. (2004). Evaluation of soil and water conservation
technologies in vegetable-based upland production system of Manupali
Watershed, Souther Philippines. A paper presented in the 13"
International Soil Conservation Organisation Conference. Brisbane, July
2014. Conserving Soil and Water for Society: Sharing Solutions

DENR. National Greening program. Downloaded from: ngp.denr.gov.ph

DING, G., LIU, X., HERBERT, S., NOVAK, J., AMARASIRIWARDENA, D., and
XING, B., (2006). Effect of cover crop management on soil organic
matter. Geoderma 130: 229-239. Doi: 10.1016/.geoderma, 2005.01.019

DONOVAN, P. (2013). Measuring soil carbon change. A flexible, practical, local
method. Retrieved from: http://soilcarboncoalition.org.

87

EPA. United States Environmental Protection Agency. Global greenhouse gas emissions
data. Retrieved from:
http ' climatechange/gh Date
retrieved: 22 Sept 2015.

ERDB. (1991). Reforestation Species. Para Rubber (Hevea brasiliensis (HBK.) Muell-
Arg. Research Information Series on Ecosystems (RISE) 3(3) 31 Mar
1991,

ESA. (2000). Ecological Society of America. Carbon sequestration in soils. Retrieved
from: 1 1

(1997). Ecological Society of America, Ecosystems Services. Retrieved from:

(1997). Ecosystem Services: Benefits Supplied to Human Societies by Natural
Ecosystems. /ssues in Ecology, No. 2, Spring 1997.

EVANS, D.M., ZIPPER, C.E., BURGER, J.A., STRAHON, B.D., and
VILLAMAGNA, A.M. (2013). Restoration practice for enhancement of
ecosystem services on a compacted surface mine: Path toward ecosystem
recovery. Ecological Engineering 51:16-23

EVERARD, M. and WATERS, R. (2013). Ecosystem Services Assessment : How to do
one in practice (Version 1. October 13). Institution of Environmental

Science. London. www.ies-uk.org.uk/ resources! ecosystem-services-
assessment

FAO. (2005). The importance of soil organic matter: Key to drought-resistant soil and
sustained food and production. Edited by A. Bot and J. Benites. Rome,
Italy ISSN 0253-2050. Retrieved from
0. 19/009 a) 1006/40 100e.palf Date retrieved: 05 Oct. 2015

FABER, J.H. and VAN WENSEN, J. (2012). Elaborations on the use of the ecosystem
services concept for application in ecological risk assessment for soils.
Science of the Total Environment 415:3-8.

FEINTRENIE, L. and LEVANG, P. (2009). Sumatra’s Rubber Agroforest: Advent,
rise and fall of a sustainable cropping system, small-scale forestry. doi
10.1007/s1 1842-009-9086-2

88

FENTON, M., ALBERS, C. and KETTERINGS, Q. (2008). Soil organic matter.
‘Agronomy Fact Sheet 41. Cornell University Cooperative Extension.

GENESIS 1:12. New World Translation of the Holy Scripture (2006). Watchtower Bible
and Tract Society of New York, Inc. Brooklyn, New York, USA.

HANES-YOUNG, R.H. and POTSCHIN, M.B. (2009): Methodologies for Defining
and Assessing Ecosystem Services. Final report. JNCC, Project Code
C08-0170-0062. 69 pp.

HUNTER, M.O., KELLER, M., VICTORIA, D. and MORTON, D.C. (2013) Tree
height and tropical forest biomass estimation. Biogeosciences 10, 8385-
8399, doi:10.5194/bg-10-8385-2013

IGOT, G.L. (2005). A practical guide for rubber smallholders and cooperatives.

INGRAM, J., MILLS, J., LARSEN, A.F., DAVIS, M., MERANTE, P., RINGROSE,
S., MOLNAR, A., SANCHEZ, B., GHALEY, B.B. and KARACZUN,
(2014). Managing soil organic carbon: A farm perspective.
Eurochoices 13(2): 12-19. DOK: 10.1111/1746-692X. 12057
IPCC. (2006). Guidelines for national greenhouse gas inventories. Agriculture, Forestry
and Other Land Use. Retrieved from: i
r p/p 2006g1/vol4.

JOBBAGY, E.G., AND JACKSON, R.B., (2000). The vertical distribution of soil
organic carbon and its relation to climate and vegetation. Ecological
Applications 10(2): 423-436.

JOHNSON, I. and COBURN, R. (2010). Trees for carbon sequestration. Prime fact
981. Retrieved from:

4/Tre H 1 L
KARLEN, D.L., MANSBACH, M.J., DORAN, J.W., CLINE, R.G., HARRIS, R.F.,

and SCHUMAN, G.E., (1997). Soils Quality: A concept, definition and
framework for evaluation. Soil Sci. Soc. AmJ 61:4-10,

KREMEN, C. and OSTFELD, R.O. (2005). A Call to Ecologist: measuring , analyzing,
and managing ecosystems services. Front, Ecol, Environ, 3(10): 540-548

KONGSAGER, R. (2013). Carbon sequestration in tropical tree crop systems -
especially in rubber plantations (heveabrasiliensis). International Rubber
Conference 2013. London, United Kingdom, 24/06/2013

89

LAL, R. (2005). Forest soils and carbon sequestration. Forest Ecology and Management
220; 242-258.

LASCO, R.D., PULHIN, F.B., CRUZ, R.V.O. PULHIN, J.M., and ROY, S.S.N.
(2005). Carbon budgets of terrestrial ecosystems in Pantabangan-
Carranglan Watershed. AIACC Working Paper No. 10.

LASCO, R.D. and VISCO, R.G. (2003). Introduction to Agroforestry: A Lecture
Syllabus. College, Laguna, Philippines: Philippines Agroforestry
Education and Research. Network and the UPLB Institute of Agroforestry.
ISBN 971-579-044-5

LAYKE, C. (2009). Measuring Nature's Benefit: A preliminary roadmap for improving
ecosystem service indicators. (Working Paper). World Resources Institute.
Washington DC. September 2009

LIU, X., HERBERT, S.J., HASHEMI, A.M., ZHANG,X., DING, D. (2006). Effects of
agricultural management on soil organic matter and carbon
transformation. A review. Plant Soil Environ 52 (12): 531-543.

MARKS, E., AFLAKPIN, G.K.S., NKEM, J., POCH, R.M., KHOUMA, K.,
SAGOE, R., and SEBASTIA, M.T. (2009). Conservation of soil organic
carbon, biodiversity and the provision of other ecosystem services along
climatic gradients in West Africa. Biogeosciences 6, 1825-1838. Retrieved
from: wb et 6/1825/2009

MILLENNIUM ECOSYSTEM ASSESSMENT, (2003). Ecosystem and Human well-
being: current state and trends. Retrieved from:
Ic Date

retrieved: March 25, 2016

MILLENIUM ECOSYSTEM ASSESSMENT (2005). Ecosystem and Human-Well-
being: Synthesis. Island Press, Washington, DC.

NASI, R., WUNDER, S., and CAMPOS, J.J. (2002). Forest Ecosystem Services: can
they pay our way out of deforestation? A discussion paper prepare for the
GEF for the Forestry Roundtable in conjunction with the UNFF Il, Costa
Rica, March 11, 2002.

PAELMO, R.F., CASTILLO A.S.A., VISCO, R.G., CABAHUG, R.D., CASTILLO,
A.K.A., and CANILAN,G.N. (2014). Rubber-based agroforestry systems
in two climatic types in the Philippines. Paper presented in IRRDB

90

International Rubber Conference and Annual Meetings. 24-28 November
2014. Hyatt Regency Hotel, Manila, Philippines.

PCARRD. (1997). The Philippines recommends for rubber. The National Rubber
Publication Committee. Los Bafios, Laguna. 181p. (PCARRD Philippines
Recommends Ser. No. 33-B).

RICHARDS, B.N. (1993). Guidelines for site classification and determination of
fertilizer requirements of industrial forest plantations. Asian Development
Bank and Fortech. Canberra, Australia.

SAHA, S.K., NAIR, P.K.R., NAIR, V.D. and KUMAR, M.B. (2009). Soil carbon stock
in relation to plant diversity of homegardens in Kerala, India. Agroforest
Syst 76:53-65 doi 10.1007/s 10457-009-9228-8

SARE. Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education. Organic matter and natural
cycles. ww org/Learnii ¢

SOLERA, C.R. (2014). Technical and social dimensions in establishing a rubber
plantation in the former war zone of Mindanao, Philippines. Paper
presented in IRRDB International Rubber Conference and Annual
Meetings. 24-28 November 2014. Hyatt Regency Hotel, Manila,
Philippines.

STARKWEATHER, J. (2010). Module 8 handout: t test examples

TILLEKERATNE, L.M.K., (2010). Carbon negative products on global warming and
climate change and their impact on agriculture. Proceedings of IRRDB
International Rubber Conference. 18-19 October 2010. Sanya, Hainan,
China.

TISDALE, S.L. AND NELSON, W.L. (1970). Soil fertility and fertilizers. 2" Edition.
The Macmillan Company, London.

TUMANENG, R.D. and GALANG M.A. (2012). Vegetation and soil relations of land
use types of Boot Subwatershed at Makiling Forest Reserve. USM R&D
20 (1): 1-20

UNEP (2015). Year Book. The benefits of soil carbon. Managing soils for multiple
economic, societal and environmental benefits. Retrieved from:

91

(Undated).Ecosystems and Their Services. Retrieved from:
unep.org/maweb/documents/document papal. Date retrieved:

March 14, 2016

UNWIN, G.L. and KRIEDEMANN, P. E. (2000). Principles and processes of carbon
sequestration by trees. Research and Development Division State Forests
of New South Wales, Sydney. Technical Paper No. 64

USDA-NRCS (2015). Soil Quality Indicators: Physical, Chemical, and Biological
Indicators for Soil Quality Assessment and Management. Retrieved from:
www.nres.usda.gov.

(2014). Soil organic matter. Soil Health - Guides for Organic Matter.
Retrieved from: www.nres.usda.gov.

(2009). Soil Quality Indicator: Total Organic Carbon. Retrieved from:
www.nres.usda.gov.

(2008). Soil Quality Indicator: Infiltration. Retrieved from:
www.nres.usda. gov

(1998). Soil Quality Indicators: pH. Soil quality information sheet.
Retrieved from: http://soils.usda.gov.

(Undated). Soil Phosphorus. Soil Quality Kit - Guides for Educators.
Retrieved from: www.nrcs.usda.gov.

VAN NOORDWIJK, M., TATA, H.L., S. MINANG, P.(2012). Segregate or integrate
for multifunctionality and sustained change through landscape
agroforestry involving rubber in Indonesia and China. In agroforestry:
the future of global land use. Nair, P.K.R. and Garrity, D.P. (Eds.),
Springer, the Netherlands pp 69-104.

VASHUM, T.K. and JAYAKUMAR, S. (2012). Methods to estimate above-ground
biomass and carbon stock in natural forest — A review. J. Ecosyst. Ecogr.
2:116. doi:10.4172/2157-7625.1000116

WEIFU, L. (2014). Windfarm cultural practices for rubber plantations in China. Paper
presented in IRRDB International Rubber Conference and Annual
meetings. 24-28 November 2014. Hyatt Regency Hotel, Manila,
Philippines.

‘WOOMER, P.L. KARANJA, N.K., and MURAGU, E.W. (2001). Estimating total

92

system carbon in smallhold farming systems of the East African
highlands. In: Assessment methods for soil carbon. R. Lal, J.M., Kimble,
R.F. Follet and B.A. Stewart (Eds.). CRC press LLC .pp 147-163.

YUEN, J.Q., FUNG, T., AND ZIEGLER, A.D. (2015). Review of allometric equations
for major land covers in SE Asia: Uncertainty and implecations for above-
and below-ground carbon estimates. Forest Ecology and Management 360
(2016) 323-340

ZHANG, Y., LIU, B.Y., ZHANG, Q.C. and XIE, Y. (2003). Effect of different
vegetation types on soil erosion by water. Acta Botanica Sinica 45 (10):
1204-1209.

ZUAZO, VHD and PLEGUEZUELO, CRR (2008). Soil-crosion and run-off
prevention by plant covers. A review. Agron, Sustain. Dev, 28:65-86.
DOI: 10.1051 /agro:2007062

ZHOU, Y., JIANG, J., PENG, Z., WANG, Q., and XIONG, D. (2012). Ecosystem
management in the natural rubber industry. J. Resour. Ecol. 3(3): 230-235.
doi: 10.5814/j.issn.1674-764x.2012.03.005

Online Links

22 Importance of trees. Retrieved from: | tr

FACTFISH. (2015). Philippines:
from: factfish

Natural rubber production quantity (tons). Retrieved

Infiltration. Soil Quality for Environmental Health. Retrieved from:

PATRIQUIN, D. (Undated). Water, soil and organic matter: a complex relationship.
Retrieved from:

Photosynthesis downloaded from \\ | lia.or

PULHIN and TAPIA, (Undated). History of a legend: Managing the Makiling Forest
Reserve. Retrieved from:


93

soilquality.org.au. Soil nitrogen supply by J. Carson and L. Phillips.
www.environment.org. Tress and Ecosystem Service

USDA. Role of soil organic matter. Retrieved from:

VILLANUEVA, (2013). Makiling Forest Reserve declared Heritage Park. Downloaded
from: philstar 1

Why responsible plantations are important. Downloaded from:

CHAPTER VIII

APPENDICES

Appendix 1. stati

95

al analysis of bulk density (BD) of the young and old rubber stands in MMFR

Appendix Table 1. Students test at p =0.02 using MS Excel for BD at 0-20em between the young and the old stand.

ral OL I
puot_| at) | MEAN X1-MEAN cermeansy2 | 0x2) | MEAN2_|x2-MEANZ | (X2-MEAN 22
18 12 17 005 00s | 138 123 015 0.0225)
tb 121 47 004 oot | 141 12 018 324
tc 42 17 003, o.oo | __ 137 123 ow 0.0196,
2a 113 17 004 oars | 119 123 004 0.0016
2 nt 17 0.06 ogo | 1.19 123 004 0.0016
2c 115 17 202 ooo | 1.17 123 006 0.0036
3a 124 17 oor ooo | 1.4 123 009 0.0081
2» 1% 17 009 00st 4 123 013 oot6s
3c 12 117 005, 0025 | __ 1.13 123 24 001
fa “4 17 0.07 ooo | 123 123 ° °
cy 113 47 0.04 ooo | 1.21 123 902 0.0008
4 4 47 007 oooss | 124 123 oot 0.000
TOTAL’
1407 TOTAL (x1) SOst= 0.0375 1476 02) Sosz= _ 0.1168
Ntz_12 STDEV=0.06 STD ER=002 Na=_12 STOEV=01 STDER+003
$21= 0.003091 | MEAN1-MEAN2 =007 2.089616
S222 0,0106182 thelow= —0,007013636

Appendix Table 2. Student's test at p =0.02 using MS Excel for BD at 20-50cm between the young and the old stand.

PLOT | YOUNG Xt) | MEANT | _xiMEANT | QTMEAN 1»? | oL0 02) | MEAN? | X2MEAN2 | OOMEAND\2
2 wef ue 0 of owl 16 “008 0016
i ts] 12 03 ooo} tts] 16 201 ‘ot
te in| 12 0 of as] us 206 10036
20 wn] ae 001 ooo} tas] a6 001 oat
2» im] 42 001 reat] tae] 136 “008 ons
2 io| iz 03 coo] 12] 16 oot .ot6
38 wm] ae oe ooo | te] a6 oe «0004
» wf 4k 005 coos} tig] a6 00g 0009
x i| iz aot reo] ot] 16 aot 001
‘a vel “004 owe} a] 16 007 0049
ry wo] aR 005 aos) 1) 16 06 00036
tc so] ue a0 coos | tio] 16 03 0008

134_ToTALx1 sosi=_oot sage _totanz| _ sosze_o0a4e
Me 2 STDEV=003  STDER=001 Noe 12 STOEV=005 STDER+001
sa1= oaaogoat | meaninean2  =004 Teas 2506206

sz 00022 Telow= 0001554545


96

Appendix 2. statistical analysis of soil organic matter (OM) of young and old rubber stands in MMFR.

Appendix Table 3. Independent t-test at

02 using MS Excel for OM 0-20 cm of young and old stands.

Lor | youNG ot) | MEAN’ | x1-MEAN 1 g-mean1)*2 | 010 9c) | mean 2 | x2-mEaN2_| (MEAN 2/42
ta 395 54 189 ae | 537 46 oat 281
tb 415 54 169 28561] 5.49 446 103 110609
tc 405 584 173 32081 54 46 094 0.8836,
2 645 5a 061 osrat| 491 16 045 0.2025
2» 652 54 068 sz | 478 446 032 0.1024
2 653 584 069 oars | 472 446 026 0.0676
38 641 ay OST 03209 | 435 446 om O0r2t
» 639 584 055 03025 | 432 446 ou 0.0196
x 637 5.84 053 07309 | 436 446 en oot
4 a4 504 06 036 33 446 A6 13486
ry 639 5a 055 0302 | 325 446 421 14641
« 643 584 059 ost | 3.26 446 42 144

70.08 _ TOTAL 1) 12.8618 5351 _ TOTAL (2) 74365

Miz 12 STOERRO31 = -N2= 12, STO ERR=02¢

S21= 11692545 138 TcALs _ 3591704527

S22= _ 0.6760455 0.92265

Appendix Table 4. independent t-test at p=0.02 using MS Excel for OM 20-50 cm of young and old stands.
Lot | YOUNG (x1) | _MEAN1 xi-mean1 | Qc-meAN1)*2 | OL 0x2) | MEAN2 | x2-MEAN 2 | (x2-MEAN 2/2
ta 1a 1.62 082 02700] 2.27 1a 087 0.7569
tb 1.08 162 sa 02916 | 2.29 1a 89 0.7921
te 1.06 1.62 956 03136] 231 a 91 0.8281
2a 152 1.62 1 oor) 1.74 1a 034 oss
2» 158 1.62 0.04 ooo1s| 1.76 1a 0.36 0.1296
2 153 1.62 009 oooar | 1.72 1a 0.32 0.3024
33 23 1.62 0.68 0.4624] 0.99 1a “0.41 0.1683
36 222 1.62 06 036 | 1.07 1a 0.33 0.1089
3c 226 1.62 0.64 4096 | 1.09 1a 0.31 0.0961
4a 1.63 1.62 oon 1coa] 056 1a 8a 0.7086
ab 159 1.62 0.03 0.0009 Os, 1a 09 oat
4c 1.61 1.62 001 o.0001 | __os4 1a 0.86 0.7396
19.48 TOTAL() sosi= 16,84 _ToTAL(K2) | __sosz=_5.353,
2 sTOEV=0.48 STD ERI m= 2 STOEV#0.7 STOERR=0.20
0.934909 | MEANI-MEAN2= 0.22 Teas 0.9432
0.486364 thelow= 0.3401


Appendix 3. statistical analysis of soil pH of young and old rubber stands in MMER.

97

Appendix Table 5. Independent t-test at p=0.02 using MS Excel for pH 0-20 cm of young and old stands.

‘Appendix Table 6. Independent t-test at p=0.02 using MS Ex:

prot | vounc.oy | meant | xiweans | qxrmcany2 | ovo gry | mean2 | xamean2 | qomean 2y2

ta 57 595 025 0.0625 55 54 oa 016
tb 56 595 035 0.1225 53 51 02 0.08
tc 55 595 045 0.2025 54 54 03 009
2 59 595 0.05 0.0025 49 51 92 0.08
Fy 58 595 015 0.0225 48 51 03 0.08
20 54 595 055 0.3025 52 54 01 001
3a 61 595 015 0.0225 53 54 02 004
3b 63 595 035 0.1205 55 54 04 016
3c 59 595 0.05 0.0025 54 51 03 0.09
fa 62 595 025 0.0625 44 54 07 049
4b 66 595 065 0.4225 48 54 3 009
4c 64 595 0.45 0.2025 46 54 05 025

714 _ TOTAL) SOst=_ 1.55 614 TOTAL 02) SOS2= _155

N= 12 STDEV=038 STD ERR=0.11 2 STDEV=038  STDERR=0.11

s2t= 0.1409 MEANI.MEAN2= 085 TCAL: 5.6610

22= 0.1409 thelow= 0.1409

cel for pH 20-50 cm of young and old stands.

por | younco | means | xtmeans | oxtmean 2 | ovo) |_mean2 | xomean2 | cxomean2y2
ta 51 53 023 ooo] 54 5 os 016
t 5 533 03 01089 | 53 5 03 009
te a7 533 083 oxo | 53 5 03 009
aa 49 533 048 owe! 49 5 4 oor
» 82 53 013 cows) 48 5 02 004
ze 5 533 233 ora | 52 5 02 004
By 56 533 on oora| 43 5 01 oor
» 87 533 ox ora] 52 5 02 004
ae 55 533 ow 00269 5 5 o 0
a 59 53 os7 oma] as 5 05 025
” 56 53 on oor) a9 5 01 oot
4 58 533 ow oz | __a7 5 03 009
64 TOTAL Qt) sost= 17268 eo1_rora.ga| sosz= 0m
2 STDEV=040 —STDERRO.11 Zz 12 STOEV027 | STOERR=008
0.157 | MEANT-MEAN2= 0:3, ToAL= 2.4200
$22: 0078s tbelow= 0.162

98

Appendix 4. statistical analysis of %Nitrogen based on %OM of young and old rubber stands in MMFR.

Appendix Table 7. Independent t-test at p=0.02 using MS Excel for %N 0-20 cm of young and old stands.

prot | vounce | weans | xtmeans | ormeansy2 | ovooa)| wean2 | xomean | pco-mean 22
ta] 01975 029 00325 noes | 02685 02] 0048s 00024
w] 0.2075 023 00825 0.0068 | 02745 02] 00545, 0.0030
tc] 0.2025 023 00875 anor? | 02700 02] 00500 0.0025
za] 03225 023 0.0325 ooott | 0245s 02] 0025s 0.0007
| 03260 023 0.0360 coors | 02390 oz} — 00190 0.0004
ze] 03265, 029 0.0365 ons | 02360 02] 00160 0.0003
za] 03205 029 0.0305 conve | 0217s oz] 00025 0.0000
| 03195 023 0.0295 0.009 | 02160 02} 00040 0.0000
ae] 03185 079 0.0285 0008 | 02169 o2| 000% 00000
4a) 0320 023 0.0320 oot | 01650 02] 90550 00030
ao] 03195 023 0.0235 0009 | 0.1625 o2| 00575 00033
ac] 03215 023 0.0315 ooo1o | 01630 02] 90570 0.0032

3504 TOTAL 1) sost= 00322 26755_TOTAL Q%) | __sosz=_0.0187
M12 STDEV:005 _STDERR=0.02 2 STDEV-004 STDERR=001
s21= 00029 | MEANtAMEAN2= 007 ToALs 36383

$222 _ 00017 tbetow= 0.0023

Appendix Table 8. Independent t-test at p=0.02 using MS Ex

cel for %N 20-50 cm of young and old stands.

puor_| yours oc |_mean1 | x1-meant | oxt-mEAN 1)*2 | op 0x2) | _MEAN2 | X2MEAN2 | (K2MEAN 2)¢2

ta 0.0550 0.08 0.0250 0.0006 | 0.135 oor 0.0835, 0019
tb 0.0540 0.08 0.0260 0007 | 0.45 oor 084s 0.0020
tc 0.0530 0.08 0.0270 0.0007 | _ 0.1155 007 0.0455 0.0021
2a 0760 0.08 0.0040 0.0000 | 0.0870 oor 0.9170 0.0003
2 0790 008 0.0010 0.0000 | 0.0880 oor 0.0180 0.0003,
2 0.0765 0.08 0.0035 0.0000 | 0.0860 oor 0.0160, 0.0003,
3a 01150 0.08 0.0350 0.0012 | 00495 oor 0.0205 .0004
a onto 0.08 0.0310 0.0010 | 00535 oor 0.0165 0.0003,
3c 0.1130 0.08 0.0330 oot | o0ses oo7 0.0155, 0.0002
4a 0.0815 0.08 0.0015 0.0000 } 0.0280 oor 0.0420 0018
4 0.0795 0.08 0.0005, 0.0000 | 00260 oor 0.0450 0.0020
4c 0.0805 0.08 0.0005, 0.0000 | 0.0270 oo7 0.0830 0.0018

0.974 TOTAL ot) SOSt= _ 0.0053, 0.942 _ TOTAL 92) S0S2= 0.014

Nie 12 STDEV=002 STDERR=001 N= 12 STOEV=003 STDERR=001

Ss21= 0.0005 | MEANL-MEAN2= 0.01 TCAL= _ 0.8570

$22= 0.9012 thelow= 0.0009


99

Appendix 5. Estimation of soil surface area covered by live vegetation parts (vegetative mat) in young
and old stands of MMEFR.

Appendix Table 9. Estimating mean soil surface area covered by live vegetation parts (vegetative mat)

using counting squares.

YOUNG STAND ‘OLD STAND.
Number of Number of
Sample ‘Covered Pant parts ‘Covered Plant pats
Plots Squares MeanPiot | Pin Squares | Meant | Pant par
Wo. | caveres | 008) present | cavers | (0.04) resent
1 1250 050 vine stems 1500 060 Roots
Plott 2000 080] osser | runner 1500 060 | 0.6000 | Roots
vine stem
3 1000 040 and rots 1500 060 Roots
vine tem,
4 1750 070 runner rots 2000 08 Roots
Plo2 0.2833 05500 | roots and
5 250 010 vine sem 1500 060 vine tems
6 425 005 runner 625 025 Roots
1 500 020] 93000 | rumer 625 025} osg67 | Roots
Plot 3 8 500 02 runner 625 025 Roots
9 1250 050 runner rots 1500 060 Roots
70 1000 040 runner rots 1750 070 Rools
Plott " 1250 050} 06000 | runner rots 625 025 | 0.4833 | Roots
‘oot, runner,
| _2250 099 vine sem 1250 050 Roots
wean |_109375 04375 1250 00

Appendix Table 10. Independent t-test at p:

.02 using MS Excel for live vegetation parts that covered the

soil surface.
prot | vounsox | means | xrmeans | oxrmeany2 | our9q|_wean2 | xamean2 | ocean2y'2
ta 05 om 0.06 0.0036, 06 0s o1 oot
4D 08 04 036 0.1296 06 05 o1 oot
4c 04 om 004 0.0016 06 05 o1 oot
2 07 044 026 00676 08 05 03 008
2 012 oa 022 0.1024 06 05 04 oot
2e 0.08 on 036 01296 | __ 025 05 025 0.0625
3 02 oa 024 00576 | 025 05 “025 00625
» 02 ome 024 00576 | 025 0s 025 0.0625
3c 05 om 0.06 0.0036, 06 0s on 001
4a 04 om 008 00016 07 05 02 004
oy os oa 006 000% | 025 0s 025 0.0625
4 08 om 046 02116 os 0s o 0
53 TOTAL QM) sosts_ 077 6 Toray | sosz= 043
Mie 12 STOEV=026 —STOERR=008 = NZ= 12 STOEV=020  STOERR=006
0.0700 | MEANI.MEAN2= 006 TeaL= 06473
0.0391 toelow= 00565,


100

Appendix 6. Estimation of mean forest floor litter of young and old stands in MMFR.

The fotal dry matter otter (LBD) from the sampling plot was computed by.

LBDpgw?)

fresh weight (kg)

‘Subsample fresh weight (9)

subsample dry weight (8)
lot area (m?)

To get the ltter biomass density in a hectare, the iter biomass density in kilogram was converted to ton per hectare

Using this conversion unit of (

Appendix Table 11. Estimation of forest floor litter in the young stand in tons per hectare.

LBDponna) = LBDagm?)x 40

) or by simply multiplying the LBDogm?; by 40. In formula

‘Sample resh wt om | Subsample wtfor oven | Subsample Surface Litter dry
Plotno. |__0.5mx0.5m plot (ig) ‘drying (g) covendried wt(g) | Total dry wt (ag/sam) | wi tonfha)
ta 0.1359 1359 65.29 oa 1061
1» ott 1814 86.24 ou 1380
te 00815 815 3731 015 607
2 021 2344 s771 055 2203
2 02187 2187 raag7 050 20.00
2 0.2278 2278 13168 053 2107
a oor 12 19 003 120
2 0.0539 538 3267 013 52
3c 00358 358 22.10 0.09 354
4 oar? 300 12500 080 3180
4 0614 300 13043 107 an
4c os214 300 12785 089 35.50
MEAN ou 7.80
‘Appendix Table 12. Estimation of forest floor litter in the old stand in tons per hectare.
Sample tresh wt from | Subsample wtforoven | Subsample Surface Litter dry
Plotno. | _o.5mx0.5m plot eg) trying (g) covendried vt(g) | Total dry wt(kgisgm) | __ wt (onfha)
ta 05488 300 17143 125 4991
tb 5512 300 168.54 126 4955
te oszi4 300 173.41 121 4822
2a 0278 2378 12195 049 1951
Es 02613 13 136.09 054 2178
2 0.2495 2495 13063 052 2080
3a 04521 300 2014 121 4855
3b 0386 30 198.68, 102 4090
3c 04621 300 19737 122 4884
@ 04025 300 18231 703 18
rs 03895 300 191.08, 099 3969
Me 03906 300 183.87 101 4049
WEAN 038 wi


101

Appendix Table 13. Estimation of forest litter biomass and carbon storage in the young stand.

fected Total dry wt ace € Stock
stand) (kg/sqm) (Me/ha) (Mg/ha)

la 0.2652 10.6068 4.731

db 0.3450 13.7981 6.2091

ic 0.1516 6.0651 2.7293

2a 0.5508, 22.0329 9.9148

2b 0.4999 19,9954 8.9979

2c 0.5267, 21.0682 9.4807

3a 0.0300 1.2000 0.5400

3b 0.1307 5.2267 2.3520

3c 0.0884 3.5358 1.5911

4a 0.7950 31.8000 14.3100

4b 1.0678 42.7130 19.2209

4c 0.8875, 35.4996 15.9748

MEAN 0.4449 17.7951 8.0078

Appendix Table 14. Estimation of forest litter biomass and carbon storage in the old stand.

Plotno. | Totaldrywe | SUfacetitter | co ctoy

(old stand) | (ke/sam) ee (Mg/ha)
la 1.2478 49.9109 22.4599
ib 1.2387 49.5461 22.2957
1c 1.2055 48.2220 21.6999
2a 0.4878 19.5118 8.7803
2b 0.5444 21.7750 9.7988
2c 0.5225 20.9005 9.4052
3a 1.2137 48.5477 21.8464
3b 1.0225 40.9007 18.4053
3c 1.2161 48.6421 21.8889
4a 1.0321 41.2821 18.5769
4b 0.9924 39.6943 17.8624
ac 1.0122 40.4861 18.2187

MEAN. 0.9780 39,1182 17.6032


102

Appendix 7. statistical analysis of forest floor litter of young and old rubber stands in MMFR.

Appendix Table 15. independent t-test at p=0.02 using MS Excel for forest floor litter between the
young and the old stands.

ror | vounsoey | means | xrmeans | ormennny2 | orr9a | weave | xemean2 | yenean2y2
a 119 sima| aor] 912 1079 1644
w{ se] s7a0 400 woo] 4995] 3912 1043 10870
te sor | __ 1780 u73 wn] ax] 392 10 a28s
es ed 42 wa] wsi| an “1961 or
a] 00] 780 20 sa) ar] 3912 1735 aos
ae|___2vor| __sr0 aa|__ wes] z090| 302 1822 30195
ta va] 700 1660 zs] ass) 201 a anes
2 sa] eo 1287 se] aon] 3912 17 aw
x ass] a0 1425 waar | ass] 2912 982 sos?
wal seo] s700 1400 600] size] 3012 216 467
a} aan] 00 si cass} x06) 2912 os7 033
se| asso] 700 1770 sna | saa] 912 17 17
213.54 __ TOTAL (X1) SOS1= 2005.93 469.42 TOTAL (X2) SOS2= 1514.86
miz_12 stoeversso —stoera-a90 |_nae_12 STDERR=339
set= t9236 | weanieanas 2132 Teas 421
soit trelow= 16004


Appendix 8. Above and below ground biomass of trees in the young stand.

103

Appendix Table 16. Above ground and root biomass densities of trees in the young stand.

PLOT 1 Diameter (cm) | Heigth (m) | AGB (kg) | AGB (ton/ha) | RBD (kg) | RGB (ton/ha)
MALA 1 11.5667 4.8800 | 57.9605 0.3623 | 12.5348 0.0783
2 14.5867 6.2000 | 103.8764 0.6492 | 20.9897 0.1312
3 43,8000 6.0000 | _ 90.5961 0.5662 | 18,6001 0.1163
4 13,6000 6.0000 | 47.3110 0.5457 | 18.0028 0.1125
5 41.5867 49000 | _57.9605 0.3623 | 12.5348 0.0783
6 12,1667 5.2000] 65.8718 0.4117 | 140351 0.0877
RUBBER 1 6.1333 5.2000 | 11.6436 0.0728 | 3.0353 0.0190
2 §,3333 5.1500 8.1757 o.ost1 | 2.2208 0.0139
3 6.6000 5.2000] 14.0172 o.os76 | 3.5760 0.0224
4 6.0000 5.1000 | 11.0138 0.0688 | 2.8898 o.o1at
5 6.6000 5.2500 | 14.0172 0.0876 | 3.5760 0.0224
PLOT2 Diameter Height
MALA 1 42.7000 5.6000 | 73.4242 0.4569 | 15.4478 0.0965
2 41.1000 5.0000 | 52.2256 0.3264 | 11.4323 0.0715
3 10.9000 43500 | 49.8775 0.3117 | 10.9769 0.0686
4 10,9000 43700 | 49.8775 03117 | 10.9769 0.0686
5 15,5000 67000 | 121.5499 0.797 | 24.1158 0.1507
6 14.5000 6.2000] 102.6778 0.6417 | 207756 0.1298
RUBBER 1 7.2000 7.0900 | 17.4689 0.1092 | 4.3439 o.oz71
2 5.9000 5.2000 | 10.5553 0.0660 | 2.7832 o.o174
3 5.5000 5.0000 8.8376 0.0552 | 2.3790 0.0149
4 6.5000 5.1300 | 13.4864 0.083 | 3.4561 0.0216
5 5.5000 4.9000 8.8376 0.0552 | 2.3790 0.0149
6 5.0000 4.6000 6.9440 0.0434 | 1.9225 0.0120
1 7.2000 6.9000 | 17.4689 0.1092 | _4.3439 oz
8 7.3000 6.9500 | 18.0893 01131 | 44799 0.0280
HAWIL! 1 22.0667 8.0000 | _ 297.073 1.9567 | 53.1178 0.3320
PMUL 1 39.5000 9.1200 | _1296.0037 8.1000 | 195.2142 1.2204
PLOT 3 Diameter Height (m)
RUBBER 4 8.2000 74100 | 24.2753 01517 | 5.8096 0.0363
2 5.9000 5.1000 | 10.5553 o.o660 | 2.7832 0174
3 5.6000 4.8000 9.2498 00578 | 2.4768 0.0155


104

4 5.0000 4.5000 6.9440 0.0434 | _ 1.9225 0.0120
5 6.8000 6.1000 | 15.1169 o.945 | 3.8228 0.0239
6 6.2000 5.7000 | 11.9665 0.0748 | 3.1096 0.0194
1 7.0000 6.9500 | 16.2672 0.1017 | _ 4.0788 0.0255
BATINO. 4 8.3667 6.1200 25.5431 0.1596 6.0769 0.0380
2 8.2667 5.9500 | 24.7777 0.1549 | 5.9157 0.0370
3 8.7667 6.7800 | 28.7466 0.1797 | 6.7456 0.0422
(PIL IPIL 1 8.9667 7.2700 | 30.4349 0.1902 | 7.0945 0.0443
2 12,5000 10.1300 | 70.5339 4408 | 14,9093 0.0932
3 11.5000 92100 | 57.1191 0.3570 | 12.3738 0.0773
PLOT 4 Diameter (cm) | Height (m)
RUBBER 1 8.6300 73700 | 27.6263 0.1727 | 65128 0.0407
2 6.5300 5.1200] 13.6444 0.0853 | 3.4918 0.0218
3 6.2700 57000 | 123113 o.o769 | 3.1886 0.0199
4 7.5700 7.4500 | 19,8302 0.1239 | 4.8588 0.0304
5 8.6300 73700 | 27.6263 0.1727 | _ 65128 0.0407
6 6.5300 5.9000 | 13.6444 o.o8s3 | 3.4918 0.0218
MALA 1 11.8300 4.9700 61.3574 0.3835 | 13.1817 0.0824
2 410.9000 43500 | 49.8775 03117 | 10.9769 0.0686
3 12.3300 5.3900 | 68.1322 0.4258 | 14.4598 0.0904
4 13.1700 6.0600 | 80.4948 05031 | 16.7552 0.1047
5 43.1700 6.1300 | 80.4948 05031 | 16.7552 0.1047
6 12.3300 5.6300 | 68.1322 0.4258 | _ 14.4598 0.0904
TOTAL 3521.5466 22.0097 | 671.9043 4.1994


Appendix 9. Estimation of Undergrowth in the young and old stands.

Appendix Table 17. Estimation of undergrowth aboveground and root biomass and carbon
storage in the young stand.

Plot no. Undergrowth C (root)
(young Ninel drywt eae RBD (ke) | igsnnay |, StOCK
stand) a (Mg/ha) (Mg/ha)

la 0.1011 1.0110 0.4550 0.3503 0.0022 0.0010

1b 0.1008 1.0080 0.4536 0.3494 0.0022 0.0010

dc 0.1000 1.0000 0.4500. 0.3469 0.0022 0.0010

2a 0.1385 1.3850 0.6233 0.4626 0.0029 0.0013

2b 0.1395 1.3950 0.6278 0.4655 0.0029 0.0013

2 0.1375 13750| o6188| 0.4596 | 0.0029] 0.0013,

3a 0.1663 1.6630 0.7484 0.5437 0.0034 0.0015

3b 0.1650 16500] 0.7425] 05400] 0.0034} 0.0015,

3c 0.1636 16360 0.7362| _0.5359| 0.0033] 0.0015,

4a 0.3345 3.3450 1.5053 1.0083 0.0063 0.0028

4b 0.2794 2.7940 1.2573 0.8600 0.0054 0.0024

Ac 0.3000 3.0000 1.3500 0.9158 0.0057 0.0026

MEAN 0.1772 17718 | 0.7973| 0.5698| 0.0036 | 0.0016

0.321607 R/S
Appendix Table 18. Estimation of undergrowth biomass and carbon storage in the old stand.

Plotno. | Totaldry | Undergrowth | ooo. | pep rep | Clreot)
(old wt deywt | ‘rag/na) | tke) | (ton/hay | S*2°K

stand) | (ke/sam) | (Mg/ha) (Mg/ha)

Ja 0.0650 0.6500] 0.2925] 0.2371] 0.0015] 0.0007

1b 0.0500 0.5000 0.2250 0.1880 0.0012 0.0005

de 0.0600 0.6000| 0.2700} 0.2209 | 0.0014 | 0.0006

2a 0.6200 6.2000] 2.7900] 1.7393] 0.0109] 0.0049

2b 0.5400 5.4000 2.4300 1.5394 0.0096 0.0043

2c 0.6460 6.4600 2.9070 1,8036 0.0113 0.0051

3a 0.6000 6.0000 | 2.7000] 1.6896] 0.0106 | 0.0048

3b 0.5000 5.0000 | 2.2500] 1.4382] 0.0090] 0.0040

3c 0.4000 4.0000 | 1.8000 1.1808] 0.0074] 0.0033

43 0.4172 4.1720] 18774] 1.2256] 0.0077] 0.0034

4b 0.3830 3.8300] 1.7235] 1.1364] 0.0071] 0.0032

4c 0.4100 4.1000 1.8450 1.2069 0.0075 0.0034

MEAN 0.3909 3.9093 1.7592] 1.1338[ 0.0071] 0.0032

0.2900 R/S

105

106

Appendix 10. Soil carbon for surface and sub-surface soil of the young and old stand.

Appendix Table 19. Estimation of soil carbon for surface (0-20) soil of the young stand.

Bulk Density Soil Mass
PLOT g/cc ton/ha %OC Soil C ton/ha
ja 1.22 2440 2.2965 56.0349
1b 1.21 2420 2.4128 58.3895
1c 12 2400 2.3547 56.5116
2a 1.13 2260 3.7500 84.7500
2b alt 2220 3.7907 84.1535
2c 1.15 2300 3.7965 87.3198
3a 1.24 2480 3.7267 92.4233
3b 1.26 2520 3.7151 93.6209
3c 1.22 2440 3.7035 90.3651
4a aa. 2200 3.7442 82.3721
4b 1.13 2260 3.7151 83.9616
4c 11 2200 3.7384 82.2442
MEAN 1.1725 2345 3.3953 79.3455

Appendix Table 20. Estimation of soil carbon for surface soil (0-20) of the old stand.

por | Bulk Density | Soil Mass %0C Soil C ton/ha
e/ce ton/ha
da 1.38 2760 3.122 86.1698
1b 1.41 2820 3.1919 90.0105
dc 1.37 2740 3.1395 86,0233
2a 1.19 2380 2.8547 67.9407
2b 1.19 2380 2.7791 66.1419
2 117 2340 2.7482 64.2140
3a 114 2280 2.5291 57.6628
3b 11 2200 25116 55.2558
3c 1.13 2260 2.5349 57.2884
43 1.23 2460 1.9186 47.1977
4b 1.21 2420 1.8895 45.7267
4c 1,24 2480 1.8953 47.0047
MEAN 1.23 2460 2.5925 64.2197


Appendix Table 21. Estimation of soil carbon for sub-surface soil (20-50) of the young stand.

Bulk Density g/cc | Soil Mass
PLOT ton/ha %0C Soil C ton/ha
la 1.12 3360 0.6395 21.4884
tb 1.15 3450 0.6279 21.6628
1c 1.12 3360 0.6163 20.7070
2a 1 3330 0.8837 29.4279
2b 1.13 3390 0.9186 31.1407
2c 1.09 3270 0.8895 29.0878
3a 114 3420 1.3372 45,7326
3b 1.17 3510 1.2907 45.3035
3c 1.13 3390 1.3140 44.5430
4a 1.08 3240 0.9477 30.7047
4b 1.07 3210 0.9244 29.6738
4c 1.09 3270 0.9360 30.6087
MEAN 1.1167 3350 0.9438 31.6734

107

Appendix Table 22. Estimation of soil carbon for sub-surface soil (20-50) of the old stand.

Bulk Density Soil Mass
PLOT elec ton/ha %OC Soil Cton/ha
la 1.12 3360 1.3198 44.3402
db 1.15 3450 1.3314 45.9331
1c 11 3300 1.3430 44.3198
2a 1.15 3450 1.0116 34.9012
2b 1.08 3240 1.0233 33.1535
2c 12 3600 1.0000 36.0000
3a 1.18 3540 0.5756 20.3756
3b 1.19 3570 0.6221 22.2087
3c 1.17 3510 0.6337 22.2436
4a 1.23 3690 0.3256 12.0140
4b 1.22 3660 0.2907 10.6395,
4c 119 3570 0.3140 11.2081
MEAN 1.1650 3495 0.8159 28,1118


108

Appendix 11. statistical analysis for the amount of carbon stored (ton/ha) at 50 cm depth of soil.

Appendix Table 23. Independent t-test at p=0.02 using MS Excel for the amount of carbon stored
{ton/ha) at 50 cm depth of soil.

vouns oy | wesw’

PLOT ximeant | oxtmeansy2 | ovo | mean | x2mean2 | o2MEAN2)¢2
ta] r7sza| sni02 aso | rarer} tansiao | 9233 3318 | 14879040
ww] so0sz3 |] r1102 sor | —9sase69] rasse6 | 9232 asst | 19021465
te] raves | s1t02 gs | iasua | 1203090 | 9239 eon | 1444-9600
za} sma] s1102 316 sor} ross] 9233 1051 1104992
a] r1s2042 | 11102 aa 182687 | 992953] 9233 697 485161
ze] we4o76 | 11102 539 za02se | so2wo| 9233, 788 62.1567
za] 138558] t1102 mi 736.3524 | 7e0xes | 9233 1428 204-2506
ae] rsasze | s1102 2190 rressss | 774ses| 9233 487 720 9821
ze} ssasoss | 11102 2389 s7oss2 | 79sq0 | 9233 1280 163 7694
¢a| rso767| 11102 206 42m) saan] 9233, sar] 1096.8266
ao] 1136385 | 11102 262 ser} 563663] 9233 3596 | 12933802
4c| sas] sn102 183 33595 | 5828] 9233 sar] 11639040

43322273 _TOTALX! sost=_sssos7 | tto7s773_rotaLx2| _sos2=_ 9164s
Nie 12 STOEV=22.12  STDERR=6.38 Na _12 STDEV=2867 | STOERR-833
sats 499.17 | MEANLMEAN2= 1869 Teas 182
$22= 6358 tbelow= 651.38


109

Appendix 12. Statistical analysis for percent soil organic carbon of the two rubber plantations.

Appendix Table 23. Independent t-test at p=0.02 using MS Excel for the % SOC at the surface soil

puot_| vounc ot) | means | xt-meant | oct-mEaN 42 | OLD 0x2) | MEAN2 | X2MEAN2 | (X2-MEAN 2)*2
18 2.2965 340 4.10 r2074 | 3.1221 299 053 0.2804
tb 24128 34 099 09746 | 31919 259 060 0.3622
tc 23547 34 4.05 10978 | _ 3.1395 259 055 0.3020
2 3.7500 34 038 0.1225 | 20547 259 026 0.0700
2 37907 34 039 0.826 | 2791 259 019 0.0357
2 3.7965 34 0.40 o.ss72 | 27442 259 0.15 0.0238
37267 34 033 0.1068 | 25291 259 0.06 0.0037
2» 37151 34 032 0.0993 | 25116 259 0.08 0.006
x 3.7035 34 030 ost | 25349 259 0.085 0.0030
fa 3742 34 om oes | 19186 259 ost 0.458
ry ast 34 032 0.0993} 1.8895 259 070 o.4so7
4 37384 34 om 14s | 1.8953 259 069 0.4825

407442 TOTAL Xt $0S1=_43376 31.1105 _ TOTAL X2 $0S2=_ 25111
Nis_12 STOEV=063 STD ERR=0.18 N= 12 STOEV=048 STDERR=0.14
S21= 039 MEANL-MEAN2= 081 ICAL: 363
S222 00 thelow= 031

Appendix Table 24. indepen

dent t-test at p=0.02 using MS Excel for the % SOC

at the sub-surface soil

puot_| ounc 1) | MEAN | xi-MEAN1 | @xt-MEAN1)*2 | OLD x2) | MEAN2 | x2MEAN2 | (2.MEAN2)*2
ta 0.6395 094 030 0.0926 | 13198 082 050 0.2539
tb 06279 034 on ogra | 13314 082 ost 02615
1c 05163 oss a2 crows | 13430 82 ose 0.2736
aa 0.8837 ot 0.06 0.0032 | 10116 082 019 0.0367
Fa ote ose 002 0.0005 } 1.0233 82 020 0.0813
2 0.8895, oat 005 0.0025 | 1.0000 0.82 018 0.0324
3 13372 ost 040 o1s7a | 05756 82 02 0.0507
» 12907 094 035 0.1230 | 06221 082 020 0.0382
x 13140 94 037 1398 | _ 06337 082 019 0.0347
4a oge77 094 oot ‘oot | 0.3256 082 0.49 0244
4 sees 094 0.02 0002 | 0.2907 082 053 0.2802
4 0.9360 oo 0.00 0.0000 | _03140 82 051 0.2561
143256 _ TOTAL Xt sost= 07219 9.7907 OTALx2| _SOS2=_ 1.8137
Nie_12 STOEV=0.26 STDERR=0.07 Nae 12 STDEV=040 STOERR+0.12
s2t= 007 MEANI-MEAN2= 0.12 TCAL= _ 0.88
S22= 0.16 thelow= 012


