GROWTH AND MORPHO-ANATOMY OF ADVENTITIOUS ROOTS OF VANILLA (Vanilla planifolia Jacks. ex Andrews) DURING ATTACHMENT TO SUPPORT POST

NETNET BORLAZA DESEO

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Horticulture

June 2017

ABSTRACT

The adventitious roots (ARs) of vanilla (Vanilla planifolia Jacks. ex Andrews) are
primarily responsible for the firm anchorage and vertical growth and development of this
important spice. The effects of different types of supporting structures and applications of
plant growth regulators (PGRs) on the growth and attachment properties of ARs were
investigated. The ARs attached to natural support posts (Gliricidia sepium [Jacq.] Steud.
and Sphaerobambos philippinensis [Gamble] S.Dransf.) appeared to be flattened due to the
significant increase in root width. In contrast, slender ARs attached to artificial support
posts (GI wire [control treatment], PVC pipes, concrete and styrofoam) were observed. The
appearance of long and slender ARs attached to artificial posts and flattened ARs attached
to natural support posts were probably adaptive root traits to increase water retention and
improve phosphorus (P) and nitrogen (N) acquisitions. The maximum increment growth in
length and width (2.1 mm and 0.25 mm d⁻¹, respectively) of the ARs attached to G. sepium
was achieved after 4 d. The attachment strength, the force that maintains the permanent
attachment of ARs to the support post, was greatest when ARs were attached to G. sepium
(935.44 ± 514.60 mN) while the least force was exerted when ARs were attached to S.
Philippinensis (179.70 ± 148.72 mN). The texture of the support post was observed to
primarily influence the attachment strengths of ARs. The type of materials used as substrates was shown to contribute mainly to the
growth and attachment of ARs than the applications of PGRs. No variations were observed
on the growth of ARs attached to cork substrate treated with indole-3-butyric acid (IBA)
and abscisic acid (ABA), but the application of 2,3,5-triiodobenzoic acid (TIBA)
significantly shortened the ARs. On the other hand, IBA-treated ARs with glass substrate
were noticeably reduced in size. The number of permanently attached roots was not
significant in PGR-treated roots with cork substrate; however, ABA and TIBA applications
induced attachment while IBA induced detachment of ARs with glass as substrate. The attachment strategy of vanilla ARs was characterized into three stages
according to the size and the extent of adhesion, namely (1) initial contact; (2) weak to
strong attachment and; (3) strong and permanent attachment. The root tip was identified to
send signal to produce root hairs on the ventral side of the root facing the substrate which
interacted with the surface of the substrate that brought the adhesion. Profuse unicellular
elongated root hairs in the velamen were only observed on ARs that were attached to solid
support posts.

INTRODUCTION

Vanilla, a climbing monocot and a member of the orchid family, is the only orchid
genus that enters into the commercial trade, of essences and spices (Stern and Judd, 1999).
The vanilla of international commerce is derived from Vanilla planifolia Jacks. ex Andrews
(syn: V. fragrans (Salisb.) Ames.) (De Guzman and Zara, 2012). Natural vanilla is mainly
used for high-quality confectionery and for baking and is also increasingly popular in
manufacturing ice cream. Expensive brands of chocolates made of organically cultivated
ingredients are also flavored with vanilla (Augstburger et al., 2000). The growing interest
in natural and organic products opens up window of opportunity for the expansion of the
current vanilla market. To sustain this trend, there is a need to develop exciting products
that will fully exploit the potential of dietary and medicinal properties of natural vanilla.
The development should be coupled with the improvement of cultural management
practices in vanilla specifically geared towards sustainable production (De Guzman and
Zara, 2012). Vanilla is a hemi-epiphytic orchid that in its cultivation, a tree is crucial to
provide physical support, shade and organic material throughout its growing period.

Plants as sessile organisms that are exposed to constantly changing environments
must develop a mechanism by which they can ascend over various obstacles in their life
cycle. Throughout the evolution of plants, attachment structures have been continuously
modified by plants to complement their needs and to suit their environment. Attachment
devices that provide a permanent or temporary adhesion are fascinating examples for
highly specialized structures in nature. A firm grip or a good anchorage with high reliability

is an essential factor for many successful survival strategies (Steinbrecher et al., 2011).

Technically, plants that have the ability to climb using attachment structures are called
vines and these include vanilla.

Vaughn and Bowling (2011) defined the term “vine” as those plants that truly
ascend other objects, either by twining or with tendrils or holdfasts. Vines depend on the
availability of a physical support to reach the canopy and thereby prevent shading by
neighboring plants. Vines in natural populations can increase their likelihood of
encountering a suitable support by being able to climb on plants encompassing a wide
range of stem/trunk diameters (Gianoli, 2004). Vines that find a suitable support usually
have a greater biomass and reproductive output than those that grow unsupported.

The ability of the vines to climb depends on their attachment organs which are able
to hold the whole plant that has greater mass than these structures. Hence, vines are
classified by the method they use to climb and are enumerated as follow: (1) tendrils for
climbing, (2) twining stems and (3) sticky adventitious roots. Vaughn and Bowling (2011)
have done extensive studies on the attachment mechanisms of tendrils and twining vines.
The presence of gelatinous fibers (G fibers) is responsible for the coiling of the tendrils
while in the growth of twining stem, studies showed that xylary fibers located near the
xylem elements, and gelatinous fibers (G fibers) distributed in cortex both increased in
amount and are involved in the stiffening of the stem and twining , respectively (Vaughn
and Bowling, 2011).

While G fibers are significant in the attachment strategy of tendrils and twining
stems, Bowling and Vaughn (2009) showed that these fibers were not found in adventitious

roots of some species that have been studied, e.g. Hedera helix and Toxicodedron radicans,

and those lax species that are more trailing in nature, e.g. blackberries, bedstraw, and
henbit. Thus, they concluded that G fibers are only associated with tissues that are twining
or coiling.

Adventitious roots secrete substance used for adhesion in the climbing substrate
that is very effective in securing attachment of the plant to the support. The adhesion of the
adventitious roots in the climbing support largely depends on the properties of sticky
substance which can provide the strength for the contact such as in the case of vanilla.

The structural development and morpho-anatomy of tendrils to account for the
phenomena of attachment in this type of vines have been extensively studied for the past
decades. However, researches on the attachment systems of twining vines and adventitious
roots have just began in recent years. In 2009, Melzer et al. initiated a systematic approach
to analyze the functional morphology and biomechanics of the sticky adventitious roots of
English ivy (Hedera helix L.), which was mainly concerned in the understanding how this
plant is beneficial or detrimental as part of cultural buildings in European heritage. The
presented results revealed the four-phase model attachment process that was based on
morphological analysis of adventitious roots during this process. This can be the basis for
further studies on morpho-anatomy of adventitious roots in different species of plants
specifically those that are associated with agricultural production.

Different plant growth regulators have been also investigated as effective promoters
of adventitious roots. Auxin is the hormone commonly used to promote adventitious
rooting in different species. Auxin and ethylene are more often described as activators,

whereas cytokinins and gibberellins usually as inhibitors of AR formation, even when some

positive effects have been observed (Geiss et al., 2010). Agronomists, horticulturists and
silviculturists have been eminently successful in manipulating rooting of cuttings of many
species of plants using auxin treatments and various environmental variables in conjunction
with a knowledge of the optimum stage of development of the mother plant for root
initiation (Hackett and Murray, 2010). It is also interesting to investigate the role of plant
hormones beyond adventitious root initiation and focus instead on their potential action in
the attachment strategy of sticky adventitious roots since there is very limited study in this
matter.

The underlying mechanism of adventitious roots attachment of vanilla is significant
in providing knowledge on the holistic role of this structure on vertical growth and
development of the plant as affected by its immediate environment and other external
factors. Thus, the knowledge on the attachment strategy of vanilla can be applied in
choosing the appropriate supporting structures which is essential in cultural management

practices towards sustainable production of this important spice.

Objectives of the Study

This study was conducted to evaluate the growth and morpho-anatomy of
adventitious roots of vanilla (Vanilla planifolia Jacks. ex Andrews) during attachment to
support post. The specific objectives were:

1. To quantify and compare the growth of adventitious roots of vanilla grown on
different support posts

2. To investigate the effect of plant hormones on the growth and attachment of
adventitious roots of vanilla and

3. To evaluate the anatomical changes in the adventitious roots of vanilla at different

stages of attachment to support substrate

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

Vanilla

Botanical Description

Vanilla (Vanilla planifolia Jacks. ex Andrews) is a hemi-epiphyte, succulent,
perennial, tropical monocot vine that belongs to the family Orchidaceae. It is unique in the
orchid family because it is the only climbing plant and it bears edible fruits. It has long
cylindrical stem that possesses alternate, thick, fleshy, elliptical leaves and can reach up to
a height of 10 to 15 m. Long, whitish adventitious aerial roots are produced opposite in the
leaves that are used as support for the stem to firmly attach to the support tree. The
inflorescence usually has 6 to 15 or more yellow-white to cream-colored flowers which are
raceme usually axillary. The fruit is botanically a capsule but is more popularly and
commercially known as “bean” or “pod” It is pendulous and cylindrical, about 10 to 25 cm
long and 8 to 15 mm in diameter (De Guzman and Sangalang, 1997). Vanilla is primarily
cultivated for its capsule that produces aroma and characteristic flavor that is used as spice
in culinary and confectioneries after curing processes. Of the total industrial application,
30% is utilized in ice cream preparation, 17% in soft beverages, 11% in alcoholic
beverages, 10% in yoghurt and the remaining 7% in bakery items, confectionaries, cereals

and tobacco products (De Guzman and Zara, 2012).

Cultivation

Vanilla as a perennial vine makes use of forest trees in its natural habitat for support,
shade, and natural humus (Hernandez and Lubinsky, 2011). Hence, vanilla production is
done very similar to its natural habitat, where it is commonly cultivated using
support/shade trees. Different settings are used to cultivate vanilla, thus, different support
trees are used based on the type of setting. The traditional setting in Mexico (also known
as “acahual” which refers to secondary forest or fallow) commonly used support tree
species which include Litcea glaucescens, Bahuinia divaricata, Tabernaemontana sp.,
Hamelia erecta, and Eugenia capuli, among others. Traditional style is also used in
intercropping with coffee. Support trees that are primarily used as shade for coffee such as
Inga sp., but introduced species like Erythrina sp., is also used. The yield in this type of
setting is 50-500 kg of green vanilla ha’', with an average yield of 200 kg ha! (Hernandez-
Hernandez, 2011). On the other hand, in Costa Rica, traditional system of cultivating
vanilla is only for small-scale production. Support trees used are Erythrina spp., guaba, or
melina trees (Quirés, 2011).

Another style of vanilla cultivation is the intensive system. The cultivation process
follows the same method for both locations. Commonly in Mexico, leguminous trees such
as Erythrina sp. and/or Gliricidia sepium are first planted allowing them to grow until 50%
shade is attained which is already sufficient for vanilla. Afterwards, vanilla is then planted.
Yields are relatively higher with an average of 1-2 tons of green vanilla ha’! in rain-fed

systems, and 2-4 tons of green vanilla ha’! with a higher density of plantings and irrigation.

Existing orange tree groves may also be used in vanilla cultivation. Orange trees have
durable branches that grow laterally which are capable of supporting good quantity of
vanilla shoots. Thus, the problem of vanilla shoots shading other shoots is alleviated by
good distribution making orange trees as an excellent choice as a support tree for vanilla.
Yield ranges from 500-2,500 kg of green vanilla ha’! but most obtain 1 ton ha"! (Hernandez-
Hernandez, 2011).

In lieu of natural support trees, farmers in Mexico and Costa Rica use “shade
houses/net house posts” in cultivating vanilla. This is the most recent intensive type of
vanilla cultivation wherein artificial supports or ‘‘inert’’ support tress are used, such as
concrete posts, or posts made from wood or bamboo. Occasionally, Erythrina sp. and/or
G. sepium are also used in place or in combination with artificial support trees. Shade is
provided by using artificial shade such as black or red cloth of 50% luminosity. Theoretical
yield is 5,140 kg of green vanilla ha’! in this type of setting in Mexico (Hernandez-
Hernandez, 2011).

Artificial supports are also being used in vanilla production in India such as trellis,
latticework, wooden and concrete posts, and wire or bars. However, wooden posts are
subject to decay or to attack of termites and hence it becomes necessary to replace them at
frequent intervals. On the other hand, the use of wire or bar supports may be easily break.
Apart from providing physical framework, one should also provide artificial shade for the
plants (Sarma et al., 2011).

Intensive cultivation of vanilla is also done in Australia but artificial supports are

mostly preferred over natural support trees because of the ease in pollination and

harvesting. Some examples of artificial posts that are used include wooden posts, drainage
pipes covered with non-woven geo-textile and coco peat-filled wire mesh tubes (Exley,
2011). In terms of yield, using artificial posts as support for vanilla has an advantage over
natural support trees because of greater efficiency of maintenance and improved growth.
However, one main disadvantage of artificial supports is that they make the training of
vines more difficult; thus, it must be performed with extra care since the vines and

adventitious roots are easily damaged (Exley, 2011).

Characteristics of Support/Shade Trees

Support/shade trees are essential in vanilla production. Vanilla is mainly dependent
for these structures that provide framework for its vertical growth. Hence, choosing the
most suitable support is of great importance and as stated above. The use of different
support trees can affect the yield of vanilla. Some characteristics considered in selecting
support trees are as follows: (1) trees should maintain a canopy throughout the year; (2)
leaves are small enough to permit filter sunlight through and branches should be wide
spreading and sufficiently low for hanging the vines; (3) it should be easy to propagate and
can be reestablished readily; (4) support trees should be also strong enough to support the
vanilla plant, respond positively to periodic pruning, fairly resistant to pests/diseases; (5)
help improve soil nutrition (e.g. legumes for N fixation) and (6) should have a deep root
system that does not compete for nutrients and water with the vanilla plants (Hernandez-

Hernandez and Lubinsky, 201 1/De Guzman and Zara, 2012).


Vines

Vaughn and Bowling (2011) defined the term “vine” as those plants that truly
ascend other objects, either by twining or with tendrils or holdfasts. Vines are an important
component of the flora as food and ornamental, with over 9,000 species in just the New
World (Vaughn and Bowling, 2011). Vines are classified by the method they use to climb:
(1) tendrils for climbing, (2) twining stems, and (3) sticky adventitious roots.

The different mechanical constraints on vines and self-supporting plants are
thought to cause differences in a variety of growth characteristics between climbing plants
and unsupported species. Based on this hypothesis, Gartner (1991) observed that the
relative growth rates of vines is higher than shrubs as in the case of Toxicondendron
diversilobum. The supported shoots (vines) had significantly higher above ground biomass
and relative growth rates than did their paired unsupported shoots (shrubs) growing nearby.
Leaf elongation was more delayed in unsupported plants. However, the study suggested
that the high growth rates of the vines may have evolved in response to habitat constraints,

and to not constraints imposed by stem vs. leaf allocation pattern of the growth form itself.

Classification of Vines

Tendrils

Tendrils are formed from a variety of modified plant parts, for example, leaves, leaf
stalks, or inflorescences (Steinbrecher et al., 2011). They show a spectacular thigmotropic
behavior leading to a permanent attachment of the plant. Tendrils are produced rapidly
within the apical meristem of the plant and elongate maximally before coiling. Vaughn and
Bowling (2011) have done extensive studies on the mechanisms of tendril attachment.
They described the ability of the tendrils as an anatomical wonder. Although tendrils are
relatively small, almost ephemeral structures, they are able to support vines weighing many
times as their mass. Several studies have shown that tendrils are able to perceive touch
stimuli which initiate their ability to coil around the supporting structures. As the plant
stem circumnutates, the tendrils touch potential surfaces about which to climb. When
tendril reaches sufficient maturity, stimulation of the touch response sets in place a series
of morphological changes so that the tendril begins to coil around the object. Bowling and
Vaughn (2009) reported that the tendrils that coiled in many directions had a cylinder of
cortical gelatinous fibers (G fibers) while the tendrils that coiled in a single direction had
G fibers only along inner surface of the coil. Furthermore, tendrils with adhesive tips are
shown to have G fibers in the central/core region of the tendril. There was also a correlation

between the number and extent of fiber development with the amount of torsion required

for the vine to ascend a support which, strongly suggests that G fibers play a major role in

the attachment process of the tendrils (Vaughn and Bowling, 2011).

Twining Stems

Twining vines are plants that wrap around the branches of their supporting
structures. Once the vine has found suitable mechanical support, two new phases of activity
occur. During the initial phase, the stem can be removed from the support, will remain
supple, and will return to hunting for a new support. In the second phase, if the vine remains
in contact with the support for a sufficient length of time, the twining stem becomes fixed
in position, and the vine is unable to easily find a new support if the support is removed.
In the growth of twining stem, xylary fibers located near the xylem elements and G fibers
distributed in the cortex both increased in amount. Xylary fibers are involved in the

stiffening of the stem while G fibers are involved in twining (Vaughn and Bowling, 2011).

Sticky Adventitious Roots

Sticky adventitious roots secrete a substance which is used for adhesion in the
climbing substrate that is very effective in securing attachment of the plant to the support.
The mechanism by which this sticky substance is being produced is described later in this
paper. The adhesion of the adventitious roots in the climbing support largely depends on

the properties of the sticky substance which can provide the strength for the contact.

Adventitious Roots (ARs)

Vanilla is usually cultivated by cuttings. The success of vanilla cuttings to
completely develop into a whole new plant is dependent on the production of adventitious
roots. The advantage of developing shoot-borne roots in many plant species especially
those plants that are economically important in agronomy, horticulture and forestry has
been a significant factor for successful propagation. Adventitious root formation is a
prerequisite to successful clonal regeneration of propagules, with the possible exceptions
of apomictic seed, and graftage and budding systems on seedling rootstock (Davies et al.,
1994).

The term "adventitious root" (AR) is widely used to designate a root that arises
either on an already lateralized root axis or at a site on the plant that is not itself a root (e.g.,
ona shoot or leaf) (Barlow, 1994). This term is interchangeable with ‘aerial roots’. Dycus
and Knudson (1957) defined aerial root as any lateral root which develops and remains in
free air. Moreover, if aerial roots penetrate a substratum or attach themselves to a solid
object, they serve as climbing or adhesive roots, fastening flexible growing axis to some
underlying surface. They may then function like terrestrial roots, acting as organs of
absorption. Anatomically, Beck (2010) defined ARs as roots that arise from stems, other
plant parts (e.g., the fleshy leaves of plants such as Sedum and Begonia) and regions of
main roots other than the pericycle proximal to the zone of elongation. According to the
review of Bellini et al. (2014), the origin of AR is more variable and still largely

undetermined, depending on the species and the organ or tissue they develop from. A

conserved feature of ARs is that they always develop from cells neighboring vascular
tissues, whether they are part of the plant’s development program or are artificially induced
by wounding or hormone applications.

Aside from the importance of ARs in asexual propagation during the initial stage
of plant growth, ARs also contribute to the success of climbing plants, such as vanilla,
throughout their growth and development. Vines use ARs to ascend and permanently
attached to a structure in which they can experience a favorable environment suitable for
their growth. ARs secrete substance used for adhesion in the climbing substrate that is very
effective in securing attachment of the plant to the support. The adhesion of the
adventitious roots in the climbing support largely depends on the properties of sticky

substance which can provide the strength for the contact (Melzer et al., 2011).

Morpho-anatomical Growth Patterns of Adventitious
Roots for Permanent Attachment

In order for the adventitious roots to firmly attach to their supporting structures or
substrates, there must be a strategy by which these structures are able to grow vertically.
Permanent attachment studies in the last decade mainly focused on the adhesion systems
of animals (e.g. insects, spiders, tree frogs and geckos). The strategy in plants has recently
attracted research attention, particularly in connection with the ecological importance of a
well-known plant bearing adventitious roots — English ivy (Hedera helix L.).

English ivy is a native evergreen creeper/climber which belongs to the

family Araliaceae that is common throughout the British Isles, Europe and in Asia Minor.

It will creep along the woodland floor until it encounters something to climb up. The driver
for climbing is to reach high light levels to enable flowering. Much of the study about
English ivy is about their contribution to the preservation of heritage sites in large parts of
England due to permanent attachment of its adventitious roots to the supports. Thus, much
of the research found associated with this study mainly focused in the strategy of

adventitious root attachment of English ivy.

Four-phase Model of the Attachment Process in English Ivy

In 2010, Bjorn Melzer and colleagues have proposed a four-phase model of the
attachment process in English ivy: (1) initial contact, (2) chemical adhesion (3) shape
change of the root hairs and (4) shrinking of the climbing roots. This model includes several

morphological changes within the roots.

Initial contact. After the initiation of adventitious roots, the first phase attachment
process begins to take place — initial contact with the substrates. These adventitious roots
must be able to perceive a signal (or touch stimuli) to initiate their contact with their
support. According to Melzer et al. (2011), there exist two possibilities in which part of the
English ivy will first perceive contact. The first possibility is that the longest root tip makes
the initial contact as it always points towards the climbing substrate. The second possibility
is that the root hairs that have been present already on free growing, non-fastened

attachment roots are the first root structures coming into contact with the climbing substrate

as they protrude outwards from the growing root, but only in the region proximal to the
root cap.

Lenaghan and Zhang (2012) reported that the root tip is the key structure involved
in providing the signal to attach. They observed that prior to contact, millimeter-sized
adventitious roots elongate with the tips pointing in many directions. After contact with the
surface, there is an increase in the number of micrometer-sized root hairs, which show an
increased speed of growth. However, no root hairs were found on the root tip. It was also
observed that this initial contact stimulates the production of adventitious roots above the
next node. This indicated that the tip of the adventitious root acts as a pressure sensor
signaling not only the attaching root, but also triggering increased adventitious root
production at posterior nodes. The initial contact is also the stage of structural adaptation
of the root system with topology of the climbing substrate accompanied by two reactions
as described by Melzer et al. (2011). The first reaction is an enlargement of the contact
between the attachment root and the climbing substrate thereby bringing closure between
the root hairs and substrate. The second reaction is the lignification process wherein
incorporation of lignin within the root leads to the improved and enduring connection by

interlocking the mechanically stabilized root within the climbing substrate.

Chemical adhesion. After the initiation of the contact between the root tip and the
surface of the climbing substrate, the second phase - chemical adhesion occurs. In Ficus
pumila, the root hairs secrete a sticky, unidentified substance which acts as a glue that
sticks the root hairs and clustered roots together forming adhesive pad to the substrate

(Groot et al., 2003). English ivy also secretes a chemical adhesive simultaneously while

the adventitious roots are bending in parallel with the climbing substrate to bring closer
contact with the root hairs. Adhesive droplets from multiple root hairs combine to form
larger droplets that contact the surface, due to the close proximity of the root hairs with one
another (Lenaghan and Zhang, 2012). Uniform diffuse nanoparticles coating the areas
where root hairs and surface contacted. These nanoparticles are found to be clearly
associated with the secreted substance, thus indicating that this natural adhesive is in fact
a nanocomposite. Nanoparticles create van der Waal forces for the strengthening of the
adhesion but it will need to form monolayer in close contact with each other for stronger
attachment. Thus, the cross-linking with the matrix of the pattern of nanoparticle
distribution is likely the key factor for generating the high strength adhesion. The recent
study by Lenaghan et al. (2013), confirmed that the ivy nanoparticles are composed of

glycoproteins.

Shape change of the root hairs. After the secretion of a chemical adhesive, the root
hairs begin to undergo passive shape change due to the loss of water. The adhesive pad of
Ficus pumila dries into a hard structure that it becomes difficult to pull it from the substrate
(Groot et al., 2003). Passive shape change is accompanied by drying of the adventitious
roots due to different deformability of cellulose microfibrils and matrix in the cell wall of
the root hairs but this process also provides additional hold (Melzer et al., 2010). The
stresses occurring during desiccation mainly deform the soft matrix, while the stiff
cellulose micro-fibrils generate the shape change of the shrinking root hair. The different
shapes found in dried root hairs are caused by an interaction between the internal structure

of the root hairs and the surface structure of the climbing substrate. A spoon-shaped tip is

also observed prevailing in all dried roots which is due to the sharp increase in microfibril

angle at the apical portion of cell wall in the hairs.

Shrinking of the climbing roots. The shrinking of the climbing roots itself is also
driven by the passive loss of water (Melzer et al., 2009). At full length of the roots, the root
hairs flattened due to loss of turgor and micro-fibril arrangement. Micro-fibril arrangement
caused the edges and tips of the root hairs to curve upwards and stiffened against the
substrate thereby creating a spoon-shaped tip. The development of the spoon-shaped tip
can be viewed as an extra approach to secure attachment by anchoring root hairs at
protuberances of the surface even if chemical adhesion fails. Root hairs continuously
shortened during the drying process that caused the entire root to pull towards the substrate

which created firm attachment (Melzer et al., 2010).

Attachment Strength of Adventitious Roots

Attachment devices are functional systems, the purpose of which is either
temporary or permanent attachment of an organism to the substrate surface, to another
organism, or temporary interconnection of body parts within an organism (Gorb, 2008).
According to the review of Gorb (2008), there is a variety of natural attachment devices
based entirely on contact mechanical principles (capillary interactions, viscous forces
(Stefan adhesion) and van der Waals forces, whereas others additionally rely on the
chemistry of polymers and colloids (diverse types of glues). Electrostatic forces may also
be involved. Many biological glues are rich in polar and charged residues (amino acids or

sugars) and interact with the substrate through electrostatic interactions.


Forces of attachment are generated by highly diverse structures on variable host
substrates. Attachment forces vary in strength from very light to extremely strong. Root
climbers typically attach very tightly to host surfaces by attachment roots and root hairs
like English ivy. The different phases of attachment and their variations work together, to
allow the attachment of English ivy to various climbing substrates such as tree bark, rocks,
and house plaster (Rowe and Speck, 2015).

The quantification of attachment strengths of attachment pads of Boston ivy
(Parthenocissus tricuspidata), attachment roots of English ivy and clustered attachment
roots of trumpet creeper (Campsis radicans) was done by Steinbrecher et al. (2009) through
the development of a mobile and adaptable tensile testing machine that worked under
natural growth conditions as well as in the laboratory. Attachment roots of English ivy have
a tensile strength of 3.4MPa per individual root and a Young’s modulus (measured in
tension) of 109MPa, which is relatively stiff for non-woody roots. The mean force under
uniaxial tension to remove a 2-cm-long internode of English ivy with a typical root cluster
from tree bark is 3.8 N. At the finest level of attachment measured, values for detachment
and failure of individual roots typically range from 200-400 mN. (Steinbrecher et al. 2009;
Melzer et al. 2010).

A cling strength measuring device was developed by Gamboa (2016) that can
measure the cling strength of climbing vines. He tested this device on Syngonium plants
that have clusters of clingy adventitious roots per node attached to different host materials:
G. sepium, bamboo, concrete and PVC pipes. The experiment showed that Syngonium

clings strongest in G. sepium, followed by concrete while it poorly clings in bamboo and

PVC. The maximum forces per root measured were: 2517.14 mN in G. sepium, 2446.09

mN in concrete, 1902.67 mN in bamboo and 698.09 mN in PVC.

Anatomy of Vanilla Adventitious Roots

Aerial roots of Vanilla plants are short, unbranched, aerial ones (variously termed
clasping and anchoring) which clasp the supporting structure and are usually limited in
extension growth that originate at the nodes (Stern and Judd, 1999). According to Stern
and Judd (1999), the earliest study recorded exclusively on the anatomy of vanilla plants
(V. planifolia, a leafy species, and V. phalacnopsis, a leafless species) was done by Hafliger
in 1901. In 1954, Roux also devoted an exclusive anatomical study on V. fragrans (Salisb.)
Ames (a synonym of V. planifolia) and V. pompona, both leafy species. They summarized
the works of Hafliger (1901) and Roux (1954) which included a section describing the
anatomy of ARs. Vanilla ARs were noted to have velamen, a multiple or multiseriate
epidermis. This tissue, particularly in leaves, originates from protodermal cells and their
derivatives that divide periclinally, resulting in a tissue consisting of several layers of
ontogenetically related cells (Evert, 2006). One of the functions ascribed to the inner layers
of velamen is storage of water. Representative species of Orchidaceae such as Vanda
tricolor, Pleurothallis smithiana, Encyclia calamari, Miltonia flavescens, and Catasetum
fimbriatum are known to have velamen formed by dead cells, which could be polygonal,
elliptic or rectangular (Oliveira and Sajo, 1999). However, unlike other species belonging
in the family Orchidaceae having velamen that is multilayered, Vanilla is remarkably

observed to have uniseriated anticlinal velamen cells both in terrestrial and aerial roots

(Stern and Judd, 1999). The role of velamen in aerial roots of orchids as reported by Dycus
and Knudson (1957) is to retard water loss from the cortex accompanied by exodermis
which plays a part in the process. Recently, Zotz and Winkler (2013), reported that the
velamen of a large number of orchid species takes up solutions within seconds, while
evaporation from the velamen takes several hours. Also, charged ions are retained in the
velamen probably due to positive and negative charges in the cell walls, while uncharged
compounds are lost to the external medium. They also demonstrated that nutrient uptake
follows biphasic kinetics with a highly efficient, active transport system at low external
concentrations. Hence, their results supported one specific function of velamen - the fast
uptake and retention of relatively nutrient rich solutions after the onset of heavy rainfall,
which might be crucially important in the nutrient-poor epiphytic habitat.

Stern and Judd (1999) provided the following descriptions on the anatomy of
Vanilla aerial roots. “Internal and distal areas of lateral walls thicken in aerial roots;
thickening is heavy in aerial roots of V. dilloniana, slight in V. madagascariensis, and
absent in V. insignis. Hairs are mostly absent in aerial roots. In V. pompona, hairs occur in
aerial roots only on the surface facing the support. Capesius and Barthlott (1975) and
Barthlott (1976) reported that V. planifolia root tips are clothed with hairs and secrete
cementing mucilage on the surface of the root facing the supporting substrate (the ventral
surface). The exodermis consists of uniseriate, polygonal and anticlinal cells. Outer and
proximal regions of lateral walls are thickened; heavily thickened in aerial roots of V.
dilloniana, V. pauciflora and V. phacantha; slightly in V. madagascariensis; thin-walled

in V. africana, V. insignis, and V. poitaei. The cortex is composed of 7-18 cells wide; thin-

walled cells, mostly circular to oval with small, triangular intercellular spaces; cells of
outermost layer are small, angular, without intercellular spaces; cells of innermost layer
are small, rounded. Aerial roots cells have chloroplasts, except V. dilloniana and V.
pauciflora. Inner layers of cortex of aerial roots of Vanilla species have nine irregularly
shaped lacunae that tend to radiate more or less equidistantly from the central cylinder. The
endoderm and pericycle are composed of uniseriate and isodiametric cells. The endodermal
cells are thin-walled opposite the xylem, walls variously thickened opposite the phloem;
pericycle cells are thin-walled opposite the xylem, walls O-thickened, unthickened
opposite phloem in aerial roots of V. insignis. The vascular tissues are embedded in thin-
or thick-walled sclerenchyma, except in parenchyma in aerial roots of V. insignis and in
aerial of V. madagascariensis. Xylem groups are in radial rows; phloem groups are circular
or elliptical; xylem and phloem groups alternate around the circumference of the vascular
cylinder. Primary xylem points vary from 8-16 in aerial roots. Metaxylem elements are
always wider in the terrestrial than in the aerial roots of the same species. Pith cells are
parenchymatous in aerial roots except sclerotic in aerial roots of V. dilloniana. Pith cells
are circular to oval, except polygonal in aerial roots of V. dilloniana and V. insignis. Pith
cells are accompanied by small, triangular intercellular spaces. Chloroplasts occur in pith

cells of aerial roots in V. insignis, V. pompona, and V. madagascariensis and V. africana.”

Effects of Plant Hormones on the Attachment of Adventitious Roots

The formation of adventitious roots is a quantitative genetic trait regulated by both

environmental (especially temperature, light, relative humidity) and endogenous factors

(hormones, sugars, mineral salts and other molecules) (Krajnc et al., 2013). Endogenous
factors such as plant hormones, specifically auxin, have been shown to be involved in
controlling adventitious root formation in several species including Arabidopsis thaliana
(Sorin et al., 2005; Gutierrez et al., 2012) and Ginkgo biloba L. (Pandey et al., 2011).
Hence, the exogenous application of auxin has been considered to successfully promote
adventitious rooting in difficult-to-root plant species, wherein auxin contribute signi-
ficantly to the plant’s auxin-pool and promote adventitious root formation (Krajnc et al.,
2013 ). Recent studies have shown that indole-3-butyric acid (IBA) and a-naphthalene
acetic acid (NAA) are considered to be more effective than other synthetic forms of auxin
in promoting adventitious roots (Pandey et al., 2011; Krajnc et al., 2013). According to the
review of Geiss et al. (2010), auxin also interacts with ethylene during AR formation and
development based from the findings that inhibitors of ethylene biosynthesis, such as
aminoethoxyvinylglycine, reduce the number of ARs of mung bean (V. radiata) cuttings
(Jusaitis, 1986) and so did inhibitors of ethylene perception, such as silver thiosulfate and
2,5-norbornadiene (Robbins et al., 1985). Geiss et al. (2010) also reported from the
findings of Clark et al. (1999) that applied 1 -aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC),
an ethylene precursor, increased AR formation on vegetative stem cuttings from NR (never
ripe) mutant tomato plants and wild-type plants. On the other hand, cytokinins (CKs)
negatively regulate the formation of ARs in hypocotyls or stems of P. radiata (Smith and
Thorpe, 1975), rose (De Vries and Dubois, 1988), or pea (Pisum sativum) (Bollmark and

Eliasson, 1986) as cited by Geiss et al. (2010). Gibberellin (GA) and jasmonic acid (JA)

have also been shown to inhibit AR formation in Nicotinia tabacum (Niu et al., 2013) and
Arabidopsis (Gutierrez et al., 2012), respectively.

While the role of plant hormones on the initiation of adventitious roots is already
well established, the knowledge on the role of plant hormones on the attachment strategy
of adventitious roots during adherence to the supporting structures is still limited. The
essentiality of [AA in root attachment was first observed by Tanada in 1967 in barley root
tips and followed by another study in mungbean root tips in 1968. He reported that the
necessity for IAA in very low concentrations for this process suggested the role of IAA as
a cofactor in phytochrome expression along with adenosine triphosphate (ATP), ascorbic
acid (AA), Mg?*, K*, Mn?*, and Ca?*. Subsequent studies were done in 1973 where he
reported that indoleacetic acid (IAA) and abscisic acid (ABA) at concentrations of 10 nM
or less quickly affected the phytochrome-mediated attachment of mungbean (Phaseolus
vulgaris L., var. Oklahoma 612) root tips on glass. [AA induced detachment, whereas ABA
induced attachment. Both plant regulators rapidly antagonized the action of the other.
However, the effects of low concentrations (10 nM or less) of LAA and ABA on the
phytochrome-mediated attachment of barley root (Hordeum vulgare L., var. Compana) tips
on glass have been found to be opposite to those reported for mungbean root tips which
was observed by Tanada on the same year. He stated that unlike their effects on mungbean
root tips, IAA causes attachment while ABA causes detachment of barley root tips. Both
hormones specifically and rapidly counteract the action of the other. None of several
cytokinins, gibberellins, and ethylene tested over a wide range in concentration had any

effect on either attachment or detachment of mungbean and barley root tips. This study

also observed the effects of red and far red lights with the hormones. Thus, Tanada (1973)
postulated that phytochrome could control the endogenous levels of IAA and ABA and
perhaps other hormones. Under certain circumstances, this action appeared to be the first
process initiated by phytochrome, and that IAA and ABA act on the plasmalemma to bring
about opposing changes in the surface electric charges of plant cells. Phytochrome could
increase the endogenous concentration of ABA relative to that of IAA after red light
irradiation. The excess ABA would then somehow produce a more positive charge on the
cell membrane, causing attachment of root tips on the negatively charged glass surface. On
the other hand, after far red irradiation, phytochrome could increase the endogenous
concentration of IAA relative to that of ABA. The excess IAA would then produce a more
negative charge on the cell membrane, causing detachment of root tips from the negatively
charged glass surface. This could be the possible action of phytochrome on the hormones
in the mungbean root tips but not for the attachment mechanism in barley root tips which
still remains clearly unexplained.

Racusen and Etherton (1974) presented that it was likely a phytochrome-mediated
charge development in mungbean root tips is involved in the alteration of an already
existing electrical component. They found out that changes in ionic strength and
particularly changes in Ca”* and H’ in the bathing medium formulated by Tanada (1968)
caused changes in the surface charges on the root cap cells in the absence of red light.
Moreover, red light-induced charge changes were demonstrable only on root cap cells and
were reversible with far red light and both light-induced and ionically mediated charge

changes were associated with the cell membrane and not the cell wall.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Time and Place of Study

The field experiment was conducted at Jardin de Hierbas, Institute of Crop Science,
College of Agriculture and Food Science, University of the Philippines Los Bafios (UPLB),

College, Laguna, Philippines from December 2015 to October 2016.

Experimental Design and Treatments

Experiment 1: Growth and Attachment Strategy
of Vanilla Adventitious Roots in Different Support Posts

1. Growth of Adventitious Roots on Different Types of Support Post

Vanilla (Vanilla planifolia Jacks. ex Andrews) was used in this study. This plant
was propagated using cuttings with 3 nodes. Cuttings were pre-planted in 8 x 10 cm
polyethylene planting bags with garden soil. The vanilla plants were placed outdoors in a
natural shaded area (i.e. under the rubber trees). After 84 days, selected seedlings with new
shoot with at least 2 nodes and developed leaves were transplanted to 20 x 18 cm
polyethylene pots containing mixture of sterilized garden soil and vermicompost (4:1 w/w).
Sample plants were established using different artificial and natural support posts (Fig. 1).

The experiment was conducted in a randomized complete block design (RCBD) (Fig. 2).

In each support post, one plant was established. Three replications were made and in each
replicate, two plants were established. A space of | m x | m between and within rows in
experimental plants was maintained. The list of artificial and natural support posts used

and their physical and chemical nature are shown in Table 1. Recommended cultural

management for vanilla was applied throughout the growing period.

Figure 1. The transplanted vanilla plants with the support posts (indicated by the red
arrows): (a) GI wire (control); (b) Gliricidia sepium (Jacq.) Steud.; (c)
Sphaerobambos philippinensis (Gamble) S.Dransf.; (d) PVC pipe; (e) concrete
and; (f) styrofoam.

ae

LEGEND

Support posts (S):
1—GI wire (control)
2 - Gliricidia sepium
(Jaeq.) Steud

3 - Sphaerobambos
philippinensis (Gamble)
S.Dransf.

4-PVC pipes

5 — Concrete posts

6 — Styrofoam

R - Replicate
P - Plant

Figure 2. Experiment 1-I (a) setup and (b) schematic layout.



Table 1. Characteristics of natural and artificial support posts used.

OTHER FEATURES (MORPHO-

TYPE OF PHYSICAL
ANATOMY, CHEMICAL
SUPPORT POST STRUCTURE COMPOSITION)
Natural

1. Gliricidia sepium
(Jacq.) Steud.
(Common name:

Stem with smooth bark,
without thorns, whitish to
grey in color and dotted

Fibrous (ave. fiber length is 1.0 mm,
ranging between 0.4 mm and 2.0 mm). Stem
is composed of 27.1% Klason-lignin, 43.4%

Kakawate) all over with lenticels alpha cellulose and 29.6% beta- and gamma
(Kpikpi and Sackey, cellulose (Mainoo and Ulzen-Appiah,
2012). 1996).

2. Sphaerobambos
Philippinensis
(Gamble) S.Dransf.
(Common name:
Laak)

Culms 4-6 m tall, 5cm
diameter; internodes 60-
70 cm long, thin-walled,
smooth (Dransfield,
1989).

Culm consists of about 50% parenchyma
cells, 40 % fibers, and 10% vascular
bundles. The main constituents of the culm
tissue are cellulose, hemicelluloses, and
lignin; minor constituents are various
soluble polysaccharides, proteins, resins,
tannins, waxes and ash. (Liese and Tang,
2015).

Artificial

1, Galvanized Iron
(GI) Wire (control)
—to hold the stem

Size: no. 10; smooth

Iron-coated with zinc

2. Polyvinyl chloride
(PVC) pipes

Size: no. 2 (5 cm x 3 m);
black, smooth surface;
rigid; plastic

Polymerized vinyl chloride (C2H3Cl)n

3. Concrete

Size: 10 cm x 10 cm x 2.2
m.; Rough surface; hard

Portland cement composition (most
common type of cement for general usage):
Lime or calcium oxide (CaO) from
limestone, chalk, shells, shale or calcareous
rock; Silica (SiOz) from sand, old bottles,
clay or argillaceous rock; Alumina (Al203)
from bauxite, recycled aluminum, clay; Iron
(Fe20s) from clay, iron ore, scrap iron and
fly ash; Gypsum (CaSO..2H20) found
together with limestone; combined with
water to glue the aggregates together to
form cement paste

4. Styrofoam

Smooth to rough surface;
petroleum-based plastic
material; light weight
(about 95% air); good
insulation properties;

Polymerized styrene (CsHs)n

high moisture resistance


Data Gathered

Data gathering was started after the plants have been established with at least one
adventitious root attached to the support post. The position of sampled roots was noted by
designating the first node, starting from the shoot growth, as node 1, the next node as node
2 and so on (Fig. 3). Roots sampled were from node 6 to node 11.Three consecutive roots
were observed in each sample plant. Collection of data was done every 2 days but the
presented results show interval of 4 days because the roots merely had slight growth during
2-day interval. The selected ARs were consistently monitored throughout the experiment
with the following parameters:

e Length of ARs

e Width of ARs

e Elongation with time

e Lateral expansion with time

¢ Internode length — length between two nodes where the sample ARs were found

«¢ Number of days to attain full length — days until the roots completed maximum
length

¢ Number of days to attain full width - days until the roots completed maximum width

¢ Total number of attached roots — number of permanently attached roots determined
from the 6 roots constantly monitored in each plant

¢ Qualitative parameters — color and shape


Figure 3. Positions of the sampled roots during data collection.

II. Attachment Strength of Adventitious Roots on Different Types of Support Post

Two plants in each type of support post were selected for the determination of
attachment strength. In each plant, 3 fully grown and permanently attached ARs were
chosen for sampling. Each root tested was considered as one trial. The equipment used in

this study was fabricated by Gamboa (2016) (Fig. 4) using low-cost material based on a

similar study done by Steinbrecher et al. (2011). The hardware detailed system description
of the equipment (load cell, motor system, printed circuit board (PCB) and Arduino

microcontroller unit) is presented in Appendix C.

NoCROCONTROLIR
Bg ss
S74 ee
rm00

Figure 4. (a) The setup of the mechanical structure with the equipment used for the
determination of attachment strength. (b) Detailed hardware components of the
equipment. (c) Schematic diagram of the parts of the equipment (Gamboa,
2016).

The following descriptions of the mechanical structure and calibration setting up
were also taken from Gamboa (2016) (Fig. 4b-c). The structure was composed of a tripod
and a plastic platform. The platform contained all the components of the sensor, including

the motor system, microcontroller, PCB, and power source. Tip ties were used to secure

the components and were temporarily bind onto the board. The tripod, which was a regular
large camera tripod, was screwed under the board. The tripod was adjustable in order to
properly align the load cell with the node. The linear guides used in the motor system also
acted as stabilizers during operation, countering the pulling force exerted by the load cell.
They were positioned below the node touching the host surface, and they prevented the
device from toppling sideward or forward. A calibration set was used for the calibration of
the sensor system (see Appendix C).

The preparation of sampled roots and actual measurements of attachment strength
are detailed as follows. First, the length and width of the roots were measured. The position
of the sampled roots were at nodes 19-28. In each type of support post, 6 roots were
sampled. Each root sampling was equivalent to | trial. Next, a string was tightly knotted
around the node where the root was located. It served as the contact between the equipment
and the root, the medium during the detachment process. Then, the leaf attached to the node
was cut to prevent additional force exertion due to its weight. The internodes above and
below the node were also cut to separate this sample portion from the whole plant. Lastly,
the equipment was set to start to begin the detachment process (Fig. 5). The weights of the
detached roots were measured. The data recorded in the SD card are a series of time
(milliseconds) and mass (g). The force exerted by the roots on the attachment was
calculated using the formula:

F=mxg

Where: F = force (kg m‘'s? or N)

m = mass recorded by the equipment (g)
g = standard acceleration due to gravity (9.8 ms)


Figure 5. Detachment of an adventitious root using the equipment.

Experiment 2: Plant Growth Regulators (PGRs) and Vanilla
Adventitious Roots Attachment to Support Post

The effect of plant growth regulators on the attachment strategy of ARs was
investigated through exogenous applications of PGRs as spray. The treatments included 1)
distilled water (dH2O) as control; 2) 50 ppm indole-3-butyric acid (IBA); 3) 50 ppm
abscisic acid (ABA); and 4) 50 ppm 2,3,5-Triiodobenzoic acid (TIBA). IBA is commonly
used in promoting ARs in asexual propagation as it is proven to be effective than other
forms of auxin, hence this was used in the experiment. Sample vanilla plants were selected
from pre-planted cuttings. These were established in 20 cm x 41 cm clay pots with mixture
of sterilized garden soil and vermicompost (2.5:1 w/w) and were placed in a natural shaded
area (i.e. under the rubber trees).

Corksheet and glass were used as substrates in this experiment (Fig. 6). Previous

studies of Melzer et al. (2009) on adventitious roots of Hedera helix L. and Steinbrecher et

al. (2011) on tendrils with adhesive pads of Parthenocissus tricuspidata both have shown
that cork board was among the substrates that showed attachment with the adhesive
structures. Thus, the cork material available as corksheet was chosen substrate for this
experiment. Glass was also chosen as substrate to clearly see the side of the root facing the
substrate.

The experiment set up was also conducted in RCBD. Three replications were made
in each treatment and in each replicate, one plant was established. A space of | m x | m
between and within rows in experimental plants was maintained. Spraying of the treatments
started after the plants were already established with at least one adventitious root observed
attached to the support post. Henceforth, continuous spraying and data gathering were done

every 2 d until the completion of root growth of the 3 consecutive sample roots.

Figure 6. (a) Cork and (b) glass (indicated by the red arrows) were used as substrates of the
vanilla plants treated with plant growth regulators (PGRs).


Data Gathered

e Length of ARs

© Width of ARs

¢ Elongation rate

« Expansion rate

¢ Internode length

¢ Number of days to attain full length

¢ Number of days to attain full width

© Total number of attached roots

© Qualitative parameters — color and shape

Experiment 3: Morpho-anatomy of Vanilla Adventitious
Roots During Attachment to Support Post

Light Microscope Analysis

Another set of vanilla plants from the pre-planted cuttings using the same materials
and media as in Experiment 2 were established. The experimental setup for morpho-
anatomical analysis was also similar to that in Experiment 2.

Samplings were done by carefully cutting a portion of the substrate (for cork only)
with attached AR using a sharp blade (Fig. 7). Careful cutting of the samples was done to
ensure that the roots were still tightly attached to the substrates upon detachment from the

whole plant. On the other hand, ARs were manually detached from glass. Destructive

samplings were done wherein AR samples were prepared at different stages of growth and
degree of attachment, i.e. stage | (initial contact), stage 2 (weak to strong attachment) and

stage 3 (strong and permanent attachment).

Support post Cross-sectional view
Vanilla stem
Adventitious root
Adventitious root
Vanilla stem
a b Support post
Figure 7. Schematic diagram of the method of sampling for morpho-anatomical analyses.

(a) Longitudinal view and (b) cross-sectional view. Broken lines represent
sampling area.

Samples were immediately transferred to containers with fixative composed of 5%
ethanol, 5% glacial acetic acid and 10% formalin. Samples were sent to Micro Biological
Laboratory, Inc. (MICROLAB) for processing (plant microtechnique). Prepared slides
were viewed under Olympus BX53 microscope equipped with Olympus DP70 camera
located at Histology Laboratory, Plant Breeding, Genetics and Biotechnology Division,
International Rice Research Institute (IRRI). Fresh root samples collected from Experiment
1-I were also prepared. Cross sectioned roots were stained with Safranin O and were

observed under a light microscope using Olympus CH5 microscope at Morphology

Laboratory, Institute of Crop Science, College of Agriculture and Food Science, University

of the Philippines Los Bafios (UPLB).

Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) Analysis

Initial sample preparations were the same as in light microscopy section. Samples
were immediately transferred to containers with methanol and were sent to Electron
Microscopy Service Laboratory, National Institute of Molecular Biology and
Biotechnology (BIOTECH) for further preparation and coating (see Appendix B).

Prepared samples were viewed under Scanning Electron Microscope (JEOL JSM
6010-LV) at Micro and Nano Innovations Laboratory (miniLab), Department of Physical
Science, College of Science, University of the Philippines Baguio, Governor Park Road,

Baguio City.

Statistical Analysis

The data gathered were analyzed using STAR, version 2.0.1 2014, Biometrics and
Breeding Informatics, PBGB Division, International Rice Research Institute, Los Bafios,
Laguna. Treatment mean comparison was carried out using Least Significance Difference

(LSD) at 5 % level of significance.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Growth and Attachment Strategy of Vanilla Adventitious
Roots in Different Support Post

Support posts are essential in the cultivation of vanilla to maintain its vertical
growth, similar to its natural habitat. Vanilla, one of the most important spice in the world,
have adventitious roots (ARs) that are primarily responsible for its ascending growth.
These sticky ARs are influenced by the nature of the structures used as supports. In this
study, the growth and attachment of ARs as affected by the type of support post was
investigated. Common natural support posts (Gliricidia sepium [Jacq.] Steud. and
Sphacrobambos philippinensis [Gamble] S.Dransf.) and artificial support posts (PVC,
concrete and styrofoam) were chosen as experimental frameworks whereas GI wire was
used as control.

The length and width of adventitious roots of vanilla are presented in Fig. 8. Root
length which ranged from 29.5 mm (G. sepium) to 44.4 mm (PVC pipes) was not
statistically significant among the different types of support used. On the other hand, root
width was significantly different among the support posts used. Roots attached to S.
Philippinensis had the highest width (3.9 mm) which was comparable to the width of the
roots attached to G. sepium (3.5 mm). Results revealed that natural support posts greatly
affected the lateral expansion of the roots as compared to those attached to artificial posts.
Hanging adventitious roots in the GI wire (control) only showed slight lateral expansion

(1.6 mm).


ns

Figure 8. Length and width (mm) of adventitious roots of vanilla attached to different types
of support post. Legend: ns, * - not significant & significant, respectively, using
LSD at 5% level. Means with the same letter are not significantly different; error

bars represent SE of the mean (n=18).
Fig. 9 shows the elongation with time of the adventitious roots in different support
posts. The root length of the adventitious roots in all the support posts sharply increased
after 4 d. During this time, roots hanging in GI wire and those attached to PVC pipes and

styrofoam showed high increment growth (8.3, 8.3 and 8.5 mm, respectively) compared to

the increment growth of the roots attached to G. sepium, S. philippinensis and concrete
(6.7, 7.8 and 6.8 mm, respectively). Roots were elongating for about 1.7-2.1 mm d!: Roots
continued to elongate until the 8" day. Gradual increase in the length of the roots was
observed until 12 d. Moreover, roots attached to G. sepium and GI wire reached maximum
length on the 12" day. On 16" day, slight increase in the length of the roots attached to S.
Philippinensis, PVC pipes, concrete and styrofoam was observed. On the succeeding days,
roots in all the support posts already showed steady state growth. Although roots attached
to concrete and styrofoam were noticed to have minimal increment growth, this did not

affect the overall length of the roots.

Figure 9. Elongation (mm) with time (day) of adventitious roots of vanilla attached to
different types of support post. Error bars represent SE of the mean (n=18).

The lateral expansion of the adventitious roots with time differed among the support

posts used (Fig. 10). Similar to the elongation of the roots in all support posts, lateral

expansion markedly increased after 4 d. Noticeably, roots attached to G. sepium had the
highest expansion growth while the roots hanging in the GI wire and roots attached to
styrofoam had the minimal expansion growth among the treatments during the 4-day
interval. During this time, the maximum increase in width based on the results was 0.25
mm per day as observed in the roots attached to G. sepium. On the 8" day, roots in the
control already reached optimum width while roots attached to solid support posts
continued to expand. The increment growth of roots attached to S. philippinensis was also
higher than the other treatments. This contributed to the increase root width even reaching
the same width of the roots attached to G. sepium. After 12 d, ARs markedly reached the
optimum width. The roots attached to S. philippinensis had the highest root width (3.9 mm)
compared to the roots attached to the other support posts. An increment growth of 0.1-0.2
mm was still measurable on this day until 20" day of observation, however this probably

has minimal or no effect at all on overall expansion growth.

Figure 10. Lateral expansion (mm) with time (day) of adventitious roots of vanilla attached
to different types of support post. Error bars represent SE of the mean (n=18).


The number of days to attain full length ranged from 14.7-18.1 d, however, this did

not vary with the treatments (Fig. 11). Shorter growth duration (7.1-13.3 d) was noted for
root width compared to the number of days to attain full length. Moreover, the number of
days to attain full width was extended for about five days when adventitious roots were

attached to a solid support post unlike when it was just hanging as observed in the control.

‘ b i ns

Figure 11. The number of days to attain full length and full width of vanilla adventitious
roots attached to different types of support post. Legend: ns, * - not significant
& significant, respectively, using LSD at 5% level. Means with the same letter

are not significantly different; error bars represent SE of the mean (n=18).
The number of attached roots was counted from the roots that were constantly
monitored per type of support post (Fig. 12a). Only the number of roots attached to solid
support posts were analyzed since it was expected that no roots will be attached in the

control, however, in some instances, it was observed that the roots in the control were

capable of adhering to the stem and leaves. Fig. 12a shows that all the sampled adventitious

roots were firmly attached to G. sepium. The highest number of adventitious roots (6)
attached to G. sepium was comparable to the number of adventitious roots attached to other

support posts except for concrete.

OCTET EE
sae mest ese

SEE

EESTI

Figure 12. (a) Number of attached roots and (b) internode length of adventitious roots of
vanilla attached to different support posts. Legend: ns, * - not significant &
significant, respectively, using LSD at 5% level. Means with the same letter are
not significantly different; error bars represent SE of the mean (n=18).

The internode length was also measured in this experiment to determine if the

growth of the stem in different support posts would affect the growth of the adventitious

roots (Fig. 12b). Internode length, which ranged from 40.4-49.2 mm, was not affected by
the treatments.

The quantitative parameters presented reflected the variations in the morphology of
ARs attached to different support posts (Fig. 13). Vanilla plants without solid support posts
had cylindrical and thinner ARs (Fig. 13a). ARs attached to natural support posts appeared
bigger and flattened (Fig. 13b-c) than ARs attached to artificial support posts (Fig. 13d-f).
Anatomical observations clearly show that ARs had lateral expansion when attached to
supporting structures (Fig. 14). Moreover, root hairs developed on the side of the AR where
attachment occurred (Fig. 14b-f) whereas ARs in the GI wire had no root hairs (Fig. 14a).

At different stages of growth, changes in the color of the adventitious roots were
also monitored, which were observed to be the same in all the support posts. Fig. 15 shows
the change in color of an adventitious root attached to G. sepium. The initiation of roots
was detected when a bulge just proximal to the node was noticed (Fig. 15a). The root tip
touched the surface of the post. Light green bulge continued to elongate on the succeeding
days. Whitish to light green roots rapidly elongated, accompanied by an increase in width
for about a week (Fig. 15b). Gradual decline in the elongation and expansion of the roots
on the following week also showed a decrease in the brightness of the roots (Fig. 15c). This
continued until the roots attained full length and full width (Fig. 15c). Fully grown roots
exhibited dark green appearance (Fig. 15d). The green-colored ARs of vanilla was due to
its chlorophyll content which is capable of slight light transmission but showed no net
photosynthesis because of its primary role in anchorage and absorption (Aschan and Pfanz,

2003).


“wROJOIAIs (J) pue ‘a}a19U09 (3) ‘Ad (P) Sysuesiq’s (2|quIeD) sisuaurddijryd soquvgosavydg (9) “pnais
(boer) wnidas nypiaiat}H (q) ‘241M [9 (b) :1sod yoddns jo sadA} quasaysip 01 payoene (Sy) s}oos snonnuaape eyjiueA “¢] Qn3iy



Figure 14. Cross sections of vanilla adventitious roots (ARs) attached to (a) GI wire; (b)
Gliricidia sepium (Jacq.) Steud.; (c) Sphaerobambos philippinensis (Gamble)
S.Dransf.; (d) PVC; (e) concrete; and (f) styrofoam. Legend: v-velamen, c-

cortex, vb-vascular bundles, p-pith, rh-root hairs, s-remnants of support post.
Magnification: 40x.


Figure 15. Changes in the color of the adventitious roots (ARs) of vanilla at different stages
of growth and development. (a) Visible light green bulge on the 1% day of
observation. (b) Elongated and expanded light green root after 6 d. (c) Green
root at full length and permanently attached to Gliricidia sepium (Jacq.) Steud.
after 17 d. (d) Root turned dark green after 21 d.

The differential growth of the adventitious roots as influenced by the type of
support posts is clearly revealed in this study. The thin, long and cylindrical roots observed
hanging in GI wire probably resulted in ‘not finding’ the substrate of the roots due to size

limitation of the material. On the other hand, flattened roots attached to solid support post

were observed indicating a root-substrate contact. In similar studies, it was demonstrated
that the growth of plant attachment structures was certainly influenced by the type of
substrates. Steinbrecher et al. (2011) reported that the attachment pads of Parthenocissus
tricuspidata were highly efficient structures that secrete an adhesive fluid and were found
to attach to a wide variety of substrates, both organic and inorganic. Moreover, it was
shown that the mean projected attachment pad area was found to be dependent on the
substrate. The mean projected attachment pad area is comparable to the root width of the
adventitious roots in this study. Upon successful contact to the substrate, the roots began
to expand, doubling its width after 4 d as exhibited with G. sepium and S. philippinensis as
support posts (Fig. 8). The roots attached to G. sepium was also observed to simultaneously
slow down the rate of elongation and increased the lateral expansion rate while the roots
attached to other support posts continuously elongated. On the other hand, roots attached
to S. philippinensis showed continued elongation and expansion simultaneously, even
exceeding the value of the width of the roots attached to G. sepium (Fig. 8).

Both the roughness of G. sepium bark due to the presence of numerous lenticels
and the smoothness of S. philippinensis culm have shown significant contributions to the
expansion growth. The textures of the substrates were also considered in the growth of
mature attachment pads in P. guinquefolia and P. tricuspidata. Steinbrecher et al. (2009)
reported that fully grown attachment pads were observed in rough organic substrates like
wood and for smooth inorganic substrates like ceramic tiles. Except for ceramic tiles, all
inorganic substrates (Mylar foil, PVC, aluminum, glass and steel) showed a tendency for

small, stunted or secondary detached attachment structures, which were denoted as

rudimentary. Furthermore, attachment pad showed lignification filling the vessel elements
of the wood substrate, thereby creating the perfect form closure with the substrate
(Steinbrecher et al., 2011). However, it was also emphasized that substrate surface
roughness cannot be the only important stimulus for the development of an attachment pad
due to large variation even within one tested plant specimen in their study. Moreover, it
was stated that the growing site with all its biotic and abiotic environmental conditions

plays a key role in the development of a plant and its organs.

Attachment Strength of Vanilla Adventitious Roots
on Different Types of Support Post

The ability of the vanilla plants to maintain its vertical position depends on the
intrinsic property of the adventitious roots, i.e. attachment strength, to sustain the force
needed to enable firm attachment onto supporting structures. The attachment strengths of
the roots were measured using a low-cost fabricated equipment (Fig. 4). In this test, another
set of firmly attached roots was chosen in each type of support post from the same setup
used for adventitious root characterization. Results show that the greatest force was
exhibited by the roots attached to G. sepium (935.44 + 514.60 mN) while the lowest force
was observed in the roots attached to S. philippinensis (179.70 + 148.72 mN) (Fig. 16).
Moreover, roots attached to PVC and concrete had relative forces that were contrary to the
reported cling strength of Syngonium roots (Gamboa, 2016). Vanilla ARs attached to PVC
had higher attachment strength (791.76 mN) than Syngonium roots (698.09 mN) attached

to the same type of post. Whereas, the attachment strength of vanilla ARs attached to

concrete was lower (414.06 mN) than the Syngonium roots (2446.09 mN). Presumably, the
reason for the high force exhibited by the vanilla ARs attached to PVC was the alteration
of its surface probably due to erratic weather condition in the natural environment (see

Appendix A).

Figure 16. Attachment strength of adventitious roots of vanilla attached to different types
of support post. Error bars represent SD (n=29).
The smooth-surfaced PVC pipes became slightly rough due to soil particles and other dust
particles that were continuously splashed to the surface by rain and wind. The compact
concrete slowly disintegrated through time and was observed to produced dusty particles
which could have affected the adhesion of the roots. These circumstances were probably
the causes of contrasting results compared to the previous study in Syngonium. In the case
of roots attached to G. sepium and styrofoam, surface contact was formed at the earlier
stage of root growth between the root hairs and the substrates due to the action of root

adhesives that can be supported by the mechanical interlock between irregularities of the

contact surfaces. Increased surface roughness usually results in an increased strength of the
adhesive joint (Gorb, 2008). Hence, strong and permanent adhesion was already achieved.
In contrast, the root hairs of the ARs attached to S. philippinensis culm could have lost its
capability to form an interlock with the surface due to the substrate’s smoothness. Rowe
and Speck (2015) emphasized that attachment mechanisms are often geometrically
complex, thus measurements can be difficult to replicate under typical natural conditions.
Furthermore, mechanical properties often change during ontogeny and so measurements

depend on the maturity and the length of time the attachment has been active.

Physiology of Adventitious Root-Host Surface Association

The marked differences in the growth and development of ARs, significantly in
terms of lateral expansion, attached to different types of support post have been discussed
in the previous section. It was also described in the methodology section that the support
posts used in this study have different physical and chemical properties that can influence
the lateral expansion of the ARs. Results have shown that the width of ARs attached to
natural support posts (G. sepium and S. philippinensis) was higher than the width of ARs
attached to artificial posts (PVC, concrete and styrofoam). Moreover, ARs in the control
(GI wire) only had slight increase in width throughout the growth period.

The attachment mechanism of vanilla ARs is comparable to the description of the
four-phase attachment process in English ivy (Melzer et al., 2011). In the discussion of the
morpho-anatomy of ARs in this study, it was observed that the root tip had no root hairs

which was assumed in this study to be the site of perception. This is in agreement with

Lenaghan and Zhang (2012) which also reported that the root tip acts as the pressure sensor
that provides the signal to attach. The root exhibited thigmomorphogenic behavior, in
which development and adhesion take place in response to the touch stimulus.
Thigmomorphogenesis was also observed in P. guinguefolia which caused its epidermal
cells to become papillated that may produce adhesive because of modification and
remobilization of wall components of these cells after a touch stimulus (Isnard and Silk,
2009). In the same way, the vanilla root tip is primarily responsible for producing the touch
stimuli after its contact with the substrate. AR responded to the touch stimulus by
producing root hairs in the velamen that are eventually accountable for the attachment in
solid supports. The initial contact of the root is also the stage of structural adaptation of the
root system with the topology of the climbing substrate accompanied by the first reaction
which is enlargement of the contact between the attachment root and the climbing substrate
thereby bringing closure between the root hairs and substrate (Melzer et al., 2011). Rapid
increase in the size of the root complements the successful enlargement of contact between
the root and the substrate.

The continuous growth of ARs is also dependent on the acquisition of water and
nutrients from its immediate surrounding (i.e. the substrates) which probably caused the
differences in the length and width of vanilla ARs attached to different types of support
post in this study. Likewise, studies on the terrestrial roots of wheat have shown that the
development of the roots is altered based on the soil conditions. Increased rooting depth
and production of greater length of roots in the deeper soil layers in response to soil drying

in surface layers have been reported as important drought-adaptive root trait in many crop

species including wheat (Manschadi et al., 2013). Also, these roots have tendency for
vertical growth to improve water acquisition. This is comparable to the growth of long
vanilla ARs attached to relatively dry surfaces of S. philippinensis, PVC, concrete and
styrofoam, which is an adaptive mechanism to increase the root surface area for higher
water retention. On the other hand, the noticeable increase in lateral expansion of vanilla
ARs attached to G. sepium and S. philippinensis could be attributed to the roots’ adaptive
trait for acquiring nutrients. A study on common bean and soybean showed that improved
phosphorus (P) uptake caused greater dispersion of lateral roots which enable foraging in
the topsoil where P availability is high. Also, a study on wheat revealed that root diameter
is also an important determinant of P acquisition efficiency. Furthermore, early and more
extensive horizontal growth of the roots in the top 70 cm of the soil profile was responsible

for the superior N acquisition by vigorous wheat breeding lines (Manschadi et al., 2013).

Plant Growth Regulators (PGRs) and Vanilla Adventitious
Roots Attachment to Support Post

The regulation of adventitious root formation by plant growth regulators (PGRs)
has been widely documented in different plant species (Sorin et al., 2005; Gutierrez et al.,
2012; Pandey et al., 2011). On the other hand, the role of PGRs throughout the growth and
development of adventitious roots having adhesion properties is still limited. In this study,
the effects of PGRs on the growth of adventitious roots of vanilla during attachment was
investigated using organic (cork) and inorganic (glass) substrates. The PGRs applied were

(1) indole-3-butyric acid (IBA) (2) abscisic acid (ABA) and; (4) 2,3,5-triiodobenzoic acid

(TIBA), all used at the same concentration (50 ppm). PGRs had significant effects on the
length and width of the roots attached both in cork and glass (Fig. 17). Results show that
the growth of roots were affected by both the substrate used and treatments applied. IBA
and ABA applied to the roots attached to cork showed no effect on growth. On the other
hand, TIBA application shortened the roots attached to cork. IBA application markedly
shortened the roots attached to glass but root length (12.7 mm) was still comparable to the
length of roots attached to the same substrate applied with ABA and TIBA (22.7 and 22.8

mm, respectively).

abe

be

Figure 17. The effects of applications of PGRs on the growth of vanilla adventitious roots
attached to cork and glass. Legend: * - significant, using LSD at 5% level.
Means with the same letter are not significantly different; error bars represent
SE of the mean (n=9).


The width of the roots attached to cork was not affected by the application of the
PGRs (Fig. 17). On the other hand, width of the roots attached to glass applied with PGRs
was lower compared to the roots attached to cork. Slender roots were observed in
treatments with IBA and ABA (1.5 and 1.7 mm, respectively) but root width was still
comparable to the roots in the control and TIBA treatments (2.1 and 2.0 mm, respectively).

The number of days to attain full length and full width was not significantly
different among the treatments in cork and glass substrates (Fig. 18). On the average, the
number of days to attain full length ranged from 9.9-14.7 d while the number of days to

attain final width ranged from 5.6-8.8 d.

Figure 18. The effects of applications of PGRs on the number of days to attain full length
and full width of vanilla adventitious roots attached to cork and glass. Legend:
ns — not significant, using LSD at 5% level. Error bars represent SE of the mean
(n=9).

The elongation of the roots with time attached to cork and glass and treated with

PGRs is presented in Fig. 19. A sharp increase in the root length was observed after the 4"

day until the 8" day of observation. An increment growth of 2.05 mm d"' was recorded in

control treatments with cork as substrate; however, this decreased to 1.3 mm d! when
treated with TIBA. Although root elongation was still observable on the 8" day, increment
growth started to decline with 27% reduction in the control treatment and 65% reduction
in the TIBA-treated roots. Roots treated with TIBA also reached the maximum length at 8
d. After 12 d, a steady-state growth was already observed in the rest of the sampled roots.
Average increment in growth in all the treatments was 2.2-2.3 mm, which was calculated
before the roots attached to cork reached the final length. The elongation with time of the
roots attached to glass varied slightly between the treatments applied with PGRs after 4 d.
On the other hand, a difference of 4.7-5.3 mm in the root length was observed between the
control and the other treatments. An increment growth of 2.2 mm d"' in the root length for
the control and only 1.26-1.45 mm d’! for the treated roots were calculated on the 4" day.
On the 8" day, slight gain in length was seen in roots treated with IBA in contrast to the
steady, striking increase in length of roots in the other treatments. This was supported by

the sharp decrease in the increment growth of the roots treated with IBA as shown in Fig

Figure 19. The effects of applications of PGRs on the elongation (mm) with time (day) of
vanilla adventitious roots attached to cork and glass. Error bars represent SE of
the mean (n=9).

17. An increment growth of 0.6-1.1 mm was observed before it attained the maximum
length at 12 d.

Application of PGRs only showed slight effect on the lateral expansion of the roots
attached both in cork and glass (Fig. 20). The increment growth ranged from 0.4-0.8 mm
in the roots attached to cork while the increment growth ranged from 0.2-0.5 mm in the
roots attached to glass after 4 d. Final width was reached after 8 d. Moreover, ABA treated-
roots attached to cork had the lowest increment growth while those ABA-treated roots

attached to glass had the highest increment growth among the treatments.

Figure 20. The effects of applications of PGRs on the lateral expansion (mm) with time
(day) of vanilla adventitious roots attached to cork and glass. Error bars
represent SE of the mean (n=9).

The application of PGRs showed no significant effects on the internode length of
the vanilla plants (Fig. 21). The internode length of vanilla with cork substrate ranged from
33.3-51.1 mm while that with glass substrate ranged from 36.7-51.7 mm.

Many studies have demonstrated that auxin and ABA interplay in the development
of adventitious roots. Pandey et al. (2011) found out that lower concentration of IBA (10.0

iM) was the most effective treatment not only in inducing maximum rooting (88.9%) but

also in enhancing number of roots, length of roots and length of longest root in Gingko
biloba L. In contrast, Steffens et al. (2006) reported that ABA acted as a potent inhibitor
of gibberellin (GA) activity and ethylene signaling on the growth rate of adventitious roots
of deep water rice. They also found out that root emergence and elongation were distinct
phases of adventitious root growth that were regulated through different networking among
ethylene, GA and ABA signaling pathways. However, in this study, the effects of IBA and
ABA did not clearly manifest on the growth parameters of vanilla adventitious roots even
if the concentration used was increased to 50.0 pM. The results show that the root lengths
of IBA- and ABA-treated plants were comparable to the control with cork as substrate.
Moreover, IBA-treated roots with glass substrate showed the least root length and root
width among the treatments. On the other hand, the effect of TIBA on roots with cork
substrate noticeably shortened the roots. TIBA is an auxin transport inhibitor, inhibiting
polar transport in part by competing with auxin for its binding site on the efflux carrier

(Taiz and Zeiger, 2010).

Figure 21. The effects of applications of PGRs on the internode length of vanilla
adventitious roots with cork and glass as substrates. Legend: ns - not
significant, using LSD at 5% level. Error bars represent SE of the mean (n=9).


The results on the actions of the PGRs on the elongation and lateral expansion of
the roots were rather inconclusive in the present study. Many studies have proven the
effectivity of auxin in promoting the growth of adventitious root as well as the regulation
of ABA on this organ. The large variation in the growth of ARs as affected by PGRs in this
study could be attributed to the small sampling size per treatment. It is also hypothesized
that different biotic and abiotic factors could interplay in a complex manner in the
adventitious root growth of vanilla since the experiment was carried in a natural
environment.

Cork was found to be an effective substrate leading to firm adhesion of the roots
which was also reported by Steinbrecher et al. (2011). All IBA-treated roots showed
permanent attachment to cork while 1-2 roots failed to attach in ABA and TIBA treatments
(Fig. 22). On the other hand, a lower number of attached roots was observed in glass
substrate compared to the cork substrate. Only 1 root was attached to glass in the control,

ABA and TIBA treatments while no root attachment was exhibited in IBA-treated roots.

Figure 22. The effects of applications of PGRs on the number of permanently attached
vanilla adventitious roots with cork and glass as substrates. Legend: * -
significant, using LSD at 5% level. Means with the same letter are not
significantly different; error bars represent SE of the mean (n=9).


In this study, no attachment was observed in roots treated with IBA while
attachment was observed in roots treated with ABA, which was in agreement with the
findings of Tanada (1973) that auxin (IAA) caused detachment and ABA induced
attachment in mungbean root tips with glass as substrate. On the other hand, no existing
study has been found to demonstrate the effect of an auxin inhibitor (TIBA) in the root
attachment phenomenon. TIBA has been shown to exert its inhibitory action on the polar
transport of auxin (Taiz and Zeiger, 2010), which in this course of action, probably
counteract the effect of auxin in root attachment. However, further research should be
carried out since the previous reports had involved the split-second action of phytochrome
photoreversibility under regulated red and far-red lights, which was not done in the current
experiment. It is also assumed in the present study that the smoothness of the glass
primarily affected the attachment of the roots in this substrate because the root hairs could
not anchor to the flat surface during the shrinking process (Melzer et al., 2010). On the
other hand, the surface of the cork had many intrusions in which the root hairs anchored

during the drying process, thus, maintained permanent attachment.

Morpho-anatomy of Vanilla Adventitious Roots
During Attachment to Support Post

In this study, the morpho-anatomy of adventitious roots of vanilla during
attachment to substrates was observed in different growth stages according to the root

length and width and the extent of adhesion. Morpho-anatomically, the roots with cork and

glass as substrates were the same except for a slight difference in form. The degree of

attachment also varied between the roots attached to the two substrates used.

Stage 1: Initial Contact

The initiation of adventitious roots was noticeable when a bulge was already visible
at the ventral side of the node facing the substrate (Fig.23a). Only one adventitious root
was initiated per node but in rare instances, two opposite roots were noted, where the main
root developed first and after several days the second root was initiated. Adventitious roots
appeared alternately in succeeding nodes in a plant. After 2 d, millimeter-sized, thin and
cylindrical root facing the substrate elongated in the same direction as the leaf in the same
node. The attachment of the root to the substrate was observed after 5 d. The attachment
was weak but perceptible since the roots were easy to detach. The attached mid-region of
the roots slightly expanded and scarce whitish root hairs were visible to the naked eye were
observed except at the tip. This finding does not agree with the early reports of Stern and
Judd (1999) that the root tip was clothed with root hairs. Based on their findings, root hairs
of V. pompona were only found on the surface of the roots facing the support post.
Furthermore, this study was in agreement with the reports of Lenaghan and Zhang (2012)
that the root tip is the key structure responsible for finding the contact which provided the
signal to induce formation and elongation of the root hairs that were responsible for the
adhesion. The cross-section and longitudinal sections of the roots at initiation stage are
presented in Fig. 23b-c. Sample roots used for this stage were not yet attached to the
substrates, thus expanded roots and root hairs were not observed in the following

anatomical characterization.


*(syse|qoIpl sye3sA19 oprydel-s ‘soypung sejnosea-qa ‘yyid-d ‘s1wapopua-ua ‘xay09-9 ‘s1WaPOXa-xa ‘USUIE]IA
-A :pusda’]) °(x0Op) (speoymouse pas a4) Aq payeoipul) xoU09 ay} UL S}se[qoIp! [eISA19 aplydes jo aBeun pasiejug (Pp) “(xOO1)
Syse{qoip! yeIss0 aprydes juepunge Burmoys dy yy ay} Jo UOI}as |eUIpNyIBUCT] (9,) -(x002) UV JO woIo9s-ssos_ (q) “y109
SY} JO soeyANs ay} Buryono} YY Pszis-s9}auNII TIA! (e) ‘odeys uoNEIUT Je (YY) 1001 SNONNUaApe eI[IUeA Jo AWOJeUe-OYdIOW “€Z aINSI{



A pronounced characteristic of the Orchidaceae is having multiple epidermis i.e.
velamen, which is certainly discernible in the adventitious roots of vanilla even at early
stage of growth. The velamen is composed of 3-4 strata of irregularly- shaped parenchyma
cells separated from the inner cortex by highly lignified and compacted layer of exodermal
cells. The cortex is composed of thin-walled parenchyma cells. Raphide crystal idioblasts
composed of calcium oxalate are prominently distributed throughout the cortex (Kaush and
Horner, 1983) (Fig. 23c-d). Calcium oxalate functions include calcium regulation, plant
protection, detoxification (e.g., heavy metals or oxalic acid), ion balance, tissue
support/plant rigidity, and even light gathering and reflection (Franceschi and Nakata,
2005). The arrangement of vascular tissues is indistinct although it is assumed that the
small vacuolated cells radially arranged inner to the endodermis will be developed
conspicuously as the phloem and xylem cells. A pith is distinct at the center of the root

composed of parenchyma cells.

Stage 2: Weak to Strong Attachment

The length and width of sample roots used at this stage ranged from 20-30 mm and
2.0-2.5 mm, respectively (Fig. 24a). Scanning electron micrographs (Fig. 24c-d) showed
profuse root hairs were distributed on the ventral side facing the substrate interacting with
the surface that brought attachment except for the root tip having no root hairs and was not

in contact with the surface.

a
oe
“(wa Xx-x Swaojyd-yd ‘yyid-d ‘sruuapopua-ua 'x91100-9 ‘slwapoxe-xa ‘UdUIe]aA-A :puarse7]) ‘(X0S 1)
JORJUOD doBJNS a}JeIJSGNS y1OI-s12Y JOOI Jo adeuN WAS passeyuy (p) ‘(x¢Z) aesIsqns ¥109 ay} Jo do"ZINS pue sUIeY jOOI BY}
usamjag juauysene oy) BulAeldsip yy Jo a8eut WAS (9) *(xOOI) Sanssty padojoap-jjam Surmoys YY JO uoNdas-ssolD (q)
“109 0} payoene YY pausnely (2) uoWYoeye Buoys 0} yeam Buriqiyxo (YY) J00I SNONUaApe e[IUeA Jo AWOJeUe-oYdIoW “pz aIN3Iy


Anatomically, root tissues were already well developed (Fig. 24b). Distinct arrangement
of tissues was observed. The velamen was composed of bistratified cells wherein the outer
layer was composed of compacted and smaller cell which was separated from the
compacted, cuboidal and bigger cells by thin layer of wax deposit. The cortex occupied the
greatest area in the root. The stele is classified as eustele. Vascular bundles were arranged
radially wherein xylem cells were located inner to the phloem cell. Small and
parenchymatous cells constituted the pith in the center of the root. Syncytial raphide crystal

idioblasts were still present.

Stage 3: Strong and Permanent Attachment

Roots exhibiting permanent and strong attachment already achieved the optimum
size. Morphologically, whole roots attached to cork were dark green and flattened but the
roots attached to glass were slender (Fig. 25a). Profuse dried root hairs were observed both
in roots with cork and glass as substrates (Fig. 25c-d). However, the degree of attachment
differed between the roots attached to glass and cork as mentioned earlier. Although root
hairs were present throughout the whole growth of the roots attached to glass, weak root-
substrate attachment was observed unlike the strong and irreversible root-substrate
attachment formed in the roots attached to cork. Thus, this supports the understanding that
the texture of the substrate greatly influence the ‘closure’ that formed between the roots
and substrate, more specifically the bond between the root hairs and the surface of the
substrate which is similar to the findings in the experiment above comparing the effect of

different types of support posts on the growth and attachment of the roots.

Anatomically, cross-sections clearly showed the flattened shape of the roots
wherein root hairs were located on the underside of the whole root attached to the substrate

(Fig. 25c-d). Elongated unicellular root hairs originated from the outer layer stratum of the

velamen. Only few raphide crystal idioblasts were found in the cortex.

Figure 25. Morpho-anatomy of vanilla adventitious root (AR) exhibiting strong and
permanent attachment. (a) Mature AR behind the glass with profuse dried root
hairs (indicated by the red arrow) (b) Cross-section of permanently attached
AR (100x). (c) Cross section (400x) and (d) SEM image of root hairs (150x).
(Legend: v-velamen; c-cortex; vb-vascular bundles; p-pith; rh-root hairs.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

Vanilla (Vanilla planifolia Jacks. ex Andrews) is one of the most important spice
in the world that is primarily cultivated for its distinct aroma and flavor used in
confectionery and culinary industry. As the only climbing plant member of the family
Orchidaceae, the successful propagation of vanilla mainly depends on the initiation of
adventitious roots (ARs) at the early stage of growth and the attachment of ARs on the
supporting structures at the latter stage to maintain its vertical growth. Different aspects
concerning the formation of ARs have been widely documented in different plant species,
as well as in vanilla; however, the AR attachment phenomenon is poorly understood.
Therefore, this study conducted three related experiments to investigate the growth and
morpho-anatomy of vanilla AR during adherence to support post, namely: (1) growth and
attachment strength of ARs in different types of support posts; (2) effects of PGRs on AR
attachment, and (3) light and scanning microscopy analyses of the attachment strategy of
ARs. The findings of this study are enumerated as follows:

e The growth and attachment of ARs were influenced by the type of supporting
material used. Morpho-anatomically, vanilla plants without solid support posts (GI
wire [control]) had cylindrical and thinner ARs whereas those attached to natural
(Gliricidia sepium (Jacq.) Steud. and Sphaerobambos philippinensis (Gamble)
S.Dransf.) and artificial support posts (PVC pipes, concrete and styrofoam) had
flattened and slender ARs, respectively. The width of ARs attached to natural

support was wider than ARs attached to artificial support posts. Lateral expansion

with time of the roots also showed that G. sepium and S. philippinensis posts greatly
influenced the width. No significant differences in root length among the treatments
were observed. The maximum increment growth in width and length of the roots
was achieved after 4 d.

The variations in the length and width of the ARs attached to different types of
support post was most likely as an adaptive root trait for efficient water and nutrient
acquisition.

The greatest force was exhibited by ARs attached to G. sepium while the lowest
force was observed in the ARs attached to S. philippinensis as measured by a low
cost fabricated attachment strength-determining device. The texture of the substrate
primarily influenced the attachment strength of the roots.

The growth of roots was affected by both the substrates used (cork and glass) and
PGR treatments applied (indole-3-butyric acid [IBA], abscisic acid [ABA] and the
auxin inhibitor 2,3,5-triiodobenzoic acid [TIBA]. In the treatments with cork as
substrate, the expected roles of IBA and ABA in positive and negative regulations
of root growth, respectively, was not clearly observed. Also, a contradicting result
showed that shortest ARs was observed in IBA treatment with glass substrate. On
the other hand, TIBA significantly shortened the ARs attached to cork. In terms of
root width, IBA- and ABA-treated roots attached to glass showed the least lateral
expansion among all the treatments, including the roots with cork substrate.

IBA application showed no root attachment at all with glass as substrate compared

to the control, ABA and TIBA treatments which had only one attached root.

The morpho-anatomy of vanilla ARs during attachment to substrate was divided
into three different stages based on the size and the extent of adhesion: (1) Stage |
- characterized by AR initiation: initial contact of the root tip with the substrate,
rapid elongation, and expansion and scarce formation of root hairs; (2) Stage 2 -
stage of weak to strong attachment of the roots and growth of profuse root hairs on
the ventral side facing the substrate, and (3) Stage 3 - stage of strong and permanent
attachment of ARs; roots already achieved the maximum length and width, dark
green in appearance and were flattened; profuse dried root hairs created a closed
contact with the substrate surface leading to permanent attachment.
Anatomically, the AR tissues in cross section were arranged outside to inside as
follows: velamen; lignified and compact exodermis; cortex composed of thin-
walled parenchyma cells with abundant raphide crystal idioblasts; endodermis;
developing vascular tissue; and pith. The velamen was composed of 3-4 stratified
cells at stage | but was reduced to 2 layers at stage 2. The stele, xylem and phloem
were clearly recognizable at stage 2. Elongated unicellular profuse root hairs were
distinct at stage 3.
Profuse root hairs were distributed on the ventral side facing the substrate and
interacted with the surface that brought the attachment. Root tip had no root hairs
and was not in contact with the surface. Thus, it appeared that the tip was the
signaling factor of the neighboring tissues to continue to elongate and produce root

hairs for attachment.

* Cork is an effective substrate leading to firm adhesion of the ARs with or without
application of PGRs. In contrast, a glass is not a suitable substrate for AR
attachment. Although root hairs were present throughout the growth of ARs
attached to glass, ARs still exhibited feeble root-substrate attachment unlike the
strong and irreversible root-substrate attachment formed in the roots attached to
cork. Hence, the texture of the substrate might be considered as an important factor
for the attachment to take place.

The results of this study revealed that the type of material used as support posts for
growing vanilla had an influence on the growth and attachment properties of the ARs which
are the main structures responsible for the ascending growth of this spice. ARs attached
firmer on natural/organic substrates like G. sepium and cork than on artificial substrates.
Also, exogenous applications of PGRs affected the growth and attachment of ARs which
showed a potential involvement of these chemicals in the phenomenon. Morpho-
anatomical analyses clearly showed the changes in the root, particularly demonstrating the
important roles of root tip and root hairs in the attachment. In general, the findings of this
research could contribute to the limited studies of the attachment strategy of adventitious

roots.


Recommendations

This study demonstrated the variations in the growth and attachment of vanilla
adventitious roots in different types of substrates and as affected by applications of plant
growth regulators under a natural environment. In practice, the findings could be applied
in choosing the appropriate supporting structures which is essential in the cultural
management towards sustainable production of this important spice. However, it is
recommended that further studies should be done in a controlled environment to minimize
the interactions of other factors that can also affect the results. A biochemical analysis of
the surface composition of the substrates can be also carried out to clearly understand the
physiological interactions between the root and substrate attachment. Other types of PGRs

with varying concentrations is suggested in succeeding research.

LITERATURE CITED

ASCHAN G, PFANZ H. 2003. Non-foliar photosynthesis — a strategy of additional carbon
acquisition. Flora 198: 81-97.

AUGSTBURGER F, BERGER J, CENSKOWSKY U, HEID P, MILZ J, STREIT C. 2000.
Organic Farming in the Tropics and Sub-Tropics, Exemplary Description of 20
Crops: Vanilla, 1‘ ed. Germany: Naturland e.V. 12 p.

BANIK RL. 2015. Morphology and Growth. In: Liese W, K6hl M, editors. Bamboo — The
Plant and its Uses. Switzerland: Springer International Publishing. p. 43-89.

BARLOW PW. 1994. The Origin, Diversity and Biology of Shoot-Bome Roots. In: Davis
TD, Haissig BE, editors. Biology of Adventitious Root Formation. Proceedings of
the First International Symposium on the Biology of Adventitious Root Formation,
held April 18-22, 1993, in Dallas, Texas. New York: Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC. p. 1-23.

BECK CB. 2010. Introduction to Plant Structure and Development Plant Anatomy for the
Twenty-First Century. 2nd ed. New York: Cambridge University Press. 465 p.

BELLINI C, PACURAR DI, PERRONE I. 2014. Adventitious roots and lateral roots:
Similarities and differences. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 65: 17.1-17.28.

BOTIA JM, ORTUNO A, ACOSTA M, SABATER F, SANCHEZ-BRAVO J. 1992.
Influence of 2,3,5-triiodobenzoic acid on the transport and metabolism of IAA in
Lupin hypocotyls. J Plant Growth Regul 11:135-141.

BOWLING AJ, VAUGHN KC. 2009. Gelatinous fibers are widespread in coiling tendrils
and twining vines. Am J Bot 96(4): 719-727.

BURRIS JN, LENAGHAN SC, ZHANG M, STEWART CN. 2012. Nanoparticle
biofabrication using English ivy (Hedera helix). J Nanobiotechnology, 10:41.

DAVIES Jr. FT, DAVIS TD, KESTER DE. 1994. Commercial Importance of Adventitious
Rooting to Horticulture. In: Davis TD, Haissig BE, editors. Biology of Adventitious
Root Formation. Proceedings of the First International Symposium on the Biology
of Adventitious Root Formation, held April 18-22, 1993, in Dallas, Texas. New
York: Springer Science+Business Media, LLC. p. 53-59.


DE GUZMAN CC, ZARA RR. 2012. Vanilla. In: Peter KV, editor. Handbook of Herbs
and Spices Volume 1.2" ed. USA: Woodhead Publishing Limited. p. 547-589.

DE GUZMAN CC, SANGALANG JB. 1997. Vanilla Cultivation and Processing. Los
Bajios: University of the Philippines Los Bais. 29 p.

DE KLERK G, VAN DER KRIEKEN W, DE JONG JC. 1999. The formation of
adventitious roots: New concepts, new possibilities. In Vitro Cell. Dev. Biol. Plant
35: 189-199.

DRANSFIELD S. 1989. Sphacrobambos, a new genus of bamboo (Gramineae-
Bambusoideae) from Malesia. Kew Bulletin 44(3): 425-434.

DYCUS AM, KNUDSON L. 1957. The Role of the velamen of the aerial roots of orchids.
Botanical Gazette 119(2): 78-87.

EVERT RF. 2006. Esau’s Plant Anatomy: Meristems, Cells, and Tissues of the Plant body:
Their Structure, Function, and Development, 3" ed. New Jersey: John Wiley &
Sons, Inc. 601 p.

EXLEY R. 2011. Vanilla Production in Australia. In: Havkin-Frenkel D, Belanger F,
editors. Handbook of Vanilla Science and Technology, Ist ed. USA: Blackwell
Publishing. p 69-78.

FRANCESCHI VR, NAKATA PA. 2005. Calcium oxalate in plants: Formation and
function. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 56: 41-71.

GAMBOA RM. 2016. The effect of host material type on the cling strength of Syngonium.
Institute of Mathematical Sciences and Physics, College of Arts and Sciences,
University of the Philippines Los Bajfios. BS Thesis. 30 p.

GARTNER BL. 1991. Relative growth rates of vines and shrubs of western poison oak,
Toxicodendron diversilobum (Anacardiaceae). Am J Bot 78 (10):1345-1353.

GEISS G, GUTIERREZ L, BELLINIC. 2010. Adventitious Root Formation: New Insights
and Perspectives. In: Beeckman T, editor. Annual Plant Reviews Volume 37: Root
Development. USA: Blackwell Publishing Ltd. p. 127-156.

GELDNER N, FRIM JC, STIERHOF Y, JURGENS G, PALME K. 2001. Auxin transport
inhibitors block PIN1 cycling and vesicle trafficking. Nature 413: 425-428.

GIANOLI E. 2004. Evolution of a climbing habit promotes diversification in flowering
plants. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 271: 2011-2015.


GROOT EP, SWEENEY EJ, ROST TL. 2003. Development of the adhesive pad on
climbing fig (Ficus pumila) stems from clusters of adventitious roots. Plant and
Soil 248: 85-96.

GORB SN. 2008. Biological attachment devices: Exploring nature's diversity for
biomimetics. Phil Trans. R. Soc. A 366 (1870): 1557-1574.

GUTIERREZ L, MONGELARD G, FLOKOVA K, PACURAR DI, NOVAK 0,
STASWICK P, KOWALCZYK M, PACURAR M. DEMAILLY H, GEISS G,
BELLINID C. 2012. Auxin controls Arabidopsis adventitious root initiation by
regulating jasmonic acid homeostasis. Plant Cell 24: 2515-2527.

HACKETT WP, MURRAY JR. 2010. Research On Adventitious Rooting: Where Do We
Go From Here? In: Davis TD, Haissig BE, editors. Biology of Adventitious Root
Formation. Proceedings of the First International Symposium on the Biology of
Adventitious Root Formation, held April 18-22, 1993, in Dallas, Texas. New York:
Springer Science+Business Media, LLC. p. 333-335.

HALLIDAY KJ, MARTINEZ-GARCIA JF, JOSSE EM. 2009. Integration of light and
auxin signaling. Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology 1(6): a001586.
http://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a001586

HANSCH C, MUIR RM, METZENBERG RL. 1951. Further evidence for a chemical
reaction between plant growth-regulators and a plant substrate. Plant Physiol 26(4):
812-821.

HERNANDEZ JH, LUBINSKY P. 2011. Cultivation Systems. In: Odoux E, M. Grisoni,
editors. Medicinal and Aromatic Plants — Industrial Profiles: Vanilla. New York:
CRC Press. p. 75-95.

HERNANDEZ-HERNANDEZ J. 2011. Mexican Vanilla Production. In: Havkin-Frenkel
D, Belanger F, editors. Handbook of Vanilla Science and Technology, Ist ed. USA:
Blackwell Publishing. p. 3-39.

ISNARD S, SILK WK. 2009. Moving with climbing plants from Charles Darwin's time
into the 21st century. Am J Bot 96(7): 1205-1221.

JUNG JK, MCCOUCH, S. 2013. Getting to the roots of it: Genetic and hormonal control
of root architecture. Frontiers in Plant Science 4(186).

KAUSCH AP, HORNER HT. 1983. Development of syncytial raphide crystal idioblasts
in the cortex of adventitious roots of Vanilla planifolia L. (Orchidiaceae). Scan.
Electron Microsc. II: 893-903.


KPIKPI WM, SACKEY I. 2012. Gliricidia sepium (Jacq.) Walp.: Hardwood with potential
for pulp and paper-making. CJPAS 6 (2): 1961-1966.

KRAJNC AU, TURINEK M, IVANCICI A. 2013. Morphological and physiological
changes during adventitious root formation as affected by auxin metabolism:

Stimulatory effect of auxin containing seaweed extract treatment. Agricultura 10:
No 1-2: 17-27.

LENAGHAN SC, BURRIS JN, CHOUREY K, HUANG Y, XIA L, LADY B, SHARMA
R, PAN C, LEJEUNE Z, FOISTER S, HETTICH RL, STEWART JR. N, ZHANG
M. 2013. Isolation and chemical analysis of nanoparticles from English ivy (Hedera
helix L.). J. R. Soc. Interface 10: 20130392.

LENAGHAN SC, ZHANG M. 2011. Real-time observation of the secretion of a
nanocomposite adhesive from English ivy (Hedera helix). Plant Sci 183: 206-211.

LIESE W, TANG TKH. 2015. Properties of the Bamboo Culm. In: Liese W, Kohl M,
editors. Bamboo — The Plant and its Uses. Switzerland: Springer International
Publishing. p. 227-256.

LUDWIG-MULLER J, VERTOCNIK A, TOWN CD. 2005. Analysis of indole-3-butyric
acid-induced adventitious root formation on Arabidopsis stem segments. J Exp Bot
56 (418): 2095-2105.

MAINOO AA, ULZEN-APPIAH F. 1996. Growth, wood yield and energy characteristics
of Leucaena leucocephala, Gliricidia sepium and Senna siamea at age four years.
GJF 3: 69-79.

MANSCHADI AM, MANSKE GGB, VLEK PLG. 2013. Root Architecture and Resource
Acquisition: Wheat as a Model Plant. In: Eshel A, Beeckman T, editors. Plant Roots
The Hidden Half, 4'" ed. Florida: CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group. p. 319-
336.

MELZER B, STEINBRECHER T, SEIDEL R, KRAFT O, SCHWAIGER R, SPECK T.
2009. Mechanics and structure of the attachment system of English ivy (Hedera
helix L.). Proceedings of 6th Plant Biomechanics Conference; 2009 November 16-
21; Cayenne.

MELZER B, STEINBRECHER T, SEIDEL R, KRAFT O, SCHWAIGER R, SPECK T.
2010. The attachment strategy of English ivy: A complex mechanism acting on
several hierarchical levels. J. R. Soc. Interface. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2010.0140.


NIU S, LIZ, YUAN H, FANG P, CHEN X, LI W. 2013. Proper gibberellin localization in
vascular tissue is required to regulate adventitious root development in tobacco. J
Exp Bot 64 (11): 3411-3424.

OLIVEIRA VC, SAJO MD. 1999. Root anatomy of nine Orchidaceae species. Braz. Arch.
Biol. Technol. 42 (4): 0.

PANDEY A, TAMTA §, GIRI D. 2011. Role of auxin on adventitious root formation and
subsequent growth of cutting raised plantlets of Ginkgo biloba L. Int. J. Biodivers.
Conserv. 3(4): 142-146.

QUIROS EV. 2011. Vanilla Production In Cost Rica. In: Havkin-Frenkel D, Belanger F,
editors. Handbook of Vanilla Science and Technology, Ist ed. USA: Blackwell
Publishing. p. 40-49.

RACUSEN RH, ETHERTON B. 1975. Role of membrane-bound, fixed-charge changes in
phytochrome-mediated mungbean root tip adherence phenomenon. Plant Physiol.
55: 491-495.

RAMAN V, HORNER HT, KHAN IA. 2014. New and unusual form of calcium oxalate.
J Plant Res 127: 721. doi:10.1007/s10265-014-0654-y.

ROWE NP, SPECK T. 2015. Stem biomechanics, strength of attachment, and
developmental plasticity of vines and lianas. In: Schnitzer SA, Bongers F, Burnham
RJ, Putz FE, editors. Ecology of Lianas, 1 ed. JohnWiley & Sons, Ltd. p. 323-341.

SARMA YR, THOMAS J, SASIKUMAR B, VARADASAN S. 2011. Vanilla Production
in India. In: Odoux E, Grisoni M, editors. Medicinal and Aromatic Plants —
Industrial Profiles: Vanilla. New York: CRC Press. p. 295-325.

SIMONS AJ, STEWART JL. n.d. Gliricidia sepium - a Multipurpose Forage Tree Legume.
Retrieved August 255 2015 from
http://www. fao.org/ag/AGP/AGPC/doc/Publicat/Gutt-shel/x5556e07.htm.

SORIN C, BUSSELL JD, CAMUS I, LJUNG K, KOWALCZYK M, GEISS G,
MCKHANN H, GARCION C, VAUCHERET H, SANDBERG G, BELLINIA C.
2005. Auxin and light control of adventitious rooting in Arabidopsis require
ARGONAUTE!W. Plant Cell 17: 1343-1359.

STEFFENS E, WANG J, SAUTER M. 2006. Interactions between ethylene, gibberellin
and abscisic acid regulate emergence and growth rate of adventitious roots in
deepwater rice. Planta 223: 604-612. doi 10.1007/s00425-005-0111-1


STEINBRECHER T, DANNINGER E, HARDER D, SPECK T, KRAFT 0,
SCHWAIGER R. 2009. Quantifying the attachment strength of climbing plants: A
new approach. Acta Biomater. 6: 1497-1504.

STEINBRECHER T, BEUCHLE G, MELZER B, SPECK T, KRAFT O, SCHWAIGER
R. 2011. Structural development and morphology of the attachment system of
Parthenocissus tricuspidata. Int. J. Plant Sci. 172(9):1120-1129.

STEINBRECHER T, KRAFT O, SPECK T, MELZER B, SCHWAIGER R. 2009.
Ontogenetic variations in morphology and attachment strength of permanent
attachment pads of species of Parthenocissus. Proceedings of 6th Plant
Biomechanics Conference; 2009 November 16 — 21; Cayenne. 444-449 p.

STERN WL, JUDD WS. 1999. Comparative vegetative anatomy and systematics of
Vanilla (Orchidaceae). Bot. J. Linn. Soc. 131: 353-382.

STERNBERG T, editor. 2010. Ivy on walls. Proceedings of a Seminar on Ivy undertaken
by English Heritage, the National Trust and Natural England; 2010 May 19;
London. 62 p.

TAIZ L, ZEIGER E. 2010. Plant Physiology. Sth ed. Sunderland, MA Sinauer Associates.
782p.

TALBOT MJ, WHITE RG. 2013. Methanol fixation of plant tissue for scanning electron
microscopy improves preservation of tissue morphology and dimensions. Plant
Methods 9: 36.

TANADA T. 1968. A rapid photoreversible response of barley root tips in the presence of
3-indoleacetic acid. Proc. N. A. S. 59: 376-380.

TANADA T. 1968. Substances essential for a red, far-red light reversible attachment of
mungbean root tips to glass. Plant Physiol. 43: 2070-2071.

TANADAT. 1973. Indoleacetic acid and abscisic acid antagonism I. On the phytochrome-
mediated attachment of mungbean root tips on glass. Plant Physiol. 51: 150-153.

TANADA T. 1973. Indoleacetic acid and abscisic acid antagonism I. On the phytochrome-
mediated attachment of barley root tips on glass. Plant Physiol. 51: 154-1 57.

The Way To Go. 2008. Retrieved August 25, 2015 from
http: //isites.harvard.edu/fs/docs/icb.topic967858. files/PolystyreneFactSheets.pdf

VAUGHN KC, BOWLING AJ. 2011. Biology and physiology of vines. In: Janick J, editor.
Horticultural Reviews, 38. Wiley-Blackwell. p. 1-21.


WALTON CS. 2003. Leucaena (Leucaena leucocephala) in Queensland: Pest Status
Review Series — Land Protection. Queensland: Department of Natural Resources
and Mines, Qld. 51 p.

ZOTZ G, WINKLER U. 2013. Aerial roots of epiphytic orchids: the velamen radicum and
its role in water and nutrient uptake. Oecol 171: 733-741.
