Environmental and Economic Analysis of the Rehabilitation of Mined-Out Areas in Rio Tuba, Bataraza, Palawan

KATHLEEN FAITH P. EVINA

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Environmental Science

DECEMBER 2017

ABSTRACT

Rio Tuba Nickel Mining Corporation is one of the largest and oldest nickel
producer in the Philippines. It has been recognized with numerous Presidential Mineral
Industry Environmental Awards in the country because of their rehabilitation projects
among others. Hence, the primary interest of this study is the rehabilitation efforts of the
company and its impacts in the society, environment, and economy. Specifically, this study
aims: 1) to describe the processes involved in rehabilitation of mined-out areas in Rio Tuba,
2) to identify the social impacts of rehabilitation of mined-out areas in Rio Tuba; and 3) to
identify and value the environmental and economic impacts of rehibilitation of mined-out
areas in Rio Tuba; The results of the social analysis through a focus group discussion revealed that the
generation of employment, erosion control and prevention, and air and water purification
are among the most common perceived impacts of rehabilitation. Benefit-Cost Analysis was conducted to value the environmental and economic
benefits and costs using “with” and “without” rehabilitation scenarios over 15-year rotation
period at each rehabilitation area from 2013-2041. The results revealed that the net present
value of economic benefits is relatively higher compared to the net present value of
environmental benefits for both “with” and “without” rehabilitation scenarios. Moreover,
results show that only “with” rehabilitation there is a positive net present value of PhP 1.41
billion. The results suggest that it is economically beneficial for the mining company to
rehabilitate their mined-out areas. In addition, rehabilitation provides significant
environmental benefits in the form of ecosystem services such as carbon sequestration and
erosion control.

Keywords: rehabilitation, carbon sequestration, erosion control, value of timber, benefit-
cost analysis, net present value

CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION

Background of the Study

The Philippines has a land area of about 30 million hectares with nine million
hectares identified as having high mineral potential. Despite the limited land area, mining
remains one of the industry sectors in the Philippine economy. In 2015, there is about 2.91
percent or 0.872 million hectares covered by mining tenements where there are 44 metallic
mines and 39 non-metallic mines operating in the country (MGB, 2015).

The economic impacts of mining are felt through foreign exchange eamings from
exports, through taxes, fees, and royalties, and through employment. According to MGB
(2016), mining contributed around 0.7 percent in GDP or a gross value added of PhP77.8
billion in 2014. Taxes, fees, and royalties collected increased from PhP22.8 billion in 2011
to PhP32.2 billion in 2014 while employment in mining and quarrying increased from
211,000 in 2011 to 235,000 in 2014.

The primary minerals being produced in the country are gold, nickel, and copper.
The value from such minerals are estimated to be PhP32.97 billion, PhP80.95 billion, and
PhP22.76 billion in 2014, respectively (MGB, 2015).

Nickel has the largest production with 58 percent contribution to the total metallic

mineral production in 2014 (Figure 1). In fact, the Philippines exports more than 50 percent

of low grade nickel ores to China due to the Indonesian export ban in China since January

2014 (www .inquirer.net).

Silver, Chromite
& Iron ore
1.42%

|

Figure 1. Percent contribution of metals to total metallic mineral
production value (MGB, 2014)

Palawan is one of the provinces where nickel is being mined. The expansive reserves
of metal ores particularly nickel and chromite, which lay underneath old growth forests,
attracts mining investments into the province (Figure 2).

Mining and quarrying activities are the most common resource extractive industry in
Palawan. This was initiated in the 1970s by the operation of the Palawan Quicksilver Mines
in Brgy. Sta. Lourdes, Puerto Princesa City and Rio Tuba Nickel Mining Project in
Bataraza based on the report of PCSDS (2015). Furthermore, the Oxford Business Group
(2016) reported that the largest of the nickel producers in 2014 was the Rio Tuba Nickel

project of Rio Tuba Nickel Mining Corporation in Palawan with 693,585 dry metric tonnes

(DMTU), followed by the Claver Nickel Project of Taganito Mining Corporation in
Surigao del Norte with 515,033 DMTU. Rounding out the top four were the Tunay Nickel-
Cobalt Project of SR Metals, incorporated in Agusan del Norte with 434.158 DMTU and
the Toronto-Pulot Nickel Projects of Citinickel Mines and Development Corporation in

Palawan with 413,147 DMTU.

‘COMMODITY

© Gold (Au)

© Chromite (Cr)

© Copper (Cu)

* Dimension Stone (Os)
Mercury (Hg)

© Limestone (Ls)

© Manganese (Mn)

Nickel (Ni)
Silica (Si)

MINERAL RESOURCES MAP.
OF SOUTHERN PALAWAN, PHILIPPINES

Figure 2, Mineral resources map of southern Palawan (MGB-4B, 2015)

Mining may have significant economic impacts, but it is also linked with negative
environmental impacts because of the activities involved with it. Mining can impact the
environment through land, air, and water. Some of the impacts of mining are soil
degradation and contamination of soil and water resources with oil, grease and heavy
metals. Mining can also increase surface run-off and flash floods, increase the
concentration of air pollutants, generate dust and solid waste, lead to loss of flora and fauna
and displace wildlife species (Nickel Asia Corporation, 2014). These problems can be
addressed through proper impact management plan throughout the mining project where
mine rehabilitation is necessary. However, to attain efficient outcomes, companies should
have a sufficient understanding of the complex dynamics of the system of rehabilitation,

and the economic value generated from it.

Statement of the Problem

Many believe that benefit from mining is economic asset, but it cannot hide the fact
that the cost from it is environmental degradation. According to the RTNMC EPRMP.
(2014), the loss of top soil, soil erosion, and slope failure or mass movement are among
the impacts of mining operation to land. During operation stage, topsoil together with its
nutrient contents, are susceptible to loss due to erosion caused by the action of the wind
and rain on the exposed soil. Specifically, the ore stockpiles and mining pits are susceptible
to erosion due to heavy rain. Mining can also impact the air through increase in gaseous
emissions from heavy equipment, hauling, and other mining activities (see Appendix A for

detailed description of mining method).

Rehabilitation is one way to mitigate environmental degradation. It can impact the

environment through changes in vegetation, soil conditions, air quality, microclimate, and

biodiversity (Table 1). However, prior to the passage of RA 7942 or the Philippine Mining

Act of 1995, rehabilitation is not mandatory to mit

ing companies, hence, mined-out areas

may be left barren when mineral extraction activity ends.

Table 1. Impacts of ecosystem rehabilitation on the environment
IMPACTS DESCRIPTION
Changes in The initial aim of establishing dense vegetation cover on mine waste is to

vegetation

Changes in soil
conditions

Changes in air
quality

Changes in
microclimate

Changes in
biodiversity

stabilize the soil surface and prevent soil erosion that can spread pollutants
further. Also, rapid surface stabilization prevents siltation in nearby
streams. In addition, vegetation can curtail acid drainage because
vegetation cover can decrease the rainwater available for deep percolation.
Furthermore, vegetation cover facilitates accumulation of soil organic
matter that can act as an oxygen sink (Greipsson, 2011)

Tree roots stabilize mine land soil, which is susceptible to erosion. By
stabilizing the soil, trees prevent sediment and nutrients from washing into
nearby streams and rivers (Cruz, Francisco, & Tapawan-Conway, 1988)
Trees gives off oxygen and take in carbon dioxide (CO:) in carbon
sequestration. The CO; and industrial gases that trees absorb reduce the
pollutants in the atmosphere. It is estimated that a tree uses about five tons
of COz for every cubic meter of wood that it produces through the process
of photosynthesis (Ecosystems Research and Development Bureau, 2012)
Acacia planting improved soil enzyme activity and microclimate factors
(air temperature, soil temperature, and relative humidity) and decreased
the variation rate of these factors. This type of plantation is efficient in
accelerating invasion of tree species and improving site qualities (Lee et
al., 2005)

Recolonization of fauna was dependent on the methods used to
rehabilitate and the number of years since rehabilitation. Notably, methods
combining the use of fresh topsoil with the addition of seeds and seedlings
were most successful for fauna recolonization, both in term of fauna

density and richness (Cristescu Frére, & Banks, 2012)

In 2016, DENR audit all operating mines in the country. The purpose of the audit
is to determine the adequacy and efficiency of the environmental protection measures of
each mining operation, identify gaps in environmental protection measures and determine
the appropriate penalty/ies in case of violators of the mining and environmental laws
(MGB, 2016).

One of companies that passed the audit is Rio Tuba Nickel Mining Corporation
(RTNMC) in Palawan. Even though the company was established way before rehabilitation
became mandatory, it been recognized with numerous Presidential Mineral Industry
Environmental Awards. The said award is being conferred every year to mining companies
which showed exemplary practices in rehabilitation among others (MGB, 2015). Hence,

this study sought to address the following research questions:

1. What are the processes involved in rehabilitation of mined-out areas in Rio Tuba?
2. What are the social impacts of rehabilitation of mined out areas in Rio Tuba?
3. What are the value of environmental and economic impacts of rehabilitation of

mined-out areas in Rio Tuba?

Objectives of the Study

This study aims to determine the social impacts and to value the environmental and
economic impacts of rehabilitation of mined out areas in Rio Tuba from 2013 to 2041.

Specifically, this study aims to:

1. describe the processes involved in rehabilitation of mined out areas in Rio Tuba;
2. identify the social impacts of rehabilitation of mined out areas in Rio Tuba; and
3. identify and value the environmental and economic impacts of rehabilitation of

mined out areas in Rio Tuba.

Significance of the Study

By presenting a detailed assessment of social impacts and valuation of
environmental and economic impacts of rehabilitation of mined-out areas in Rio Tuba, the
study will provide a better understanding of the significance of rehabilitation of mined-out
area as an integral part of mining activity. In addition, by providing a value of rehabilitating
mined-out area, the study will give an insight on how much cost does the society bear
without rehabilitation and how much benefit does the society enjoy when there is
rehabilitation. These will benefit other mining companies in formulating and planning their
rehabilitation projects by presenting the Rio Tuba Nickel Mining Corporation

rehabilitation as the model.

Scope and Limitations of the Study

The study limits its scope to the benefits and costs of two different scenarios or
systems of rehabilitation of mined-out areas. Because of the lack of detailed primary and
secondary data on the environmental benefits from rehabilitation of mined-out areas,
adjustments and a variety of simplifying assumptions were used in the analysis. The study
is also limited to one mining company. Hence, caution is advised concerning the generality

of the findings.

CHAPTER 2

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

Mining Laws in the Philippines

The Philippine Constitution and the Philippine Mining Act of 1995 embodies the
regulatory framework for mining industry. The Philippine Mining Act “seeks to promote
exploration, development, utilization and conservation of mineral resources through the
combined efforts of government and private sector”. Moreover, the Philippine
Environmental Policy (Section 4 of PD 1151) provides the rationale for Environmental
Impact Statement (EIS) System. This led to the issuance of PD 1686 (Sec.4), which states
that “no person, partnership or corporation shall undertake or operate any or in part such
declared environmentally critical projects or area without first securing an Environmental
Compliance Certificate (ECC)”, which in turn requires an EIS. The EIS should contain at
least the following: EIS executive summary, project description, matrix of the scoping
agreement identifying critical issues and concems, as validated by EMB, baseline
environmental conditions focusing on the sectors (and resources) most significantly
affected by the proposed action, impact assessment focused on significant environmental
impacts (in relation to project construction/commissioning, operation and
decommissioning), taking into account cumulative impacts, environmental risk assessment

if determined by EMB as necessary during scoping, environmental management


program/plan, supporting documents, including technical/socio-economic data
used/generated, certificate of zoning viability and municipal land use plan, and proof of
consultation with stakeholders, environmental monitoring plan with proposed guarantee
funds including justification of the amount required, accountability statement of EIA
consultants and the project proponent and other clearances and documents that may be
determined and agreed upon during scoping.

After an ECC application attain a positive review from DENR/EMB, an ECC is
issued, certifying that based on the representations of the proponent, the proposed project
or undertaking will not cause significant negative environmental impacts. The ECC also
certifies that the proponent has complied with all the requirements of the EIS System and
has committed to implement its approved Environmental Management Plan (EMP). The
EMP is a section in the EIS that details the prevention, mitigation, compensation,
contingency and monitoring measures to enhance positive impacts and minimize negative
impacts and risks of a proposed project or undertaking.

DAO 2003-30 contains the guidelines on the monitoring of projects with ECC
whereas the multipartite monitoring team (MMT) should be established immediately after
the issuance of an ECC. The MMT shall be composed of representatives of the proponents
and of the stakeholder groups, including representatives from concerned LGUs, locally
accredited NGO/POs, the community, concerned EMB Regional Office, relevant
government agencies, and other sectors that may be identified during the negotiations. The
team shall be tasked to undertake monitoring of compliance with ECC conditions as well

as the EMP.


Furthermore, DAO 2005-7 provides the financial mechanisms on environmental
protection and rehabilitation with specific provision on setting up of Rehabilitation Cash
Fund (RCF) equivalent to 10 percent of the total amount needed to implement the
Environmental Protection and Enhancement Program (EPEP) or PhP 5 million, whichever
is lower, utilized for progressive rehabilitation as defined in the EPEP. The amount shall
be deposited as a Trust Fund in four equal quarterly deposits. A Monitoring Trust Fund
(MTF) shall likewise be initiated by the Contractor/Permit holder and shall be deposited in
a mutually acceptable Government depository bank for the exclusive use in the monitoring

approved by the MRF Committee.

Mine Rehabili

According to DAO 96-40 (Section Sbd), mine rehabilitation is the process used to
repair the major impacts of mining on the environment. The long-term objectives of
rehabilitation can vary from simply converting an area to a safe and stable condition, to
restoring the pre-mining conditions as closely as possible with all the area’s environmental
values intact. Furthermore, progressive rehabilitation refers to the immediate return of
disturbed land to a stable, productive and self-sustaining condition after an area is mined,
considering potential beneficial uses of land, the surrounding land and the needs and
desires of the local community.

The National Policy Agenda on Revitalizing Mining in the Philippines or EO 270
emphasizes the integral part of rehabilitation in every stage of mine life. It states that the

“protection of the environment shall be of paramount consideration in every stage of a


mining operation; mitigation and progressive rehabilitation measures shall be integral
components of mining operations”.

Moreover, DAO 96-40 (Section 167 ab) requires progressive rehabilitation of all
disturbed areas during every stage of mining operation, as well as after the termination
stage, in a condition prescribed in ECC and/or EPEP. In addition, mine site
decommissioning and rehabilitation shall aim to establish a land use capability that is
functional and proximate to the land use prior to the disturbance of the mine area, unless
other more beneficial land uses are predetermined and agreed in partnership with local
communities and Local Government.

The EPEP contains the mine rehabilitation plans of mining companies. The EPEP
is the comprehensive and strategic environmental management plan for the life of the
mining project on which Annual Environmental Protection and Enhancement Program
(AEPEP) are based and implemented to achieve the environmental management
objectives, criteria and commitments including protection and rehabilitation of the
disturbed environment.

As provided for in DAO 2004-05, the DENR through MGB shall institutionalize
an environmental guarantee fund mechanism known collectively as the Contingent
Liability and Rehabilitation Fund (CLRF) to ensure just and timely compensation for
damages and progressive sustainable rehabilitation for any adverse effect a mining
operation or activity may cause. The CLRF shall be in the form of the Mine Rehabilitation
Fund (MRF), the Mine Waste Tailings Fees (MWTF) and the Final Mine Rehabilitation

and Decommissioning Fund (FMRDF). A MRF shall be established and maintained by


each contractor as a reasonable environmental deposit to ensure availability of funds for
the satisfactory compliance with the commitments and performance of the activities
stipulated in the EPEP/ AEPEP during specified project phase. The MRF shall be in two
forms namely Monitoring Trust Fund (MTF) and Rehabilitation Cash Fund (RCF). The
MTF shall be determined by the MRF committee which shall not be less than PhP 150,000
to cover maintenance and other operating budget for the transportation and travel expenses,
cost of laboratory analysis, cost of supplies and materials, cost of communication services,
cost of consultancy work and other reasonable expenses incurred by the monitoring team.
The RCF, on the other hand shall be equivalent to ten percent of the total amount needed
to implement the EPEP or five million pesos, whichever is lower. The RCF serves to ensure
compliance with approved rehabilitation activities and schedules including research
programs, as defined in the EPEP/AEPEP. In accordance with Sec 71 or RA 7942 and item
f, Section 1 of EO 270-A, a Final Mine Rehabilitation and Decommissioning Fund
(FMRDF) shall be established by each operating Permit-Holder to ensure that the full cost
of the approved Final Mine Rehabilitation/Decommissioning Project (FMR/DP) is accrued

before the end of the operating life of the mine (see Appendix B).

Valuation of Ecosystem Services

Hein (2010), elaborated how ecosystem services can contribute to ecosystem
management into four main points. First, there is a lack of proper understanding on the
contribution of the ecosystems to human well-being in many countries. Risk may arise

when the default value of ecosystem in decision making is set at zero. Therefore,


identification and valuation of ecosystem services can provide incentives for setting up
more efficient and more sustainable management practices. Second, ecosystem service
valuation incorporates a part of societal costs of environmental degradation (and the
benefits of rehabilitation) in cost-benefit analysis. Thus, decision making can be enhanced
from both an economic efficiency and sustainability principle. Third, the analysis and,
where feasible, valuing ecosystem services can assist in better understanding stakeholder
motivations for ecosystem management. Finally, quantifying and valuing ecosystem
services may assist in establishing Payment Schemes for ecosystem services.

The different valuation methods for ecosystem services are summarized in Table 2.
Adjusted market price is a valuation method of using market prices adjusted for any
distortions while production function method is the estimation of an ecological function
where the ecosystem service is modelled as an input to the production process and is valued
through its effect on the output. In addition, revealed-preference methods examine actual
expenditures made on market goods are substitutes, avertive behavior or mitigating
expenditure approaches can be used. Travel cost methods can be used when market goods
are complements while hedonic price method when the ecosystem service is a
characteristic of the market good. Lastly, stated-preference methods use surveys to elicit
willingness to pay for an environmental change (contingent valuation), or to ask individuals
to make choices between different levels of environmental goods at different prices to

reveal their willingness to pay (choice modelling).

ypraudde wownsodx>
‘291049 a12N98Ip 40}
(661) "212 za1NoURPY

b

siyaung vorenrasu

$107 ‘WeEUIN UI 7'z a1qey, wo4 paidepy :a0inos,
— SS EET! OO VT

2soup 0 Kod 01 ssouuy ion
atop feanau 0} s2oud w9u9]h1p
1 spoo8 yerusuuostau jo s]243]

ue onIenfeA 1waBunuoD —_pue avead “<nyenb sre ‘~uonuanaud Poot} ny uo syoedus ‘<njend am spoyyout
40} (€002) Te 9 wosse 295 “uoNeALssuoo sayzads “Auyenb sore m ——feluausUOsAUD ‘uoHIeai20y 01 Sfenpialpul SE OL sXaamS S957] -uOU pue asp) souarajaud pares
Sunoud ysts aoejdysom
stuopay 40} (4.002) ‘iamnb pue aaead ‘A F (sease u
a ooy ‘uot ‘eau weumy pue Auradosd —_ uw saouid Auadosd
snuapisa1 uo sizedust —2'2) spoof payejau ws21sK5099 Uo spoxnau
‘sorsads ersyouaq jo soueusnureyy ———fenvawuosIAUS ‘uoneass7y ape aumnpuadxa ay) suru 2s. sauasayasd payeanay
gyeay vewny s8eurp prone
(0002) 1e 9 opesoy ——uone>yrxorap pue jonues wonnyjog ——wo stoedus yeruouuouiaug 0} sounnpuoda jo uoneuruTeX on sorneyoq Susoay
apestap
461) YONI pur WEY > ‘soneas wea) 3
“Xs00z) uressny, pu ejopeg ‘Josoddns ‘aBewep wiorg are youy 35, _papione 1509 a8ewreq,
pooy ‘wonsaroud wots "uc
Teamyeu pue a8cuesp ‘28seyoa1
seyempunosd ue uo1sou9 wos,
eurep Jo uonuaraud ‘amyncenbe ssa904d uo!
40} woddns ‘Ayananposd resmamnaud_ or sindut se
|qere Jo a5ueuurew Jorsaya a spowgou
j9U9q Jo S0ueUaTUIEYY ‘uonanpoud Jo 35. onury uornanposd
‘aannadutoo-uou pue soipisqns
‘99 “pueipoon, siysu9q ‘Saxe 9 Yon SUOILONIP
asodund-rynus y2osaay'sdouy GRU stonpoud 15010) ‘poo 40) pane s2ouid IEW 25q_saud roysew parsnipy
‘SaDIAWAS SNOLLVOTTadV BaAL ‘GOHLaW
Saris ay xa) WaLSASOA 40 SI14WVX3 40 SadAL NOWWOD ie ee an TVA NOLLWATVA,

SAS 008 40 SITING dO SIUALNOWNOD EE ooer=e rrr

saaqaias uiaysXsov2 0) paydde spoyjam uonenyea snowe,

“TAGeL


Benefit-Cost Analysis of Mining

Bennagen (1998) estimated the value of environmental damages from Marinduque
mining accident using “with short-term rehabilitation” and “with long-term rehabilitation”
scenarios in terms of direct use values of rivers and coastal waters affected by tailings spill.
With a 10-year period projection, the present value of “with short-term rehabilitation”
amounted to PhP180 million while the “with long-term rehabilitation” to PhP162 million.

Similarly, Gunaratne (2015) compared the annual costs and benefits of selected
mining sites to investigate policy options for sustainable river sand mining in Sri Lanka.

The results on the three mining sites in terms of net private benefits were: 5.2 million, 31.9

million, and 13.6 million Sri Lankan Rupees (LKR), respectively. The net social benefits

were 1.7 million, 22.3 million, and 11.7 million LKR, respectively. The comparison of the
costs and benefits at sampled mining sites revealed that the social cost of river sand mining
exceeds the private costs.

Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics (ABARE) reported that
the economic cost-benefit framework can be applied to the problem of determining
efficient levels of disturbance from mining and of rehabilitation for different mining
projects (Allen et. al. 2001). Furthermore, it is reported that coal mining in the Bowen
Basin took place on land used predominantly for cattle grazing that is of relatively low
productivity and value. The rehabilitation objective is to return the land to a state suitable
for grazing pasture, and this is estimated to cost mining companies around $12,000 per

hectare. This figure is significantly greater than the estimated average value of broad acre


farm land in the region of around $400 per hectare. Thus, feasible rehabilitation options
are those that are both technically possible and that are expected to cost less than the
expected profits of the mining project. If the costs of rehabilitation project borne entirely
by the mining company exceed expected profits, the company would not proceed with the
project. Furthermore, different rehabilitation projects could be used depending on the
degree of environmental impact of the mining activity and the optimal required standard
of rehabilitation varies depending on the costs and benefits of both mining and
rehabilitation at each site (Allen et.al. 2001).

In addition, Evina (2014) studied the efficiency of rehabilitation in Rio Tuba,
Palawan using Cost-Benefit Analysis. Benefits were measured in terms of the value of
carbon sequestration and soil erosion prevented by revegetating the mined-out areas. Costs,
on the other hand included variable and fixed costs associated with rehabilitation and costs
mandated by law. Benefits and costs of the rehabilitation scheme of Rio Tuba was
eventually compared with an alternative rehabilitation scheme, the one being tested by
ERDB in Bagacay, Samar with different selection of tree species and the use of vetiver
grass. The results show that the total NPV of alternative option is approximate to PhP 21
billion and PhP 14 billion at 8% and 15% discount rate, respectively. On the other hand,
the total NPV of current mixed species plantation is approximate to PhP 149 billion and
PhP 99 billion at 8% and 15% discount rate, respectively. These figures are higher
compared to the alternative rehabilitation scheme. This suggests that the species
combination of Rio Tuba is more efficient in terms of carbon sequestration and soil erosion

prevention than the identified alternative, which uses a single species and vetiver grass.

CHAPTER 3

THEORETICAL AND CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

Theoretical framework

The environment provides the economy with goods and services that are essential
to life. The goods and raw materials derived from the environment are transformed into
products through production process. These products are consumed and eventually
returned to environment as wastes and residuals. In addition, environmental services are
either directly or indirectly consumed by economy (Figure 3). These include the
provisioning services such as food and water; regulating services such as flood and disease
control; cultural services such as spiritual and recreational benefits; and supporting
services, such as nutrient cycling, that maintain the conditions for life on Earth
(Tientenberg, 2000). Hence, a damage to environment is also an economic problem

because important values of goods or services can be lost.


Economic System

Households

Production Consumption

“Extraction” “Residuals”

Natural Life Support System
Water, Wildlife, Energy, Raw Materials, Amenities
“Asset”

Figure 3. The economic system and the environment (Tientenberg, 2000)

Whether a resource should be used, converted to another use or left it in its natural
state, has implications in the values gained and lost. The decision as to what option is best
for a resource can be made only if these gains and losses are properly analyzed and
evaluated (Barbier et al., 1997). Criteria in choosing an option as to resource use may be
based from the project’s efficiency. Efficiency of a particular policy, or policy proposal
can be determined using the Benefit-Cost Analysis (BCA).

BCA is an economic valuation tool that involves identifying total benefits and costs.
The net benefit, which indicates the improvement, is measured by subtracting total costs

from total benefits. In comparing two options, the net benefits are compared to determine

which is better, If the net benefits are positive, the policy promotes economic efficiency.
BCA evaluation items are identified as comprising three dimensions: economic, social, and
environmental (Huang et al., 2008).

In addition, according to Stevens (n.d.) of Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development, BCA is considered as sustainability assessment tool where it concerns
the economic aspects. Taking this into consideration, the tool can be useful for the
improvement of environmental performance of companies as well as their decision-making

and policy formulation with regards to their activities.

Benefit-Cost Analysis

Benefit-Cost Analysis provides a protocol for measuring allocative efficiency, a
situation in which resources, such as land, labor, and capital are deployed in their highest
valued uses in terms of the goods and services they create. BCA allows direct comparisons
when analyzing the efficiency of alternative policies (Boardman, et al. 1996).

A simple and intuitively appealing definition of efficiency underlies modern
welfare economics and BCA: Pareto efficiency. An allocation of goods is Pareto efficient
if no alternative allocation can make at least one person better off without making anyone
else worse off (Boardman, et al. 1996).

The link between net benefits and Pareto efficiency is straightforward: If a policy
has positive net benefits, then it is possible to find a set of transfers, or “side payments,”
that makes at least one person better off without making anyone else worse off. In situations

in which policies have independent effects and there are no constraints on inputs, the BCA

a
decision rule is simple: Adopt all policies that have positive net benefits (Boardman, et al.
1996).

BCA utilizes an alternative decision rule with somewhat less appeal, but much
greater feasibility, than the actual Pareto efficiency rule. It is based on what is known as
the Kaldor-Hicks criterion: A policy should be adopted if and only if those who will gain
could fully compensate those who will lose and still be better off. The Kaldor-Hicks
criterion provides the basis for the potential Pareto efficiency rule: Adopt only policies that
have positive net benefits. As long as net benefits are positive, it is at least possible that
losers could be compensated so that the policy potentially could be Pareto improving
(Boardman, et al. 1996).

BCA accounts for both benefits and costs. The benefit is defined as increases in
human well-being (utility) while cost is defined as reductions in human well-being. BCA
is conducted by accounting for the benefits and costs of both alternatives and comparing
them to determine which have the greatest net benefit. In this case, the decision maker will
have a better basis for final alternative selection. However, there are two types of
limitations that make BCA inappropriate for decision making. Technical limitations may
make it impossible to quantify and then monetize all relevant impacts as costs and benefits.
Limitations in theory, data, or analytical resources, however, make it impossible for the
analyst to measure and value all impacts of a policy as consummate costs and benefits.

Second, goals other than efficiency may be of relevance to the policy (Boardman, 1995).


Conceptual Framework

The framework in this study is based on Benefit-Cost Analysis (Figure 4). Two
scenarios are analyzed using the company’s (private) point of view: with- and without-
rehabilitation of mined-out areas. The following are the basic components of the study: a)
description of the process of rehabilitation of mined-out areas of Rio Tuba Nickel Mining
Corporation; and b) social analysis of rehabilitation of mined-out areas in Rio Tuba,
Bataraza; c) environmental and economic benefit-cost analysis of with- and without-
rehabilitation of mined-out areas of Rio Tuba, Bataraza. The social analysis is focused
mainly on what than how much. In that sense, the results are descriptive based on the
society’s perceived impacts of rehabilitation of mined-out areas. The environmental
analysis consists of environmental impacts specifically carbon sequestration and erosion
control and prevention. On the other hand, the economic analysis consists of the economic
costs or the financial costs of the mining company, as well as their economic benefit
specifically their revenue from timber production. The benefit-cost analysis for valuation
of incremental impacts is the crucial step and the basis for conclusion. Hence, the
interconnectedness of the different components would provide information on the

efficiency of rehabilitation of mined-out area and its significance to economy.


Rio Tuba Nickel Mi

|

“Without” Rehabilitation

Environmental
Analysis
- carbon sequestration
= erosion control

|__|

Economic Analysis

UL ________» -financial cost

Figure 4.

Net Present Value

Conceptual framework of the study

CHAPTER 4

METHODOLOGY

Scope and Place of the Study

The study was conducted in Rio Tuba Nickel Mining Corporation, located in
Barangay Rio Tuba, Municipality of Bataraza, Province of Palawan (see Appendix C for
company profile of RTNMC). The scope of the study involves the rehabilitation of mined-
out area from site preparation to post planting activities (Figure 9) from year 2013 — 2041.
The inputs of the rehabilitation system include materials, energy, technology, and human
resources. Material inputs are the topsoil, fertilizer, water, tree seedlings, tools, etc. Energy
input are energy consumption from fuel, technology inputs are the heavy equipment while
human resources are the hired workers. On the other hand, the output of the rehabilitation
system may have a positive or negative impact to society and can be considered as either a
benefit or cost. The perceived output of rehabilitation system are changes in soil conditions,
changes in air quality, income of workers, and health and safety. Furthermore, the impacts
from the output include erosion control and prevention brought about by changes of soil
conditions, carbon sequestration from changes of air quality, revenue from timber, and

social impacts.

Apmys ayy yo adoag ‘gamiiy

oe
40 $2}04
souonernsxa

pe eee

vonenigeyos

yosupess
sedur sos] 2jdoad wo stoay.a Laas nee
a
——S=—= urpeaids/Surz0p
sequin wos snuanoy gf 2nupaas uo saya,
J ‘AFOIOUYD,
1 ‘ent
uonensenbas uogiey | yo ut S98uey =
———
vwonuoaaid suompuos TR

pur jonuos woisoug [*] Hosur s98ueyD

aa ~~ ss0301d sinduy



Valuation of Benefits and Costs

The benefits and costs components of “with” and “without”-rehabilitation scenarios
are shown in Table 3. Benefits and costs are identified in terms of environmental and
economic impacts and were subject to BCA to obtain their value. On the other hand, social

impacts are discussed and analyzed in a qualitative manner.

Table 3. _Benefit-cost matrix for with- and without-rehabilitation scenarios
TEM WITH WITHOUT INCREMENTAL.
 _ | Carbon sequestration . . *
é
& |__| Erosion contol and prevention . . +
a
€
2 | Revenue from timber (stumpage) FS
a
Total Benefits * Fs Fs
| Site preparation cost . . *
F E
4 & | Equipment cost . . +
o 8
= | Maintenance and operating expenses +
Total Costs * + +
32 * * £
a



Social Analysis

Social analysis focuses on identifying the perceived impacts of rehabilitation of
mined-out areas from the point of view of society. In that sense, the expected results are
mainly descriptive and qualitative. However, the results should be compared and/or
supported with sufficient secondary data.

According to Gall, et al. (2007) as cited by Nassaji (2015), descriptive research is
concerned with what rather than how or why something has happened. In such research,
the data may be collected qualitatively, but it is often analyzed quantitatively to determine
relationships. Qualitative research, however, is more holistic and often involves a rich
collection of data from various sources to gain a deeper understanding of individual
participants, including their opinions, perspectives, and attitudes.

Interviews and focus groups are the most common methods of data collection used
in qualitative research. Focus group is as a carefully planned series of discussions designed
to obtain perceptions on a defined area of interest in a permissive, non-threatening
environment which is helpful for participants to discuss ideas, opinions, and thoughts
(Krueger & Casey, 2000 as cited by Onwuegbuzie et al. 2010). The general characteristics
of the Focus Group are people's involvement, a series of meetings, the homogeneity of
participants with respect to research interests, the generation of qualitative data, and
discussion focused on a topic, which is determined by the purpose of the research

(Masadeh, 2012).


Focus Group Discussion

The social impacts of rehabilitation of mined-out areas were determined using the
information gathered from focus group discussion (FGD). One FGD with six participants
coming from different organizations of Barangay Rio Tuba was formed. The FGD was
held on April 20, 2017 at the Barangay Hall of Rio Tuba. Five additional single-person
interviews were conducted with individuals who were unable to attend during the FGD.
The anonymity of the participants is protected in this study, and in some instances the use
of “they” or “their” has been chosen to further protect the identity of participants. All the
participants are current residents of Barangay Rio Tuba and does not and/or did not work
in Rio Tuba Nickel Mining Corporation. Moreover, nearly all participants (9 out of 11)

were bom before the mining company was established in 1975.

Scope and Limitations

The analysis of social impacts of rehabilitation of mined-out areas in Rio Tuba
limits its scope to one barangay only - Barangay Rio Tuba, since it is where the mining
company is located. In addition, the residents who are not employed to the mining company
were purposely selected as participants of the focus group to obtain more truthful
information. Moreover, constraints such as differences of schedule and budget, limit the
researcher to conduct only one focus group. Hence, caution is advised on the generality

and accuracy of the results.


Environmental Analysis

The environmental impacts considered in this study are changes in carbon
sequestration and erosion control and prevention. These impacts are taken as benefits of
rehabilitation of mined-out areas. The succeeding paragraphs discusses in detail the method

used to value each environmental benefit.

Valuation of Carbon Sequestration

Carbon sequestration is the process where trees capture carbon, in the form of CO

from the atmosphere through photosynthesis and storing it in their biomass. CO2 removed
from the atmosphere is stored in growing plants in the form of biomass. Moreover, the
shadow project method is one way to value carbon sequestration. The method is based on
an assumption that carbon sequestration in different parts (trunk, foliage, etc) can be
estimated when the annual trunk volume increment is known, and is also based on the
general understanding that the total mass of foliage and live branches has a high correlation
with the stem diameter to calculate the carbon sequestration impact of forest plantations
(delos Angeles et al. n.d.) In addition, Tandug (2012) adopted equation that relates biomass
to tree diameter or height (Eq. 1). The allometric equation generally used is in the form:
W = b°(DBH)°(TH)* Eq. 1

Where,

W is the fresh or oven dry weight of the tree in kg

DBH is diameter at breast height in cm

TH is the total height in m
b®, b!, b? are constants


Field sampling

Field sampling was conducted on January 19, 2017 to determine the tree biomass
at the rehabilitation site (see Appendix C for field sampling photos). The live biomass was
determined by measuring the plant height and stem diameter at breast height (at 1.3 m
DBH) or at least before the first major branch of the tree species. This was measured for
trees and saplings. The presence of regenerations and their abundance was also recorded.

The baseline was randomly identified. There were five strips established and the
distance between them is 100 m (Figure 6). All trees within 10 m x 100 m sampling plot
along the strip line were recorded and identified. The diameter at breast height (dbh) were
measured using diameter tape and caliper. In addition, for every 1000 m? sample plot, 5 m
x 5 m plot were established and assigned for saplings, while another 2 m x 2 m plot were

established and assigned for regenerations (Figure 7).

Baseline
Strip line
100 m
Strip line
] 100 m
ut Strip line
Y

Figure6. _Strip line sampling design


Baseline

10 mx 100 m sample plot

IX Strip line

@ Trees > 14cm dbh
@ Saplings 6 <...< 14 em dbh
[1 smx5m sample plot for saplings

BD 2mx2m sample plot for regenerations

Figure 7. Sampling plot design

Live Biomass Measurement

Biomass was estimated through the use of allometric equations typically relating tree
diameter at breast height to biomass. The diameter at breast height (DBH) from the samples
were used to compute for the above ground biomass of the trees. The above ground biomass
(AGB) was calculated using the allometric equation from Brown (1997):
AGB = exp(—2.134 + 2.53 * In« DBH) Eq.2

Where,

exp {...} is “raised to the power of”

In is “natural log of (...)”

AGB is the above ground biomass per tree in kg
DBH is the diameter at breast height (1.3m) in cm


Carbon Stock

A default value of 45 percent was used to determine the carbon stored in tree
biomass, which is an average carbon content of wood samples collected from secondary
forests from several locations in the Philippines (Lasco and Puhlin 2003). In addition,
below-ground biomass (BG) was calculated using a default value of root-shoot ratio of
0.275 (Eq. 3 and 4) for tropical/subtropical dry forest/plantation (Mokany et al, 2006 as
cited by Rapidel et al, 2011). The total amount of carbon stock was then computed by

adding the carbon stock of above-ground biomass and below-ground biomass (Eq. 5).

Carbon stock (BG) = (ABG x 0.275) x 0.45 Eq. 3
Carbon stock (ABG) = ABG x 0.45 Eq.4
Total Carbon stock = C stock (AGB) + Cstock (BG) Eq.5

Computation of Carbon Dioxide

The Carbon Dioxide Equivalent was estimated by multiplying the carbon content
by a factor of 3.67 (Eq. 6), which converts the mass of carbon to the mass of carbon dioxide.
The conversion factor of 3.67 was computed by dividing the molecular weight of carbon
dioxide (44.01) by the molecular weight of carbon (12.01). The carbon dioxide content was
computed using the formula (US Department of Energy, 1998):

CO; Content = Carbon stock x 3.67 Eq. 6


Scope and Limitations

The field sampling was conducted in one rehabilitation site only as strictly
permitted by the mining company at the time of sampling request. In addition, non-
destructive sampling was done due to practical concerns. Because of the lack of detailed
primary and secondary data on the carbon sequestration benefits from rehabilitation of
mined-out areas, adjustments and a variety of simplifying assumptions were used in the

analysis. Hence, caution is advised on the generality of the results.

Valuation of Erosion Control

The other environmental benefit considered in this study is erosion control. The
valuation method for soil erosion used by Cruz, Francisco and Conway (1988) is shown in
Figure 8. As illustrated, Box A requires data on land mapping unit and soil analysis while
Box B requires data on the estimated soil erosion rate per mapping units (through universal
soil loss model) and the data on cover, rainfall, slope and soil erodibility. Given the data
on Box A, the fertilizer equivalent of N, P, K nutrients can be derived from the soil organic
content (used for estimating N) and for available P and K. From Box Al, the amount of N,
P, and K can be derived from these fertilizer equivalents and erosion rate per ton of soil
loss in Box C. From Box C, the implications for various land use classification can be
assessed in Box D. Finally, the on-site costs of erosion can be derived from the price

information in Box E combined in the estimated nutrient loss in Box C.


A. Soil or land mapping unit with B: Erosion rates per map unit
Bureau of Soils data on soil analysis classified by land use

\

Al: Data on organic content avail. P, K
converted into N, P, K fertilizer equivalent

\

C: Kg of N, P, K lost per tons of erosion for D: Implication for land
each map unit and land use | ——* classification

!

E: Price information on F: Value of N, P, K lost per ton of
po
N,P,K erosion for each map unit and land use

Figure 8. Basic application of the replacement cost method to assessment of on-site
effects of erosion (Cruz, Francisco, and Conway 1988)

Other valuation method for erosion control benefits includes the use of prediction
models. In the study of Evina (2014), SCUAF model was applied to value erosion
prevention benefits. SCUAF model can be used to predict the rate of erosion through time.
SCUAF or “Soil Changes Under AgroForestry”, is a computer model which predicts the
effects on soils of specific land use systems under given or assumed environmental
conditions. This model specifically uses the Modified Universal Soil Loss Equation
(MUSLE) to predict soil erosion through using information on average year climate
variables and soil characteristics (Predo et. al, 1997). Data on soil properties and erosion
rate serve as an input to the model. To capture the value of soil erosion prevention, the
results from the model was then used for the replacement cost method (Figure 13) and can

be computed using equations 7, 8, and 9.


DATA ON SOIL PROPERTIES (C, N, P) AND EROSION (T/HA)

XZ

PREDICT EROSION USING SCUAF

XZ

SOIL NUTRIENTS ERODED (KG/HA/YR)

REPLACEMENT COST METHOD.

Figure 13. Valuation steps for erosion prevention

benefits (Evina, 2014)

eroded Cin soit .
oe Se x per kg price of chicken manure Eq.7
eroded N in soil .
sroteg inst x per kg price of Urea Eq. 8
Sroded Pinsoil ner kg price of Solophos Eq.9

% P in Solophos

Data Collection

This study adopted the procedure used by Evina (2014) to value the benefits from
soil erosion control. Though, SCUAF requires the pre-rehabilitation and post rehabilitation
soil properties as inputs of the model (see Appendix D). These properties were obtained
from secondary sources, specifically the study of Marzo (2009) entitled “Assessment of
nickel mining and its potential for agricultural use in Palawan, Philippines” and Madid
(2001), entitled “Soil and forest influence on ecological stability in a rehabilitated nickel

minesite in Bataraza, Palawan, Philippines”.


Scope and Limitations

The analysis on soil control and prevention depends heavily on the secondary data.
Because of the lack of detailed primary and secondary data on the benefits of soil erosion
control and prevention from rehabilitation of mined-out areas, adjustments and a variety of
simplifying assumptions were used in the analysis. Hence, caution is advised on the

generality of the results.

Economic Analysis

The economic impacts in this study are financial costs such as those required by
law and cost of input which the company bears for their rehabilitation projects, and the
revenue they get from their mining operations. The former represents the economic costs

of the company while the latter serves as their economic benefits from rehabilitation.

Valuation of Economic Impacts

According to Asian Development Bank (2017) - Guidelines for the Economic
Analysis of Projects, it is required to establish the “with” and “without” project scenarios
and comparing them when economic benefits and costs associated with the proposed
project are estimated. However, it is not always the case where without project scenario is
business-as-usual. At some instances, the current position is unsustainable where it is
necessary to take some steps toward mitigation even without the proposed project. The

project benefits and costs associated with outputs and inputs must be identified in terms of

their monetary values in the years in which they arise. Furthermore, any external effects
such as adverse or beneficial environmental impacts not reflected in market transactions
by the project itself must also be identified and included. Both that needs to be measured
are the Net Present Value (NPV) and Internal Rate of Retum (IRR), where the benefits are
valued for all projects. To accept a project, the general criterion is to achieve a positive
NPV discounted at the minimum required IRR or to achieve the minimum required IRR.
ADB's newly adopted minimum required IRR is 9%. However, for social sector projects,
selected poverty-targeting projects and projects that primarily generate environmental

benefits, the minimum required IRR can be lowered to 6%.

Data collection

In order to value the economic impacts, secondary data such as financial accounts
of the mining company were obtained. In addition, key informant interviews were
conducted to gain additional information on the economic costs and benefits of
rehabilitation of mined-out areas. The economic costs from rehabilitation of mined-out
areas include the site preparation, equipment, labor, and maintenance costs. In addition, the

mandatory costs such as the Rehabilitation Cash Fund (RCF) are also included.

Valuation of timber product

The economic benefit considered in the economic analysis is revenue from timber
production using stumpage valuation. Stumpage valuation is the process of estimating the

value of standing timber for purposes of revenue assessment, tax collection and as guide

for buying and selling timber. The value of timber at rotation age is obtained if the timber
yield (m?/ha) and stumpage value (PhP/m?) are known. The timber yield is the volume of
the trees at rotation age while stumpage refers to standing timber in its unprocessed form
as it is found in the woods (DAO 1988). The equations 10 and 11 used are as follows:

SV = SP — (PC + mpr) Eq. 10
Where,
SV is the stumpage value
SP is the selling price
PC is the production cost
mpr is the margin of profit and sink
Value of timber at rotation age = Y * SV Eq. 11
Where,

Y is the timber yield in m’/ha
SV is the stumpage value

Evaluation Criteria

Net present value for single rotation
Net present value (NPV) is a method that reduces a stream of costs and benefits to a
single number in which costs and benefits which are projected to occur in the future are

discounted. The formula for NPV is shown in Eq. 10:

Sy BEC,

NAS Lay Eq. 10

Where,

NPV is Net Present Value

B; is the peso value of incremental benefits incurred at time t
Cris the peso value of incremental costs incurred at time t
ris the social discount rate

tis the life of the project, in years


According to Boardman, et al (1996), the general criterion in accepting a project is to
adopt only the policies that have positive net present value (NPV). As long as NPV is
positive, it is at least possible that losers could be compensated so that the policy potentially
could be Pareto improving. In this study, the with- and without-rehabilitation scenarios

where the options being compared.

Soil expectation value

According to Rose et al (1988), soil expectation value (SEV) is the value of bare
forest land, and is equivalent to the capitalized value of an infinitely long series of cash
flows resulting from timber management. SEV assumes that all trees growing costs within
one rotation are included, discount rate correctly reflects the context and outlook of the
landowner and the land will be forested in perpetuity. SEV is calculated using the formula:

R Eq. 10

SEV = Gyprai

Where,

R is the net income from one rotation (r) in year r,
i is the discount rate per period, and

ris the rotation age

In addition, the soil expectation value, also called as land expectation value (LEV)

is the present value, per unit area, of the projected costs and revenues from an infinite series

of identical even-aged forest rotations, starting initially from bare land. In the simplest case,
an LEV calculation assumes that: each rotation is of equal length, the sequence of events

within each rotation is the same, and the net revenue associated with each event within a

rotation is the same for all rotations.

CHAPTER 5

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Description of the Study Area

Physical Characteristics of Barangay Rio Tuba

Land area. In January 1964, the Municipality of Bataraza was created and made
Rio Tuba as one of its barangays. It has a total land area of 16,635.887 hectares with 5,000
hectares classified as industrial of which 100 hectares were planted with coconut trees, 80
hectares forest area and 50 hectares idle land while the urban land use of 1,000 hectares
allocated for residential use, commercial with 500 hectares, and aquatic for almost two
hectares.

Geology. Geologically, the municipality of Bataraza is characterized by 16 rock
formations (Figure 9). Barangay Rio Tuba is dominantly underlain by ultramafic rocks
which give rise to poor soils, thus resulting in low agricultural yields (Sonido, 1994 as cited

by Marzo, 2009).

C107 419 SID ‘Oddd) TeMEed ‘ezesvjeg Jo dem ABojoayH —*6 a3


a2

Climate and hydrology. Palawan has two distinct types of climate (see Figure 10).
The western section experiences two pronounced seasons: dry from November to April
and wet throughout the rest of the year (Type I). The eastern section (which includes Rio
Tuba) experiences a relatively dry season from November to April and wet during the rest
of the year (Type II). Based on PAG-ASA records, the northern and southern extremities
and the western portion of the province receive an annual rainfall of 2,920 mm. The eastern

region has only 1,672 mm of rainfall annually.

| two pronounced season, dry from
November to April and wet during
the rest of the year. Maximum rain
period is from June to September.
no dry season with a very
pronounced maximum rain period
from December to February. There
is nota single dry month. Minimum
monthly rainfall occurs during the
period from March to May.
no very pronounced maximum rain
period with a dry season lasting
only from one to three months,
either during the period. from
December to February or from
March to May. This type resembles
types I since it has s short dry
season.
rainfall is more or less evenly
distributed throughout the year.
This type resembles type 2 since
ithas no dry season.

Figure 10. Climate map of the Philippines based on modified Coronas classification
(DOST PAGASA)


Rainfall. There are five PAGASA stations in Palawan located in Puerto Princesa,

Aborlan, Brooke’s point, Cuyo and Coron. Other stations were established by the Palawan

Council for Sustainable Development Staff and a mining firm in Rio Tuba, Bataraza and

in Tagbita, Rizal. The mean annual rainfall in Rio Tuba, Bataraza is 1712.4 mm (PCSDS,
2005).

Water resources. Barangay Rio Tuba has relied mainly on surface water and ground
water pumped from wells for drinking water. Drinking water is obtained through Pilipinas
Water Resources Incorporated. Potable water is sourced from Umawi stream, which also
helps the mining company supply free water to neighboring sitios. The bodies of water
directly affected by the consequent discharges and runoff from the mining site are the Rio
Tuba and Ocayan Rivers, which drain to the nearby Coral Bay (Nickel Asia Corporation,

2014).

Demographic Characteristics

Population. Among the 22 barangays of Bataraza, Rio Tuba registered the biggest
in terms of population with 20,071 based on CVHW survey for CY-2016 broken down and
distributed per sitio: Kayasyasan (Sto. Nifio)- 4,125, RTN/CBNC- 3,274, Marabahay-
2,585, Bukid-Bukid- 2,146, Tagdalongon- 2,053, Macadam- 1,830, Kinurong- 1,630,
Canumay- 708, Tuka-Angri- 700, Bongkol-Bongkol- 526, and Racob- 404. Household
accounts showed that out of 3,823 households in 2012 Household Actual Survey, it has

increased by 1,093 with a total of 4,916 in 2016 survey. This represents 10.93% increased

for three years after census was previously conducted. The average percentage increase in
population for 2012 and 2013 is 10.9% and 10.93% in household while the average yearly
percentage is 4.25% and 5.76% respectively.

Religion. The barangay is predominantly Roman Catholic with a sizeable Muslim
population. Roman Catholic comprises to about 45% of the population, Islam with 23%,
Protestant with 17%, Iglesia ni Cristo with 10% and IP’s with 5%.

Indigenous community. Barangay Rio Tuba is said to be a melting pot of different
tribe and culture. Many people coming from other provinces migrate and look for a job in
the barangay. People in Rio Tuba includes Tagalog, Cebuano, Tausug, Maranao, Mapun,
Honggo, Cuyunon, Ilocano, Pangutaran, Bicolano, Palaw’an, and Boholano. Moreover,
Rio Tuba Nickel Mining Company has identified 27 indigenous clusters who are residing

around the mine area, 11 of whom are part of the impact community.

Description of Rehabilitation in Rio Tuba Nickel Mining Corporation

General background of the Mii

Rio Tuba Nickel Mining Corporation (RTNMC) is located in Barangay Rio Tuba,
Bataraza, Palawan and covers 990 hectares (See Appendix E for company profile). After
the discovery of nickel deposit in the area in 1967, the company entered into a Mining

Lease Contract in 1970 and started its operation in 1977. The Environmental Compliance

Certificate of RTNMC was issued on December 11, 1997, and received by the company
on January 17, 1998. Its Mineral Production Sharing Agreement (MPSA) was also issued
in 1998, and is valid until 2023. It considered as the largest and oldest nickel mining
company in Palawan (Figure 11).

The open pit areas of RTNMC are specifically located in Guintalunan and
Mangingidong areas with the RTNMC mining claims bounded by 8°33°15” North latitude
and 117°23713” East longitude (Figure 12). RTNMC also operates a nearby limestone
mine. They export saprolite and limonite ore and provides limonite and crushed limestone
to the adjacent operations of CBNC (Nickel Asia Corporation, 2014). In 2011, the mined

area is 658.39 hectares out of 990 hectares mining claim.

‘
t
£
E

ULLVULI


OWNLLY Aq pasedaig
‘ajeds 0} UMeJP JON



Rehabilitation standard of RTNMC

The objective of rehabilitation is to restore or reclaim disturbed areas to a safe, non-
erodible condition, thereby establishing a land use capability that is functional and
proximate to the land use prior to disturbances made on the mined-out areas. With this in
mind, the standards set by DENR and its implementing agencies shall be adopted and the
conditionality contained in the Environmental Compliance Certificate shall be strictly
complied with. Likewise, internationally accepted best environmental practices in mining

shall be followed as deemed applicable (RTNMC EPEP, 2011).

Progressive Rehabilitation Policy of RTNMC

All declared mined-out areas are immediately considered for rehabilitation.

Rehabilitation of mined-out areas is regarded as an integral part of mining activities and is

being undertaken progressively as areas are mined (RTNMC EPEP, 2011).

tation strategy of RTNMC

Site preparation activities

Rio Tuba Nickel Mining Corporation uses two operational strategies for
rehabilitation: surface operation and two-phased approach to vegetative cover restoration.

‘Surface operation or land preparation is necessary to allow the reintroduction of desirable

plant species for mining rehabilitation. In this aspect, the company has adopted two
options. First is topsoil surface matting where the previously set aside topsoil that has been
removed before mining is spread over leveled areas that will be eventually planted. The
top soil is approximately 0.5 to two meters deep. Holes are systematically dug at distances
of 5 mx 5 m for the planting of seedlings. The second option is hole excavation where
holes with 50 cm x 50 cm dimensions are dug directly into the mined-out soil surface areas
for planting purposes (RTNMC, 2011). Photos of site preparation activities from ground

levelling to out planting are shown in Figure 13 and 14.

{ Sire PREPARATION

RE-CONTOURING/
GROUND LEVELLING

Martine Wits ToP soi

Figure 13. _Site preparation activities of rehabilitation (RTN MRRU 2014)


Hauling of Seedlings/Outplanting

Use of backhoe (for Very Large Planting
‘Materials only)

Figure 14. Out planting activities of rehabilitation (RTNMC MRRU, 2014)

To address nutrient deficiency, prepared compost materials are put into the holes to
serve as growth medium for introduced tree seedlings. This approach is practicable in areas

with adverse grades and rolling terrains. Spacing is similarly in 5 m x 5 m distances.

Planting scheme

The second strategy is the two-phased approach to the restoration of vegetative
cover in mined-out areas which stimulates the natural patterns of plant succession inherent

in tropical rainforest ecosystems. The first to be introduced in bare mined-out areas are the

sa
pioneer species, ie. Batino, Anabiong, Agoho, Acacia auriculiformis and A. mangium.
‘After an interval of 3 years, the indigenous climax species are introduced, i.e. Narra, Ipil,
Amugis, Apitong, etc. At the periphery of the rehabilitated areas, fruit bearing trees shall
be planted to become source of food for some wildlife species thriving in the area including
birds. The tree planting activities of the company are scheduled during rainy seasons,
typically from May to October. Furthermore, a hectare of rehabilitation area is planted with

a combination of different species shown in Table 4.

Table 4. Species diversity of trees planted in RTNMC rehabilitation and reforestation
activities (RTNMC EPEP, 2011)

TREE SPECIES ‘SPACING (m xm)
T,_ Nara (Preracarpus indicus) ‘$x 5 (400 trees/ha)
2. Ipil Unstsia bijuga) 10x 10 (100 trees/na)
3. Amugis (Koordersiodendron pinnaturn) 10x 10 (100 trees/ha)
4. Large-leaf Mahogany (Sweetenia macrophylla) 2.5 x 5.0 (800 trees/ha)
5. Acacia (Acacia auriculiformis) 2x2 (2.500 treesha)
6. Batino (Alstonia macrophylla) 5.x 5 (400 trees/ha)
7. Pararubber (Hevea brasilienses) 5x 5 (400 trees/ha)
8 Tongkat Ali 25x25
9. Agoho (Casuarina spes.) 5x 5 (400 trees/ha)
10. Assorted bamboos (Bambusa spp.) For enrichment planting
11. Kamagong (Diospyrus spp.) For enrichment planting
12. Udling (Eugenia spp.) For enrichment planting
13. Malapapaya (Polyscias nodosa) For enrichment planting
14. Paratongon (Palm species ~ Salaca celebensis) For enrichment planting
15. Fire tree (Caesalpinia pulcherrima) For enrichment planting.
16. Kalumpang (local name Bubog) For enrichment planting.
17. Kupang For enrichment planting.
18. Palomaria (Calophylum inophyllum) For enrichment planting,
19. Vetiver (Vetiveria zizaniodes) For enrichment planting
20. Australian peanuts Cover crop species for soil conditioning purposes
21, Palawan Oak For enrichment planting,
22. Apitong Balau (Dipterocarpus sp.) For enrichment planting.
23. ‘Bignay (Antidesma bunios) For enrichment planting
24. Sampalok (Tamarindus indica) For enrichment planting
25. Bitaug (Caophyllum inophyllum) For enrichment planting
26. Marang (Artocarpus odoratissinus) For enrichment planting,
27. Teak (Tectona grandis) For enrichment planting
28. Rain tree (Samanea saman) For enrichment planting.
29. Gmelina (Gmelina arborea) For enrichment planting.
30. Banban (Donax cannaeformis) For enrichment planting
31. Bunog (Garcinia spp) For enrichment planting,

32, Panasan. For enrichment planting

The seedlings used for rehabilitation come from the seedling bank project of the
company itself. This activity involves mainly nursery operations for the production of
planting stocks for mine rehabilitation and reforestation requirements of the company.
Some of the plant species in the nursery come from collected wildlings within the area
while other species are purchased from different municipalities. Currently, there are 23
local species cultivated in the nursery.
Depending on the species, the seedlings are maintained in the nursery for about six
months to one year before they are planted. Preferably, large planting materials are used in
rehabilitation to ensure high percentage of survival to about 80-90 percent and to hasten

development of significant vegetative cover on mined-out area (Figure 15).

1. USE OF LARGE PLANTING MATERIALS (LPM)

Figure 15. Large planting materials for rehabi



The company has also developed an enrichment planting which is applied to areas
with identified low stocking densities to increase species composition and facilitate
diversity. They also adapt organic-based nutrient supplementation strategies. These
includes a massive application of organic materials mainly chicken dung at a rate of 5-8
tons per hectare. The chicken dung come from the swine and poultry farm of the Special
Projects Division of the company. The chicken dung is applied after the topsoil is levelled,
as well as after the trees were planted. Commercial fertilizers are seldom used with an
average of 15 bags of fertilizer per hectare.Other soil amelioration strategy involves the
application of microbial inoculants such as Rhizobium for leguminous species, mycorrhiza,
and Azospirillum for grasses including Vetiver and Bamboos. These are applied to rectify
nutrient deficiency inherent in mined-out areas to improve plant growth development and
increase biomass accumulation.

Aside from tree plantation establishment, additional components that were
incorporated to mining rehabilitation projects include: sakahan/gulayan sa minahan,
palaisdaan sa minahan and palayan sa minahan. These adjunct activities are implemented
at GP4 rehabilitation site to showcase agro-forestry and multiple-use practices to maximize
productivity and generate livelihood opportunities to upland farmers in otherwise “useless

and toxic areas”.


Maintenance Activities

The newly rehabilitated areas are monitored closely to ensure high survival rate of
plant species. The rehabilitated areas of the company are maintained for at least one year
up to three years. Maintenance activities include weeding, grass cutting, and reapplication
of fertilizer until the seedlings have grown. Watering activities are mostly done during dry
months, from January-May and is highly dependent on weather for the remaining months.
The water used for rehabilitation mostly come from the reclaimed water from the siltation
ponds that has undergone treatment. Dead seedlings are replaced to have sufficient cover
for the climax species. Currently, there are eight personnel responsible for maintenance

activities.

Status of Mine Rehabilitation Activities

Based on RTNMC EPRMP (2014), about 39% or 258.63 hectares of the 658.39
hectares mined-out areas are completely rehabilitated by RTNMC in 2011. It is also
important to note that RTNMC also adopts a total of 318.11 hectares of land use outside
the MPSA for reforestation program. The areas that are not rehabilitated, which total 304
hectares, are used for: tailings dam (106 has), ash pit (8 has), stockpile areas (125 has),
HPAL plant (23 has), road network (24 has) solar drying areas (9 has), and landfill (5 has).
The rehabilitation projects of RTNMC started in 1998. However, the initial strategy used
by the mining company is single tree species plantation. The current rehabilitation strategy

which is the mixed forest plantation was established on 2013.


The rehabilitation target area for implementation is shown in Table 5. In addition,

the rehabilitation map for 2013-2017 is shown in Figure 21. It shows that yearly, the mining
company conducts rehabilitation in their mined-out areas. The rehabilitation activities
schedule was based from the combined result of secondary information and interview. The
rehabilitation activities were scheduled in a way that there is a staggered expansion on the

areas to be rehabilitated.

Table 5. Rehabilitation target area for implementation from 2018-2027 (RTNMC

EPEP, 2011)

YEAR TARGET AREA (HA)
2018 44.53
2019 48.26
2020 69.43
2021 49.52
2022 67.02
2023 69.88
2024 63.90
2025 81.00
2026 76.75

2027 81.33

(p107 ‘SWNLY AWUaD L107-€107 ONLY Jo dem wopernageqey “oF aan


s7

Social Analysis

This section aims to identify the social impacts of rehabilitation of mined-out areas
in Rio Tuba, Palawan using focus group discussion and interviews. Analysis of focus group
revealed a number of key findings related to the social impacts of rehabilitation of mined-

out areas in Rio Tuba as discussed on the succeeding paragraphs.

itation of Mined-out Areas

Almost all participants are aware on rehabilitation of mined-out areas in Rio Tuba
because of their experience as residents. Only a very few individuals (3 out of 10) expressed
a different point of view. These individuals are relatively younger than the company while
one of them has not yet visited the mining site but highlighted that “rhe company has gained
recognitions in the Philippine mining industry for environmental protection”. In addition, all
participants stated that the rehabilitation strategy in Rio Tuba is tree planting.

“RTN has a rehabilitation program together with CBNC (Coral Bay Nickel

Corporation). The program is called ‘from mining to a forest’ where rehabilitation

of mined-out areas is very evident. .. when former secretary Gina Lopez conducted

an inspection, she was amazed in the mining area of Rio Tuba, Palawan. Because

in all mining companies she visited, the program of RTN company is one of the

best where you can really see that the mined-out areas are planted with trees. You
would never think that it was a mine site before” (translated).

This is mainly because many of them (60%) have been engaged with the said
activity of the mining company. They have also visited the rehabilitation sites and

witnessed its development. They agreed on the statement:


“RTN partners with different schools for their tree planting activity. They invite
the schools for their activity once a year. This activity also involves the parents
and the students. This is also a chance to visit the mining site because not everyone
has access to it [translated]”

Moreover, one of the participants claimed that aside from the tree planting activity,
the mining company also tests the feasibility of converting the rehabilitated mined-out
areas to agricultural land by saying:

“Their tree planting activity is done not just once a year but every month as much

as possible. They also try ‘rice planting in mining’ project which are conducted at

their mined-out areas. They also try fish cultures and vegetable farming
[translated].”

Most them (50%) agreed and it was attested by those that have visited the site.

Others were concerned on the health safety of the people who have eaten the harvests.

Perceived Impacts of Rehabilitation of Mined-out Areas

There were five perceived impacts of rehabilitation of mined-out areas which
emerged most often in the discussion among the participants. These include: 1) generation
of employment; 2) erosion control; 3) air and water purification; 4) health effects; and 5)
aesthetic benefits. There are other impacts that were also identified but were mentioned

only once.

Generation of Employment

Almost all of the participants (80%) identified the generation of employment as the

major benefit of the community from rehabilitation. Most of them specified that the

company prioritizes hiring of local residents, particularly the indigenous people (IP) for
their rehabilitation projects. One participant expounded:

“They are employing IPs for their rehab and nursery. Around 70% of the workers
in rehabilitation project are IPs because they are knowledgeable when it comes to
native plants and trees in the area. These native plants and trees are cultivated in
the nursery in preparation for planting activities in rehabilitation areas
[translated].”

In the study of Evina (2014), it was estimated that the average cumulative annual
income of laborers (local residents of Rio Tuba) from rehabilitation in 2003-2013 is
approximately PhP2.7 million, Furthermore, annual income received by the workers has
increased over time due to increasing minimum wage (DOLE standard) since contract

laborers, who are mostly IPs, are paid at the minimum wage basis.

Erosion Control

A number of participants (50%) identified that the planting of trees will result to
reduced soil erosion. The word they commonly associate to erosion is landslide. The usual

statement given by the participants is:

“Mining causes removal of trees in the forest. If there is rehabilitation, trees are
replaced, from mined-out to forest. When they conduct rehabilitation or tree
planting activity, erosion is prevented and there is an assurance that the occurrence
of landslide is avoided in the mined areas because of the trees [translated].”

Moreover, there are few individuals who related flood prevention as a secondary

effect of reduced soil erosion by stating:

“In my opinion, if there is rehabilitation, the erosion of soil is reduced and soil
structure is maintained. If that is the case, the soil helps the trees to grow. And as
the trees grow, their ability to prevent flood also increases {translated]”


In relation to this, Evina (2014) estimated that the total cumulative present value of
erosion control benefits from rehabilitation is approximately PhP2 million and PhP1.1

million at 8% and 15% discount rate, respectively using 21-year period.

Air and Water Purification

Few individuals (40%) identified air and water purification as impacts of
rehabilitation. One participant said that, “restoring the areas can be explained scientifically
resulting fo a maintained ecological balance like the benefits of clean air brought by grown trees”.
In addition, one participant elaborated the effects of rehabilitation by relating air and water
quality to the health of the people:

“The rehabilitation of mined-out areas has many benefits because of the trees
planted. For the reason that it prevents erosion and maintains clean water. Aside
from that, it also cleans the air. While, the water and air (quality) affects the health
of the people {translated]”

According to Evina (2014), the estimated per hectare carbon sequestration benefits
from rehabilitation is approximately PhP125 million and PhP83 million at 8% and 15%

discount rate, respectively using 21-year period.

Health Effects

About 30 percent of the participants specified health effects as one of the secondary
benefits of rehabilitation of mined-out areas. Most of the participants who identified health

effects are senior citizens.


“The trees planted maintain the quality of water and air. If the environment is
preserved, undesirable diseases or illness could be avoided. . .for example, lung
disease because of poor air quality and gastro-intestinal diseases because of
contaminated water (translated]”

With attention to air quality, some participants expressed their concem over the

dust emissions from hauling activities. Comparatively, the participants have no issues on
water quality. In relation to this, the study of Paredes (2013) suggests that most respondents
from Brgy. Rio Tuba claim a positive view on the nickel mining operation (60%) and the

quality of drinking water (58%) in the area. However, most claim a poor state of the air

system (58.75%).

Aesthetic Benefits

There were few individuals (30%) who recognized aesthetic benefits gained from
rehabilitation of mined-out areas. Referring to the mining site, one participant described,
“There is no concrete road that time. It is difficult to reach the barangay since it is located in the
southern tip of Palawan. The area was filled with trees. The IPs gather fruits and wood from the
forest”. In the same way, one participant explained that rehabilitation brings back the beauty
of the environment. According to them “it becomes pleasing to the eyes every time you see that

the green forest has returned”.

Other perceived impacts of rehabilitation

The participants also identified other impacts of rehabilitation. These are storm

protection, water preservation, restoration of flora and fauna, and bequest values of the

environment. According to one participant, if the mined-out areas are covered by trees
again, it becomes protection from storm and calamities. Meanwhile, it was also mentioned
that water preservation is a function of trees. Another participant said that if the
environment is rehabilitated, it will eventually restore flora and fauna. Lastly, one
participant acknowledged the importance of trees for future generations especially in food

and wood production.

Summary

In summary, all the participants are aware on the rehabilitation projects of Rio Tuba
Nickel Mining Corporation. Nearly all of them have been involved with the tree planting
activity on the mined-out areas while some have heard the news on the recognitions
received by the company. In addition, there were five perceived impacts of rehabilitation
of mined-out areas which emerged most often in the discussion among the participants.
These were: 1) generation of employment, 2) erosion control and prevention, 3) air and
water purification, 4) health effects, and 5) aesthetic benefits. The participants also
identified storm protection, water preservation, food production, restoration of flora and
fauna, and bequest values of the environment. Noticeably, there were only few individuals
who can explain the environmental impacts of rehabilitation but they recognized a more

direct impact which is the generation of employment.


Environmental Assessment

This section aims to value the environmental impacts of rehabilitation of mined out
areas in Rio Tuba, Bataraza in terms of carbon sequestration and erosion control. To value
the impacts of carbon sequestration, field sampling was done and secondary data were
collected as basis for adjustments and computations. On the other hand, to value the
impacts of erosion control, relevant secondary data were obtained as inputs for SCUAF
model.

Valuation of Carbon Sequestration

The value of carbon sequestration depends from the amount of carbon stored or the
C stock (ton/ha) of a given species. The C stock of each species, in turn, depends on the
amount of its biomass. As a tree grows its ability to sequester carbon increases but once it
reaches maturity, this amount declines until it would no longer sequester carbon (Sales et
al. 2004).

In this study, the field sampling was conducted at the GP4 rehabilitation site which
is 9.0 hectares and was established in 2008. The total area sampled was approximately 0.23
ha. The trees (>14 cm dbh) have an average age of 6 years while saplings (6-14 cm dbh)
have an average age of 4.2 years. Following the formula to determine carbon stock in
Equations 2-6, the carbon stock of trees and saplings at GP4 rehabilitation site are shown
in Table 6. Based on the results, Acacia auricoliformis, Acacia mangium, Gmelina

arborea, in order, have the highest carbon stock among the trees species found at the

sampling site. Moreover, the total carbon stock sampled at GP4 rehabilitation site on

January 2017 is 146.97 ton/ha. This is equivalent to 539.38 ton/ha of carbon sequestered.

Table6. Total carbon stock of trees and say
rehabilitation site on January 2017

gs and CO: equivalent sampled at GP4

COMMON; TOTALC PERCENT TOTALC

SCIENTIFIC NAME LOCAL STOCK STOCK STOCK

NAME (TON/HA) _(%C PER HA)* (CO: TON/HA)
Trees
Acacia auricoliformis Auri 76.92 70.64 282.30
‘Acacia mangium Mangium 14.63 13.43 $3.70
Gmelina arborea Yemane 10.61 9.74 38.94
Pterocarpus indicus Narra 271 2.44 9.95
Delonix regia Fire tree 2.04 1.87 749
Parkia roxburghii Kupang 0.76 0.70 2.19
Colona serratifolia Arilao 0.44 0.40 161
Macaranga tanarius Binunga 0.38 0.39 1.40
Leucaena leucocephala Ipil-ipit 0.38 0.39 1.40
Trees total 108.88, 100.00 399.59
Saplings

Acacia auricoliformis Auri 18.38 48.25 67.45
Casuarina equisetifolia ‘Agoho 6.43 16.88 23.60
‘Acacia mangium Mangium 5.35 14,04 19.63
Pterocarpus indicus Narra 4.56 11.97 16.74
Alstonia macrophylla Mahulay 281 137 10.31
Parkia roxburghii Kupang 0.56 1.47 2.05
Saplings total 38.09 100.00 139.79

TOTAL 146.97 539.38
percent contribution of each species to the total C stock of trees and saplings

Carbon estimates were converted into carbon dioxide using Equation 7 before they
were valued. The Social Cost of Carbon (SCC) was used as basis for the valuation of carbon
dioxide. The SCC estimates the value of economic damages associated with a small
increase in carbon dioxide (COz) emissions, conventionally one metric ton, in a given year.
Conversely, this figure also represents the value of damages avoided for small emission

reductions. The SCC strongly depends upon the discount rate used to value impacts of

climate change that mostly take place in the future. For 2015, at 3% social discount rate,
the SCC is assumed to be US$36 per ton CO2 while the SCC at 5% is estimated to be
US$11 pesos per ton CO2 (US EPA, 2016). Peso value was based on the exchange rate of
PhP45.00 = US $1.00 and PhPS0.00 = US $1.00.

The computed value of carbon sequestration at the sampling area is shown in Table
7. Based on the results, the sampling area or the GP4 rehabilitation site, has a total carbon
stock of 1,322.73 ton. This is equivalent to 4,854.42 of carbon sequestered. Furthermore,
the value of carbon sequestration at the sampling area using PhPS0.00 = US $1.00
exchange rate, is approximately PhP2.6 million and PhP8.7 million at 5% and 3% discount

rate respectively.

Table7. Total carbon stock, CO: equivalent, and value of carbon sequestration
at the sampling area in January 2017

TOTAL TOTAL TOTAL CO2 VALUE OF

AREA CARBON EQUIVALENT _ CARBON SEQUESTRATION*
(HA) __ STOCK (TON) __ (TON/HA) 3% 3%
9.0 1,322.73¢ 4,854.42 2,669,931.00  8,737,956.00

"Based on January 2017 exchange rate (PHPS0.00 = US $1.00)
Total area of GP4 rehabilitation site
* Based on the Carbon stock from field sampling multiplied by total area of sampled rehabilitation area


Comparison of “with” and “without” rehabilitation scenarios

The determination of carbon sequestration was constrained by the duration of the
study and for the reason that only one rehabilitation site was authorized by the mining
company for the field sampling activity. Because of lack of detailed information about the
rate of carbon sequestration specific to the study site, the rate of carbon sequestration used
for the analysis is based from Lasco et al. (2000). According to their report, tree plantations
have an average C sequestration of 10.1 tonC/ha/yr, while the brushlands areas have a C
sequestration rate of 4.29 Vha/yr. These rates depend on the percent canopy cover in natural
succession. It is expected that grasses dominate at the early stages of rehabilitation based
on the study of Burger et al. 2000 (see figure 17). Furthermore, it is assumed that the rate
of carbon sequestration flattens at a certain age following the study of Rivera (2004) where
she mentioned that once the tree matures, it experiences what is called a “carbon ceiling”
wherein it is said to be in the state of carbon equilibrium, assuming no emissions/harvests
take place. Moreover, a period of 15 years with 5% discount rate and PhP5S0.00=US $1.00

exchange rate was used for the analysis.


too] Phase 3 bond release Total Cover
——
Za Stage 4
FS Crop Trees
3 6
= tage 1°
= * rases Stage 2
240 Legumes
(i)
°
° 2 4 6 8 10 2 4 16
Time (years)
Figure 17. _ Vegetative cover changes through time using the Forestry Reclamation

Approach (Burger et al 2010)

“With” rehabilitation scenario

With rehabilitation scenario assumes that the trees planted at the mined-out areas
are not cut or removed all throughout the 15-year period. Moreover, the tree species and
their planting density is the same for all the mined-out areas all throughout the period. It is
also assumed that at year 1, the mined-out area undergone site preparation activities such
as topsoil levelling and formatting immediately followed by planting of trees at the same
year.

The undiscounted annual per ha benefits of carbon sequestration for “with”
rehabilitation using over 15 years is shown in Table 8. The Table shows that without
rehabilitation, there is an increasing per ha value of carbon sequestration from PhP 1,633.50

in year 4 to PhP4,444.00 in year 10. This suggests that at the first three years, the rate of

carbon sequestration from the grasses are faster than the trees. However, as trees grow their
canopy cover increases replacing the dominance of grasses. Furthermore, the rate of carbon
sequestration flattens starting in year 10.

The value of total benefits of carbon sequestration for “with” and “without”
rehabilitation from 2013-2041 is shown in Table 9. It shows that the highest value of carbon
sequestration “with” rehabilitation is obtained in 2032 amounting to PhP2.46 million

before it started to decline to PhP361 thousand in 2041.

“Without” rehabilitation scenario

Without rehabilitation scenario assumes that the mined-out areas are levelled with
topsoil but not planted with trees, as an alternative, the mining company allowed natural
succession to occur. In this case, it is expected that the grasses will be the thriving species
and will dominate the area.

Table 8 shows the undiscounted annual per ha benefits of carbon sequestration for
“without” rehabilitation scenario over 15 years. The Table shows that without
rehabilitation, there is relatively lower per ha value of carbon sequestration in grassland
with only PhP 1,078.00 and becomes zero starting year 3. This is adapted in the study of
Lasco (2000), where it was conservatively assumed that grasslands have a net zero
sequestration because of regular buming which prevents natural succession from
proceeding. However, the potential of grassland areas lies in transforming them to either
of the following: natural forest through natural succession, tree plantation or agroforestry

farm.


The value of total benefits of carbon sequestration for “with” and “without”
rehabilitation using from 2013-2041 is shown in Table 9. It shows that the highest value of
carbon sequestration “without” rehabilitation is obtained in 2026 amounting to PhP235

thousand before it started to decline and reaches zero in year 2041.

Incremental benefits

The per ha incremental benefits from carbon sequestration of “with” and “without”
rehabilitation scenarios are shown in Table 8. It shows that the incremental benefits per
hectare increase from PhP555.50 in year 1 up to PhP4,444.00 in year 10.

The total incremental benefits from carbon sequestration of “with” and “without”
rehabilitation scenarios are shown in Table 9. It shows that the highest value of incremental
benefits from carbon sequestration is obtained in 2032 amounting to PhP2.46 million

before it started to decline to PhP361 thousand in 2041.


Table 8. Undiscounted annual per ha benefits of carbon sequestration for “with” and
“without” rehabilitation over 15-year rotation period

WITHOUT
WITH REHABILITATION REHABILITATION _ INCREMENTAL
YEAR ANNUALC CARBON ANNUAL C CARBON BENEFIT
SEQ’ SEQ SEQ? SEQ (PHPMHA)
(TON/HA) _(PHP/HA) _(TON/HA)__(PHP/HA)

7 297 1,633.50 1.96 1,078.00 355.50
2 444 2,442.00 3.43 1,886.50 555.50
3 3.46 1,903.00 0 0 1,903.00
4 1.99 1,094.50 0 0 1,094.50
5 251 1,380.50 0 0 1,380.50
6 4.53 2,222.00 0 0 2,222.00
7 5.54 2,777.50 0 0 2,777.50
8 635 3,333.00 0 0 3,333.00
9 7.56 3,888.50 0 0 3,888.50
10 8.57 4,444.00 0 0 4,444.00
" 857 4,444.00 0 0 4,444.00
12 8.57 4,444.00 0 0 4,444.00
13 8.57 4,444.00 0 0 4,444.00
14 8.57 0 0 4,444.00
15 57 0 0 4,444.00

‘Based from annual C sequestration for tree plantations (Lasco, 2000)
° Based from annual C sequestration for grasslands (Lasco, 2000)


Table9. Value of total benefits of carbon sequestration for “with” and “without”
rehabilitation from 2013-2041

VALUE OF CARBON SEQUESTRATION

WITH ‘WITHOUT (PHP/HA)
REHABILITATION REHABILITATION
2013 579,402.00 16,170.00 8,333.00
2014 715,967.00 33,148.50 10,832.50
2015 888,025.00 18,191.25 36,044.75
2016 1,090,722.00 43,928.50 43,868.50
2017 1,334,755.00 74,112.50 70,534.50
2018 1,599,514.00 95,165.84 139,378.16
2019 1,893,102.00 136,030.13 190,567.87
2020 1,992,534.00 165,888.03 294,483.97
2021 2,085,710.00 184,362.26 395,039.74
2022 2,209,123.00 165,667.04 550,299.96
2023 2,342,409.00 201,763.87 686,261.13
2024 2,461,693.00 200,712.82 890,009.18
2025 2,432,107.00 207,865.35 1,126,889.65,
2026 2,350,448.00 235,543.00 1,363,971.00
2027 2,129,715.00 232,462.62 1,660,639.38
2028 1,954,827.00 153,429.05 1,839,104.95
2029 1,656,990.00 - 2,085,710.00
2030 1,346,443.00 : 2,209,123.00
2031 1,062,472.00 - 2,342,409.00
2032 702,508.00 - 2,461,693.00
2033 361,431.00 - 2,432,107.00
2034 579,402.00 - 2,350,448.00
2035 715,967.00 - 2,129,715.00
2036 888,025.00 - 1,954,827.00
2037 1,090,722.00 - 1,656,990.00
2038 1,334,755.00 - 1,346,443.00
2039 1,599,514.00 - 1,062,472.00
2040 1,893,102.00 - 702,508.00
2041 1,992,534.00 = 361,431.00

Details on Appendix Tables 4 and 5


Valuation of Erosion Control

The other environmental impact considered in the study is the soil erosion control.
To predict the rate of erosion through time, the SCUAF model was used in this study
(details on Appendix E). SCUAF requires the pre-rehabilitation and post rehabilitation soil
properties as inputs of the model. The pre-rehabilitation soil properties were taken from
the study of Madid (2001) while the post rehabilitation soil properties were taken from the
study of Marzo (2009). Both studies were conducted in Rio Tuba Nickel Mining
Corporation mining sites. Physical environmental descriptors of the area such as lowland
sub-humid, moderate slope class, free soil drainage, mafic parent material, clayey soil
texture, neutral and acid soil reaction, and low organic matter status were also used as
inputs to the SCUAF model. These data were taken from secondary sources.

On the other hand, MUSLE input parameters are summarized in Table 10. It was
also assumed that grasses would still grow under natural conditions even without mine
rehabilitation, given that the mined-out areas were subjected to land preparation but not
planting activities. For this reason, the average erosion rate for open grassland was the
erosion rate used for pre-rehabilitated land. On the other hand, the average erosion rate for

tree plantations was used for post-rehabilitated land.


Table 10. MUSLE input parameters under pre-rehabilitated and post rehabilitated

land
MUSLE INPUT WITHOUT
PARAMETERS REHAB. WITH REHAB SOURCE
Climate factor® 877 mm 856 mm Madid 2001; Marzo 2009
Soil erodibility 0.09 0.09 Predo, et al 1997
ye mo Al SCUAF default value for the
environment
Slope factor” Ls LS Predo, et al. 1997
Tree proportionality® 10 10
Beeler mate me Ba Francisco and delos Angeles


* one-half of the average rainfall per year
moderately slope class
€ proportion of trees to crops: I-tres only

Comparison of “with” and “without” rehabilitation scenarios

Using the SCUAF model with a period of 15 years, the amount of soil eroded per
year and the nutrients lost in the soil with-rehabilitation and without-rehabilitation. The
difference in the amount of nutrient lost between these land uses represents the erosion
avoided and prevented or the rehabilitation benefits. The fertilizer equivalent of each
eroded soil nutrients was valued using the market price of fertilizer. The prices used were
PhP 5/kg chicken manure for Organic matter, PhP 20/kg Urea (46-0-0) for Nitrogen and
PhP 30/kg Solophos (0-20-0) for Phosphorus. These prices were based on 2017 prices for
a 50-kilogram sack of fertilizer (BAS 2017). These prices were assumed to be constant

throughout the period.


“With” rehabilitation scenario

Table 11 shows the undiscounted value of annual per ha benefits of erosion control
of “with” and “without” rehabilitation scenarios over 15 years. It shows that “with”
rehabilitation, the per ha benefits from erosion control increases from PhP 14,162.55 from
year | to PhP16,502.62 in year 15.

Furthermore, table 12 shows the value of total benefits of erosion control of “with”
and “without” rehabilitation scenarios from 2013-2041. It shows that “with” rehabilitation,
the highest erosion control benefit is gained in 2027 amounting to PhP 10.32 million before

it declines to PhP1.3 million in 2041.

“Without” rehabilitation scenario

Table 11 shows the undiscounted value of annual per ha benefits of erosion control
of “with” and “without” rehabilitation scenarios over 15 years. It shows that “without”
rehabilitation, the per ha benefits from erosion control increases from PhP8,245.88 from
year | to PhP13,520.33in year 15.

Furthermore, Table 12 shows the present value of total benefits of erosion control
of “with” and “without” rehabilitation scenarios using 5% discount rate from 2013-2041.
It shows that “without” rehabilitation, the highest erosion control benefit is gained in 2030

amounting to PhP6.8 million before it declines to PhP1.09 million in 2041.


Incremental benefits

The per ha net incremental benefits from erosion control is shown in Table 11. The
per ha net incremental benefits increase from PhP5,916.67 on year | up to PhP6,337.170n
year 6. However, the following years showed decreasing rate on the value of erosion
control from PhP5,835.45 in year 8 to PhP2,982.29 in year 15.

The value of total benefits of erosion control of “with” and “without” rehabilitation
scenarios from 2013-2041 is shown in Table 12, It shows that the highest total incremental
benefits from erosion control is gained in 2027 amounting to PhP3.79 million before it

declines to PhP179 thousand in 2041.

Table 11. Undiscounted value
and “without” rehabi

annual per ha benefits of erosion control of “with”
ition scenarios over 15-year rotation period

VALUE OF EROSION CONTROL

INCREMENTAL
YEAR (PHP/HA) BENEFIT
WITH WITHOUT (PHP/HA)
REHABILITATION __ REHABILITATION

1 14,162.55 8,245.88 5,916.67
2 14,283.96 8,224.38 6,059.58
3 14,411.01 8,192.38 6,218.63
4 14,543.99 8,139.39 6,404.60
5 14,683.20 8,041.52 6,641.68
6 14,828.97 8,127.24 6,701.73
7 14,981.65 8,644.48 6,337.17
8 15,141.61 9,306.16 5,835.45
9 15,309.34 9,888.57 5,420.77
10 15,485.23 10,425.39 5,059.84
" 15,669.70 10,950.55 4,719.15
12 15,863.20 11,474.37 4,388.83
13 16,066.19 12,051.63 4,014.56
14 16,279.18 12,748.13 3,531.05

1s 16,502.62 13,520.33 2,982.29



Table 12. Value of total benefits of erosion control of “with” and “without”
rehabilitation scenarios from 2013-2041

VALUE OF EROSION CONTROL

WITH WITHOUT (PHP/HA)
REHABILITATION REHABILITATION
2013 202,322.14 123,688.20 78,633.94
2014 264,753.21 160,472.16 104,281.05
2015 388,481.83 234,108.33 154,373.50
2016 729,170.27 439,122.98 290,047.29
2017 1,072,912.19 642,737.98 430,174.21
2018 1,682,133.94 1,008,957.99 673,175.95
2019 2,349,550.78 1,411,085.52 938,465.26
2020 3,307,670.56 1,990,387.18 1,317,283.38
2021 4,006,286.17 2,409,391.57 1,596,894.60
2022 4,948,112.90 2,983,530.82 1,964,582.08
2023 5,938,049.80 3,597,149.93 2,340,899.87
2024 6,857,647.96 4,184,319.12 2,673,328.84
2025 8,018,016.91 4,944,328.91 3,073,688.00
2026 9,144,229.80 5,705,484.99 3,438,744.81
2027 10,323,771.07 6,537,102.98 3,786,668.09
2028 10,191,653.20 6,519,968.72 3,671,684.48
2029 10,228,515.57 6,684,074.33 3,544,441.24
2030 10,197,815.54 6,826,584.06 3,371,231.48
2031 9,915,413.96 6,788,602.79 3,126,811.17
2032 9,632,786.95 6,794,803.49 2,837,983.46
2033 9,038,635.08 6,553,087.15 2,485,547.93
2034 8,380,242.68 6,239,547.60 2,140,695.08
2035 7,378,523.76 5,590,667.19 1,787,856.57
2036 6,683,053.96 5,184,846.65 1,498,207.31
2037 5,701,639.41 4,506,854.33 1,194,785.08
2038 4,663,204.89 3,754,720.73 908,484.16
2039 3,707,430.97 3,053,724.78 653,706.19
2040 2,467,201.71 2,074,490.74 392,710.97
2041 1,278,245.79 1,099,608.44 178,637.35

Details on Appendix Tables 6 and 7


Present Value of Environmental Impacts

Table 13 shows the estimated value of carbon sequestration and erosion control of
“with” and “without” rehabilitation scenarios using 5% discount rate from 2013-2041. It
shows that the total present value of environmental benefits of “with” and “without”
rehabilitation is approximately PhP93.09 million and PhP48.1 million at 5% discount rate,
respectively. The table suggests that the value of environmental benefits from carbon
sequestration is relatively lower than the value from erosion control. Furthermore, the total
present value incremental benefits from environmental impacts are approximately PhP36.8

million at 5% discount rate.

Table 13. Total present value of environmental benefits of “with” and “without”
rehabilitation scenarios at 5% discount rate from 2013-2041

PV BENEFITS
(PHP) INCREMENTAL
ITEM BENEFITS
WITH WITHOUT (PHP)
REHABILITATION REHABILITATION
Carbon sequestration 22,533,760.03 1,296,943.04 13,074,405.43
Erosion control 70,554,928.86 46,800,656.34 23,754,272.53

TOTAL PV 93,088,688.89 48,097,599.38 36,828,677.96



Summary

The environmental assessment involved valuation of carbon sequestration and erosion

control using “with” and “without” rehabilitation scenarios with 5% discount rate over 15-

year rotation period at each rehabilitation area from 2013-2041. The results showed that
that the highest value of incremental benefits from carbon sequestration is obtained in 2032
amounting to PhP2.46 million, while highest value of incremental benefits from erosion
control is gained in 2027 amounting to PhP3.79 million. This suggests that the benefit from
erosion control is relatively higher and the highest incremental benefit will be gained earlier
compared to carbon sequestration. Furthermore, the total present value of “with”
rehabilitation is approximately PhP93.09 million. This is relatively higher compared to
“without” rehabilitation which is PhP48.1 million. Lastly, the value of incremental benefit

from environmental impacts is approximately PhP36.8 million.


Economic Analysis

This section aims to value the economic impacts of rehabilitation of mined-out
areas in Rio Tuba, Palawan. In addition, this section also aims to value benefits and costs
of with and without rehabilitation scenarios. The benefits considered were the
environmental benefits from carbon sequestration and erosion control, as well as the
economic benefit such as revenue from timber. On the other hand, the costs considered

were the economic costs such as input costs for rehabilitation projects.

Valuation of Economic Costs

Part of the items considered in the rehabilitation cost estimation were site
preparation (labor and equipment cost), planting, and maintenance operations costs
(watering and maintenance). Site preparation costs are costs that were incurred from
earthworks before the planting activity which include re-contouring/ground leveling,
matting with topsoil, stacking, and hole digging activities. While these can be considered
as fixed costs because there is an annual expansion in the rehabilitated area, these costs are
essentially variable costs. Maintenance operations costs, on the other hand are costs
incurred from watering and out planting. These costs were considered as variable costs and
were computed on a per ha basis and assumed to be incurred up to year 5 (Details in

Appendix Table 1-3).


Comparison of “with” and “without” rehabilitation scenarios

The undiscounted value of annual per ha cost of rehabilitation of “with” and

“without” rehabilitation is shown in Table 14. It shows that “with” rehabilitation, the costs

are incurred up to year 4 only, assuming that rehabilitation sites are maintained and

monitored for three years after planting activities. The table also shows that “without”

rehabilitation, the cost is incurred in year 1 only, assuming that only site preparations are

undertaken by the mining company for the mined-out areas. In addition, the costs incurred

in year | “with” rehabilitation is approximately PhP524 thousand which is relatively higher

compared to “without” rehabilitation which is approximately PhP501 thousand.

Table 14. Undiscounted value of annual per ha cost of “with” and “without”
rehabilitation scenarios over 15-year rotation period
VALUE OF ECONOMIC COST INCREMENTAL
YEAR (PHPMA) COST
WITH WITHOUT (PHP/HA)
REHABILITATION REHABILITATION
1 524,383.00 501,656.00 22,727.00
2 19,870.13 : 19,870.13
3 19,870.13 - 19,870.13
4 19,870.13 : 19,870.13
5 : - 5
6 : . .
10 - - -
a - - -
12 . “ :
3 - - :
14 . .


Incremental cost

The value of the total economic cost of “with and “without” rehabilitation scenarios
from 2013-2041 is shown in table 15. The table shows that the highest value of economic
cost is obtained in 2027 for both “with” and “without” rehabilitation amounting to
PhP47.05 million and PhP40.8 million, respectively. Furthermore, the highest value of

incremental cost is obtained also in 2027 amounting to PhP6.25 million.

Table 15. Value of the total economic cost of “with” and “without”
rehabilitation scenarios from 2013-2041

VALUE OF ECONOMIC COST INCREMENTAL
YEAR (PHP/HA) COST
WITH WITHOUT (PHP/HA)
REHABILITATION _ REHABILITATION
2013 7,865,745.00 7,524,840.00 340,905.00
2014 2,657,775.45 2,257,452.00 400,323.45
2015 5,106,914.54 4,514,904.00 592,010.54
2016 13,675,873.71 12,541,400.00 1,134,473.71
2017 13,874,575.01 12,541,400.00 1,333,175.01
2018 24,523,112.66 22,338,741.68 2,184,370.98
2019 27,185,046.97 24,209,918.56 2,975,128.41
2020 38,748,414.30 34,829,976.08 3,918,438.22
2021 29,190,778.65 24,842,005.12 4,348,773.53
2022 38,466,633.10 33,620,985.12 4,845,647.98
2023 40,339,132.12 35,055,721.28 5,283,410.84
2024 37,212,263.33 32,055,818.40 5,156,444.93
2025 46,464,945.10 40,634,136.00 5,830,809.10
2026 44,514,101.77 38,502,098.00 6,012,003.77
2027 47,052,283.70 40,799,682.48 6,252,601.22
2028 4,750,550.68 0 4,750,550.68
2029 3,141,070.15 0 3,141,070.15
2030 1,616,037.67, ) 1,616,037.67

Details on Appendix Table 8 and 9


Valuation of Timber Product

On the other hand, the economic benefit considered in this study is the value from
timber. The timber values at the end of rotation period of 15 years are estimated. Hence,
the benefits from timber product will be incurred from 2027 up to 2041. The production
cost and selling price was adapted from Shinamoto (1996) and adjusted using consumer
price index. It is estimated that the stumpage value is approximately PhP32,203.25 (Table
16). Moreover, the average timber yield is estimated to be 108.3 m’/ha (FAO, 2000 and

Harrison et al. 2005).

Table 16. Production cost, selling price, and stumpage
value of lumber in the Philippines

ITEM PHP/m
Selling price 62,510.24
Production cost (30,307.00)

Direct raw materials 21,884.35
Direct labor 813.22
Manufacturing overhead 2,454.18
Packaging supplies 72.61
Depreciation 638.96
Tax-10% 2,962.45
Administrative Expenses 740.61
Selling expenses 740.61
Stumpage value 3 5

Source: Shinamoto, 1996


Table 17 shows the total value of timber product. The value of timber product varies

from PhP15.7 million to PhP283.6 million. These values vary because of the changing
areas of rehabilitation, assuming that timber yield increases when the area planted
increases. Moreover, these values also represent the incremental benefits since “without”
rehabilitation has no value of timber. Note that it was assumed that grasses will dominate

the area “without” rehabilitation.

Table 17. Undiscounted value of timber product “with”

rehabilitation
YEAR VALUE OF TIMBER PRODUCT
(PHP)
2027 52,314,163.38
2028 15,694,249.01
2029 31,388,498.03
2030 87,190,272.30
2031 87,190,272.30
2032 155,303,313.02
2033 168,312,101.65
2034 242,144,824.23
2035 172,706,491.37
2036 233,739,681.98
2037 243,714,249.13
2038 222,858,336.00
2039 282,496,482.25
2040 267,674,135.96

2041 283,647,393.85


Comparison of “With” and “Without” Rehabilitation Scenarios

“With” rehabilitation scenario

The stream of undiscounted value of environmental, economic, and incremental
benefits and costs “with” rehabilitation from 2013-2041 is shown in Table 18. The table
shows that there is an increasing value of total benefits “with” rehabilitation. The highest
value of total benefits is gained in 2041 which is approximately PhP286.9 million. The
table also shows that aside from increasing environmental benefits, the benefits from
timber also increases but will only be realized at 2027, assuming that the trees in the
rehabilitation areas has 15-year rotation period. Moreover, the benefits from economic
impact is relatively higher compared to the benefits gained from environmental impacts.
On the other hand, the cost “with” rehabilitation will stop in 2030 with approximately

PhP1.6 million.

“Without” rehabilitation scenario

The stream of undiscounted value of environmental, economic, and incremental
benefits and costs “with” rehabilitation from 2013-2041 is shown in Table 18. The table
shows that there is an increasing value of total benefits “without” rehabilitation from 2023-
2030. The highest value of total benefits is gained in 2030 amounting to PhP6.8 million.
However, the values decrease on the following years. The table also shows that “without”

rehabilitation, there is no economic benefit from timber. Hence, the total benefits of

“without” rehabilitation are relatively lower compared “with” rehabilitation. On the other
hand, the cost “without” rehabilitation will stop at year 2027 which are relatively lower

compared “with” rehabilitation.

Incremental benefits

There is a negative incremental benefit from 2013-2026 for both “with” and
“without” rehabilitation. However, both “with” and “without” rehabilitation shows
increasing incremental benefits on the succeeding years. The highest incremental benefit
of “with” and “without” rehabilitation is gained in 2041 and 2032 amounting to PhP286.9

million and PhP6.8 million, respectively (Table 18).

PRRONGGOT —_ POELTRTOSBT PYRONGED] —POELIBIGORC SHCOLLPIERC PY BOTEOOT  GLOLLOLTE Tr07
PLOGFELOZ —_ LO6EPPEOTLT PLOGM PLOT —«LO'GEF'PEO'TLZ —IS'SEIPLILIT —FLOGY'PLO'Z —«IL'EOL OEY voz
BLPCLESO'E — TTLTPEORLBT BLPCL'ESO'E —«TTLTHEORLS ST TRPIGHZEZ —BLPZL'ESO'E —LO'PHE'DOE'S £07
ELOTLSL'E —_68'S67'9S8'877 ELOLL'PSL'E —«GRTSETOSR'RTZ —OUSEL'RSR'ZZZELOZL'PSL'E 6 8 6S6'L66'S. E07

ECPSE'IOS'Y —«PSOIN'9OS'OSZ —EV'GPTPIL'EDZ —EEPSE'O0S'» — IF I9E'Z6L'9 E07

KES I0S' —FS'O19'90S 057

SI OPS PI'S S9'ObB'bs RO 1RN6EL'ELT — S9'O"S™PBI'S 907

61 L99'06S"S LETEP'9OLZLI — 61°L99°06S"S 94 06b'P60°S $€07

OF LPS'6ETD 67" 09 LbS'6Ez'9 89'rh9'6S6'S: ‘pE0z

ST Leoress’9 SULR0'ESS'9 SUL8O'ESS'O 80°990°006'6 e£07

6h £08'r6L'9 6r'£08'P6L'9. ‘L6LO9'BE9'S91 6P'£08'P6L'9. S6'P67'SEE'OI ‘Te0T

6L°709°88L'9 - 6L'709'88L'9 97'BSI'891'86 6L'209'88L°9 1€07

90'P8S'978°9 90'P8s'978"9 ‘PBOLS PEL'RE 90'p8S'978°9. coz

fe PLOPEID fe PL0'vE9'9 09'£00'rL7'EY fe pLo'rE9'9 67207

LL LOE ELID - LL LOE'ELS'D IZ6ZL'OP8'LE 10°6b7'r69'S 1 LL L6EELI'D 8207

8P'789'66L OF 09°S9S'69L'9 SP69'L9L' Se EON PETS L207

00°860'Z0S'8E ¥ O8'LL9'F61 7 9207

OO9EI PEDO 16EZ1'OSP'OI - $70z

QPOBLOLILZ- LETZE'TESLZ- ——OP'BIB'SSO'TE 9 OPE SIE'S - POIEO'S8E'r ¥207

BP LOS9STIE- CEELS'SSO'TE- BTIZL'SSO'SE —ZI'ZELNGEE'OF 08'8St'087'S. 7 08°€16'86L'E 08'8Sh'087'8 £207

OTLBLILPOE- O7'LOE'60E" TI'SBE'OTIEE OL ELD 99P'RE O6'SETLSIL - 98SL6L GPE O6'SETLSIL TOT

OT ISTSPTT- — BY'TBL'B6O'EZ- TISOO'THS'PZ — $9'BLL'061'67 - EV ESL COST L1°966°160'9 1207

LBOOLELITE-  PL607'8rr'EE- 80°9L6'678'FE 9S POT OES: 7 ITSLT9SVT 9S PO7'00E'S 0707

16'7ZO8'T9FTZ-  GL'PEE'ZHE'TZ- —-9S'B16'607'FZ 7 BLTSITHT 6107

- BO IPL BEETS 7 POLE 1SZ'E 810e

> 78°L06'996" 10'SLS'pL8'EL 7 6VL99LOP'T L107

> pb'186'SS8" IL'€L8'SL9°EL 7 LT 768618" 9107

Th P09 797" Ic‘Lov‘ocs'€- 00'P06'rIS'> PS'F16'90 8S°667'7ST . 88.667 7ST €8'90S9LT S107

PETESEIOT- —-HT'SSO'LLII- OOZSFLST'T SPSLLLSIT 9907961 1707086 - 99°079'E61 17'07L'086 vl0z

O8'186'F8E'L- __98'0Z0"P80'L~ 00'Ore'bZs'L 00'SbL'S98'L O7'8S8'6E1 PU PTL SL = O7'8S8'OEL pr pee ge £107

LAOHLIA HLA INOHLIN HLA IAOFLLIAT HLA HLA LAOHLIN LIA
(ata) (aHa) (ana) San boa — SLOVAINI'IVINGIWNOWIANG —-UVSA
LId3N3d TVINIWSYONI 4809 1VLOL SLIS3NaA 1VLOL amen 40 aN'1VA

SSS
1hO7-E107 WOsy UOKENTIGQeYyss
ANOYBIA,, PUE ,YIIM,, $809 PUL sJauEQ [eJUaUIAIDU! PU ‘s]WIOMODa ‘JeJUaUMUOIIAUD Jo aNfA PayuNodrsipun yo WeIBS “SI AGEL


Net incremental benefits

The value of incremental and net incremental benefit of “with” and “without”
rehabilitation from 2013-2041 is shown in table 19. The table shows that there is a net
incremental benefit from 2013-2017 but a negative net incremental benefit from 2018-
2026. However, the net incremental benefit started to increase in 2027 from PhPS1.7

million up to PhP285.8 million in year 2041.

Table 19. Value of incremental and net incremental benefit of “with” and “without”
rehabilitation from 2013-2041

INCREMENTAL BENEFIT NET INCREMENTAL,
YEAR (PHP) BENEFIT
WITH WITHOUT (PHP)
2013 -7,084,020.86 -7,384,981,80 300,960.94
2014 =1,677.055.24 -2,063.831.34 386,776.10
2015 -3.830.407.71 ~4,262,604.42 432,196.71
2016 -11,855,981.44 -12,058.348.52 202,367.08
2017 -11,466,907.82 -11,824.549.52 357,641.70
2018 -21,241.464.72 -21,234.617.85 6846.87
2019 -22.942394.19 -22,662.802.91 279,591.28
2020 -33,448.209.74 -32,673.700.87 -774,508.87
2021 -23,098,782.48 -22.248.251.29 850,531.19
2022 -31,309,397.20 -30,471,787.26 -837,609.94
2023 -32,058.673.32 -31,256,807.48 801,865.84
2024 -27,892.922.37 -27,610,186.46 -22.135.91
2025 -36,014.821.19 -35,481.941.74 ~532,879.45
2026 -33,019,423.97 -32,561.070.01 458,353.96
2027 17,715,365.75 -34,030.116.88 $1,745.482.63
2028 23,090,178.53 6,673.397.77 16,416,780.76
2029 40,132,933.45 6,684.074.33, 33,448,859.12
2030 97,118,493.17 6,826,584.06 90,291,909.11
2031 98, 168,158.26 6,788.602.79 91,379,555.47
2032 165,638,607.97 6,794,803.49 158,843,804.48
2033 177.712.167.713 6.553,087.15, 171,159,080.58
2034 251,104,468.91 6,239.547.60 244,864,921.31
2035 180,800.982.13 5,590.667.19 175.210,314.94
2036 241,310,760.94 5,184,846.65 236,125,914.29
2037 250,506,610.54 4,506,854.33 245.999,756.21
2038 228,856,295.89 3.754.720.73 225,101.575.16
2039 287,803,427.22 3.053.724.78 284,749.702.44
2040 272,034,439.67 2,074,490.74 269,959,988.93,

2041 286,918,173.64 099,608.44 2 365.20,


Net Present Value of “With” and “Without” Rehabilitation Scenarios

The net present value and net benefits and costs of “with” and “without”
rehabilitation scenarios using 5% discount rate is shown in Table 20. The results show that
the net present value of economic benefits is relatively higher compared to the net present
value of environmental benefits for both “with” and “without” rehabilitation scenarios. In
addition, the results also show that the economic benefit is only acquired “with”
rehabilitation because of the benefits from timber. On the other hand, the net present value
of economic costs “with” rehabilitation is relatively larger than “without” rehabilitation.
Moreover, results show that “with” rehabilitation there is a positive net present value of
approximately PhP1.4 billion using 5% discount rate while “without” rehabilitation there
is a negative net present value of approximately PhP1.78 million using 5% discount rate.
This suggests that it is beneficial for the mining company to conduct rehabilitation of the

mined-out areas since the benefits generated from it exceeds the costs.

Table 20. The net present value and net benefits and costs of “with” and “without”
rehabilitation scenarios using 5% discount rate

V BENEFITS NPV COST
wake TOTAL NPV

‘ENARIOS
se Environmental Economic Economic (PHP)

93,088,688.89 —_1,573,480,734.00 260,995,177.50 _1,405,574,245.39

Without
rehabilitation

48,097,599.37 226,328,588.69 —_-178,230,989.32
Net benefit 141,186,288.26 _1,573,480,734.00 _34,666,588.81 _1,227,343,256.07


Summary

The economic analysis included financial costs and revenue as the economic
benefits and costs of rehabilitation. In addition, the environmental benefits were also
included for the comparison of “with” and “without” rehabilitation scenarios using 5%
discount rate with 15-year rotation period at each rehabilitation areas from 2013-2041. The
results revealed that the net present value of economic benefits is relatively higher
compared to the net present value of environmental benefits for both “with” and “without”
rehabilitation scenarios. In addition, the results also show that the economic benefit is only
acquired “with” rehabilitation because of the benefits from timber. On the other hand, the
net present value of economic costs “with” rehabilitation is relatively larger than “without”
rehabilitation. Moreover, results show that only “with” rehabilitation scenario has a
positive net present value which amounts to approximately PhP1.41 billion. The results
suggest that it is economically beneficial for the mining company to rehabilitate the mined-
out areas. Furthermore, rehabilitation provides significant environmental benefits in the

form of ecosystem services such as carbon sequestration and erosion control.

CHAPTER6

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

Rio Tuba Nickel Mining Corporation (RTNMC) is one of the largest nickel
producer in the Philippines. RTNMC have been recognized with numerous Presidential
Mineral Industry Environmental Awards in the country because of their rehabilitation
projects among others. Hence, the primary interest of this study is the rehabilitation efforts
of the said company and its impacts in the society, environment, and economy.
Specifically, this study aims: 1) to describe the processes involved in rehabilitation of
mined-out areas in Rio Tuba; 2) to identify the social impacts of rehabilitation of mined-
out areas in Rio Tuba; 3) to identify and value the environmental and economic impacts of
rehibilitation of mined-out areas in Rio Tuba.

Social analysis involves focus group discussions and a number of individual
interviews to obtain the perceived social impacts in the point of view of the community.
Focus groups and interview revealed that all the participants are aware on the rehabilitation
projects in Rio Tuba. Nearly all of them have been involved with the tree planting activity
on the mined-out areas while some have heard the news on the various recognitions
received by the mining company. In addition, there were five perceived impacts of
rehabilitation of mined-out areas which emerged most often in the discussion among the

participants. These were: 1) generation of employment, 2) erosion control and prevention,

on
3) air and water purification, 4) health effects, and 5) aesthetic benefits. The participants
also identified storm protection, water preservation, food production, restoration of flora
and fauna, and bequest values of the environment.

The environmental assessment involved valuation of carbon sequestration and erosion
control using “with” and “without” rehabilitation scenarios with 5% discount rate over 15-
year rotation period at each rehabilitation area from 2013-2041. The results showed that
that the highest value of incremental benefits from carbon sequestration is obtained in 2032
amounting to PhP2.46 million, while highest value of incremental benefits from erosion
control is gained in 2027 amounting to PhP3.79 million. This suggests that the benefit from
erosion control is relatively higher and the highest incremental benefit will be gained earlier
compared to carbon sequestration. Furthermore, the total present value of “with”
rehabilitation is approximately PhP93.09 million. This is relatively higher compared to
“without” rehabilitation which is PhP48.1 million. Lastly, the value of incremental benefit
from environmental impacts is approximately PhP36.8 million.

The economic analysis included financial costs and revenue as the economic
benefits and costs of rehabilitation. In addition, the environmental benefits were also
included for the comparison of “with” and “without” rehabilitation scenarios using 5%
discount rate with 15-year rotation period at each rehabilitation areas from 2013-2041. The
results revealed that the net present value of economic benefits is relatively higher
compared to the net present value of environmental benefits for both “with” and “without”
rehabilitation scenarios. In addition, the results also show that the economic benefit is only

acquired “with” rehabilitation because of the benefits from timber. On the other hand, the

net present value of economic costs “with” rehabilitation is relatively larger than “without”
rehabilitation. Moreover, results show that only “with” rehabilitation scenario has a
positive net present value which amounts to approximately PhP1.41 billion. The results
suggest that it is economically beneficial for the mining company to rehabilitate the mined-
out areas. Furthermore, rehabilitation provides significant environmental benefits in the

form of ecosystem services such as carbon sequestration and erosion control.

LITERATURE CITED

ALLEN, C., MAURER, A. AND FAINSTEIN, M. 2001. Mine site rehabilitation - An
economic review of current policy issues. Canberra Department of Industry, Science
and Resources. Retrieved from http://adl.brs.gov.au

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK. 2017. Guidelines for the economic analysis of projects.
Retrieved from https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-
documenv/32256/economic-analysis-projects.pdf

BARBIER, E.B., ACREMAN, M. AND D. KNOWLER. 1997. Economic valuation of
wetlands: A guide for policy makers and planners. FAO. Gland, Switzerland, Ramsar
Convention Bureau. Retrieved from
http://www. fao.org/docrep/005/y4470e/y4470e0e.htm

BENNAGEN, M.E. 1998. Estimation of environmental damages from mining pollution:
The Marinduque island mining accident. Economy and Environment Program for
Southeast Asia. Retrieved from hitps://idl-
bne.idre.ca/dspace/bitstream/ 1 0625/21613/23/116325.pdf

BOARDMAN, A. et al. 1996. Cost-benefit analysis: Concepts and practice. New Jersey:
Prentice Hall. 525 p.

BURGER, J., ZIPPER, C. AND J. SKOUSEN. 2010. Establishing groundcover for
forested postmining land uses. Powell River Project. Reclamation Guidelines for
Surfaced-mined land. Retrieved from
https://pubs.ext.vt.edu/contenv/dam/pubs_ext_vt_edw/460/460-124/460-124_pdf.pdf

CRISTESCU, R.H., FRERE, C. AND P.B. BANKS. 2012. A review of fauna in mine
rehabilitation in Australia: current state and future directions. Biological
conservation 149 (2012): 60-72.

CRUZ, W., FRANCISCO, H.A., AND Z. TAPAWAN-CONWAY. 1988. The on-site and
downstream costs of soil erosion. Valuation results for two Philippine watersheds and
implications for conservation policy. Philippine Institute for Development Studies
Working Paper 88-11.

DELOS ANGELES, M., FRANCISCO, H., AND A. NISKANEN. n.d. Evaluation of the
profitability of forest plantations in the Philippines. Environmental Valuation: A
Worldwide Compendium of Case Studies 2013.

ECOSYSTEMS RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT BUREAU. 2012. Rehabilitation
and ecological restoration R & D for marginal and degraded landscapes and
seascapes: A research compendium of rehabilitation strategies for damaged urban
areas. Ecosystems Research and Development Bureau, Department of Environment
and Natural Resources, College, Laguna.

EVINA, K.F. 2014. Economic valuation of mine rehabilitation in Rio Tuba, Palwan.
Unpublished undergraduate thesis. University of the Philippines Los Bafios.

FAO. 2001. Mean annual volume increment of selected industrial forest plantation species
by L Ugalde & O Pérez. Forest Plantation Thematic Papers, Working Paper 1. Forest
Resources Development Service, Forest Resources Division. FAO, Rome
(unpublished)

FAO. 2005. The Philippines national forest and tree resources assessment 2003-05.
Retrieved from
https://books.google.com.ph/books?id=V qqqI3bPxweC&pg=PAS6&dq=commerci
al+volume+of+tree+speciestin+the+ philippines&hl=end&sa=X&ved=OahUKEwiLz
uXEqIvY AhVEmZQKHdL9DykQ6AELIzA Adv=onepage&q=commercial%20volu
me%200f%20tree%20species%20in%20the%20philippinesd&f=false

GREIPSSON, S. 2011. Restoration ecology. United States of America: Jones & Barltlett
Learning, LLC. 208 p.

GUNARATNE, L. 2015. Policy options for sustainable river sand mining in Sri Lanka.
Cost-benefit studies of natural resource management in Southeast Asia Singapore:
Springer Science+Business Media Singapore Pte Ltd. doi: 10.1007/978-981-287-
393-4

HARRISON et al. 2005. Estimated financial performance of exotic and indigenous tree
species in smallholder plantations in Leyte province. Annals of Tropical Research
21(1): 67-80.

HEIN, L. 2010. Economics and ecosystems: efficiency, sustainability and equity in
ecosystem management. Cheltenham, UK; Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar. 203 p.


HUANG, C.H., LIN, Y.H., AND M.L. TSENG. 2008. Application of cost-benefit analysis
and data envelopment analysis to evaluate the municipal solid waste management
projects in Metro Manila. Vol.5 (Issue 12): 528-529.

JAMES, D. AND H.A. FRANCISCO. 2015. Cost-benefit studies of natural resource
management in Southeast Asia. Singapore: Springer Science+Business Media
Singapore Pte Ltd. doi: 10.1007/978-98 1 -287-393-4

KOTCHEN, M. J. 2010. Cost-benefit analysis. Encyclopedia of Climate and Weather 2nd
Edition. New York: Oxford University Press. Retrieved = from
http://environment.yale.edwkotchen/pubs/CBAchap.pdf

LASCO, R. et al. 2000, Carbon dioxide storage and sequestration in the Leyte geothermal
reservation, Philippines. Proceedings World Geothermal Congress 2000
Kyushu - Tohoku, Japan. Retrieved from _https://www.geothermal-
energy.org/pdf/IGAstandard/ WGC/2000/R 1005.PDF

LASCO, R. AND F. PUHLIN. 2003. Philippine forest ecosystems and climate change:
carbon stocks, rate of sequestration and the Kyoto protocol. Annals of Tropical
Research 25(2): 37-51. Retrieved
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.574.9895&rep=rep| &typ
e=pdf

LEE, et al. 2005. Effect of Acacia plantations on net photosynthesis, tree species
composition, soil enzyme activities, and microclimate on Mt. Makiling.
Photosynthetica 44 (2): 299-308, 2006

MADID, C. M. 2001. Soil and Forest influence on Ecological Stability in a Rehabilitated
Nickel mine-site in Bataraza, Palawan, Philippines. Masters Thesis. University of the
Philippines Los Bafios.

MARZO, M.L.O. 2009. Assessment of Nickel mining area and its Potential for Agricultural
use in Palawan, Philippines. PhD diss. University of the Philippines Los Bajios.

MASADEH, M.A. 2012. Focus group: Reviews and practices. International Journal of
Applied Science and Technology 2012: Vol. 2 No. 10. Retrieved from
http://www. ijastnet.com/journals/Vol_2_No_10_December_2012/9.pdf

MINES AND GEOSCIENCES BUREAU. 2016. The Philippine minerals industry at a
glance. Retrieved from http://www.mgb.gov.ph/images/links-
images/ThePhilippineMineralsIndustry Ata Glance. pdf


MINES AND GEOSCIENCES BUREAU. 2016. Mining industry statistics. Retrieved
from http://www.mgb.gov.ph/attachments/article/162/MIS(2015)%20(1)%20(1)

MBURU, J. et al. n.d, Economic valuation and environmental assessment. Training
manual. Retrieved from
www.rffiorg/.../Tropics_ Conference_Naidoo_Valuation_in_Tropics.pdf

NASSAJI, H. 2015. Qualitative and descriptive research: Data type versus data analysis.
Language Teaching Research 2015, Vol. 19 (2) 129-132. DOI:
10.1177/1362168815572747

NICKEL ASIA CORPORATION. 2014, Sustainability report. Retrieved from
http://www.nickelasia.com/pdf/NAC_2014_SR.pdf

NINAN, K.N. 2014. Valuing ecosystem services: Methodological issues and case studies.
Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing, Inc. 427 p.

NIYOMTHAI, S. AND A. WATTANAWAN. 2014. Sustainable mining in Thailand:
Paradigm Shift in Environmental Management, Applied Environmental Research.
Retrieved from https://www.tci-thaijo.org/index.php/aer/article/view/16349

ONWUEGBUZIE, A., BUSTAMANTE, R. AND J. NELSON. 2010, Mixed research as a
tool for developing quantitative instruments, Jounal of Mixed Methods Research
(1) 56-78. DOI: 10.1177/1558689809355805

OXFORD BUSINESS GROUP. 2016. The report: Philippines 2016. Retrieved from
https://books.google.com.ph/books?id=GZ40DwAAQBAJ&printsec=frontcovers&
source=gbs_ge_summary_r&cad=0#v=onepage&q&ftrue. 270 p.

PAREDES, K.M. 2013. Valuation of the perceived health effects of nickel mining and
processing on households in Rio tuba, Palawan. Unpublished undergraduate thesis.
University of the Philippines Los Bafios.

PREDO, C., GRIST, P., MENZ, K. AND R.F. RANOLA JR. 1997. Two approaches for
estimating the on-site costs of soil erosion in the Philippines. The replacement cost
approach, Imperata Project Paper 1997/8; CRES (Center for Resource and
Environmental Studies). Canberra, Australia: The Australian National University


RIVERA, M. C. 2004. The costs and benefits of the potential climate change mitigation
options in the Philippine forestry sector. Paper presented during the ITTO
Intemational Workshop on Environmental Economics of Tropical Forest and Green
Policy, Beijing, China.

ROSE, D. BLINN, C AND G. BRAND. 1988. A guide to forestry investment analysis.
Research Paper NC-284. St. Paul, MN: U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Forest Service,
North Central Forest Experiment Station

SALES, R.F., RODEL, D., LASCO, R.D. AND BANATICLA, R.N. 2004. “Carbon
storage and sequestration potential of smallholder tree farms on Leyte island, the
Philippines”. Paper presented at the ACIAR/2000/088 End-of-Project Workshop,
Sabine Resort, Ormoc City

SHINAMOTO, M. 1996. Forest resources and the forest products industry in the
Philippines. Retrieved from
https://pub. iges.or,jp/system/files/publication_documents/pub/researchrepor/740/
ir98-4-6.pdf,

STEVENS, C. n.d.. Sustainability assessments methodologies. Retrieved from
http://www,oecd.org/greengrowth/39925248. pdf

TANDUG, L. 2012. Aboveground biomass and carbon stock assessment of forest
plantations in Mindanao. Sylvatrop: The Technical Joumal of Philippines
Ecosystems and Natural Resources, Vol. 22 (142). 35 p.

TEINTENBERG, T. H. 2000. Environmental and natural resources economics. 5" ed.
New York, USA: HarperCollins College Publishers. 630 p.

US DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY. 1998. Method for calculating carbon sequestration by
trees in urban and_— suburban _— settings. Retrieved — from
https://www3.epa.gov/climatechange/Downloads/method-calculating-carbon-
sequestration-trees-urban-and-suburban-settings.pdf

US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY. 2016. Social cost of carbon.
Retrieved from https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-
12/documents/social_cost_of_carbon_fact_sheet.pdf
