
TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT CENTER
University of the Philippines — Diliman

ACTIVE TRANSFER OF NXTHINKING
KNOWLEDGE TO HIGH SCHOOL RESEARCH
PRACTICE VIA HYBRID WORKSHOP

Submitted by:
JENSHIAM E. BALGUA

In partial fulfillment of the requirements of the
Master of Technology Management Program

January 11, 2023

DR. SERAFIN D. TALISAYON
Faculty Project Adviser
and
Course Faculty, Technology Management 299

Project report classification:
F

(This project report is available to the public.)

University Permission Page

| hereby grant the University of the Philippines a non-exclusive, worldwide,
royalty-free license to reproduce, publish and publicly distribute copies of
this project report in whatever form subject to the provisions of applicable
laws, the provisions of the UP IPR policy, and any contractual obligations,
as well as more specific permission marking on the Title Page.

Specifically, | grant the following rights to the University:

1. To upload a copy of the work in the theses database of the
college/school/institute/department and in any other databases
available on the public internet;

2. To publish the work in the college/school/institute/department
journal, both in print and electronic or digital format and online; and

3. To give open access to the above-mentioned work, thus allowing “fair
use” of the work in accordance with the provision of the Intellectual
Property Code of the Philippines (Republic Act No. 8293), especially
for teaching, scholarly, and research purposes.

JENSHAM E.)BALGUA

January 11, 2023
Date

Table of Contents

Acknowledgment ..............::::cccecccccsceseseseeceseeeeseeseeeeseesenseessseesasseseesesesnesees 5
Certification against Plagiarism

Acronyms .
Abstract.

1. Introduction.

2. The Problem... cceccececcccescsscnecscesceeeescesseeesessesseeeeeseesaeeeeeeseseneensenees 10
2.1 Statement of the Problem. .................:::cccccceccceeeseeseseeeeseseeenseseneeeeee 11
2.2 Specific Research Objectives...............:cccecceesce ce sesceeeeeereeseeneeeeeee 11
2.3 Significance of the Study... ccc cece cseeeeeeseeeeeneeseseneeneee 1

3. Review of Related Literature .............. eee ee cece teeeee eee etnseeeeeees

3.1 State of Talent in the Philippine Tech Landscape ..
3.2.1 The rising demand for global problem-solvers.
3.2.2 Change in the skill sets required for work

3.2.2 Shift to a lifelong learning mindset ...............0... cee tees
3.2 NXthinking and the Shell NXplorers Programme ............0...:00ce 15

3.2.1 The NXthinking Paradigm .................:cceeceeseeeeceseeeeeeeeeeseeereteeeee 16

3.2.2 Graphical NXTOOIS.............ceeeecceseeesceeseeeeeeeneeeaeeeseeeseeneeteneenaees 16
3.3 Training Format vis-a-vis Participant Engagement.................0:006 18

3.2.2 Learning and Working with a Team ....

3.2.2 Categories of Team-based Training.
4. Conceptual Frameworks.

4.1 Definition of Terms

4.2 Limitations of the Study... ee ceecneeseeseeeeeeeeeeesetstteteseeseeeees 22
5. Methodology.............. cceecccccesescsessesesseececseceeecsesecsecacseaeseeeseeeesenesaeeess 23
5.1 Training Content and Program of Activities ........0.0.... cece 24
5.2 Planning, Preparations, and Responsibilities ...0.0..0.... 25

6. Results and Analyses

6.1 Analysis of Results for Specific Objective #1 ...

6.2 Analysis of Results for Specific Objective #2 .............::reeeee 28
6.2.1 Discussions for FGD Item #1 .......0..e cece ec ee eeeteeeeteeeenes 29
6.2.2 Discussions for FGD Item #2 ..............ceceeccee eee eeeeeteeeteeteeeeee 31
6.2.3 Discussions for FGD Item #3 .............ccccececceeeeeeteeeeeteeeeeeeeeees 33

6.3 Analysis of Results for Specific Objective #3 ..............::ceee 34
6.3.1 NXpert Evaluation Results on Content Quality .............0...05

6.3.2 NXpert Evaluation Results on Technical Fidelity .
6.3.3 NXpert Evaluation Results on Idea Continuity .

7. Conclusions and Recommendations

Bibliography. .............c cece ececeeesesceeeeceeeseeceeeeesseeeeeseeeeeeeeesseeeeseseneesseeeed 40
Annex A Project Initiation Sign-Off Page ............... cece eeeeeeeneeeeeee 44
Annex B Gantt Chart of Activities 2.0.0.0... cee cece ee cee neces eeeeee 45
Annex C Evaluation of the Facilitators........0.... ee eeceeee cee eee cee eeeeneeeeeee 46
Annex D Evaluation of the Training Content .........0..... cece eee eeeeeeeee

Annex E Evaluation of the Management of the Training .
Annex F Evaluation of Hybrid Workshop..

Annex G Instructions to Data Gatherer ....

Annex H Expert Evaluation Tool............cccceccccescecceeeeeeesceseeeeeseeeeneeeseeeees 52
Annex | Summary of Expert Evaluation... cc ceeeeeeeeeeeeeeneteeees 53
Annex J Linkage Communique During Planning and Preparation............ 55
Annex K Documentations Posted at the NXplorers.com Website ............ 64
Annex L Public Access Approval.................:ccecccesceseeeeceeenecseeseeseeaeeseseaees 70

Acknowledgments

The researcher is highly appreciative of the collaboration of the agencies
involved in this triple-helix study, and the persons that worked behind the
scenes to deliver and complete the project. In no particular order,

Shell — for their gracious approval for us to use their intellectual
property, the graphical NXtools, to train SHS students on the
NXthinking paradigm and practice, and in accepting our workshop
graduates into the global NXplorers community of innovators.

PSHS-CVC — for allowing their NXplorers community of practice to
serve as teacher-facilitators and student-hosts of the event, who also
served in various capacities during the planning, preparation,
documentation, and evaluation of the project.

LGU Cauayan City — for generously providing for the financial needs
of the participants in the two-day training, and for mediating with the
Schools Division Office of Cauayan City and the Region II Office to
approve the event in compliance with DepEd regulations.

With special thanks to Ms. Angel Nicole Iniego and her team for hosting the
event, Ms. Monaleizl Dy for coordinating with us remotely from the PSFI
offices, Director Erick John Marmol for the approval of grants and study
leave, and the public servants at LGU Cauayan City for handling the
accounting and distribution of financial assistance.

To fellow teacher-facilitators who believed that change can be achieved by
inspiring young scholars to dream a better world and to act with conviction
and patriotism, you are all heroes. Para sa Bayan.

To the DOST- Science Education Institute for the scholarship that served
as my financial life boat for this thesis and my degree.

To the Technology Management Center faculty, your wisdom will live
forever on these pages. The best of thanks to the faculty-adviser, Dr.
Serafin Talisayon, for his expert feedback and steady guidance. He inspired
grit toward the achievement of this scholarly work.

Finally, to the omnipresent and omnipotent One that kept everyone hopeful
during the uncertain years covering the implementation of this project, the
researcher will be forever faithful and thankful.

Certification against Plagiarism

This is to certify, upon my honor, that | have duly cited, quoted, or
acknowledged the ideas or writings of others, published or unpublished, that
| used in this report, and that | did not write anything here misrepresenting
it as my own writing when in fact it is copied in whole or in part from the
writing of somebody else.

JENSHIAM E\BALGUA

January 11, 2023
Date

Acronyms

ESG — Environmental, Social, and Governance

FGD — Focus Group Discussion

IPO — Input, Process, Output

LGU — Local Government Unit

PSFI — Pilipinas Shell Foundation, Inc.

PSHS-CVC — Philippine Science High School - Cagayan Valley Campus
Q&A — Question and Answer

R&D — Research and Development

RACI — Responsible, Accountable, Consulted, Informed
SDG - Sustainable Development Goals

TBIC — The Bright Ideas Challenge

WEF — World Economic Forum

WBS - Work Breakdown Structure

Abstract

On 21-22 October 2022, the PSHS-CVC (academe), Shell (industry), and
the LGU Cauayan City (government) collaborated on a Triple-Helix project
to conduct a NXplorers hybrid workshop for the City’s research students
and teachers. The NXplorers program trains highschoolers into becoming
positive change actors for issues in food, water, and energy sustainability.

The 106 teachers and students from 18 senior high schools in Cauayan City
completed six one-hour workshops and then pitched their ideas forward
using video presentations. Collectively, their NXtools outputs were rated
satisfactory on the criteria of content quality, technical fidelity, and idea
continuity in a double-blind evaluation by experts in NXthinking. This meant
that the participants were able to practice what they learned from the
training. The participants acknowledged the benefits of the program on their
problem statement definition, solutions ideation, social impact study, and
knowledge transfer approaches to research.

The participants considered how the method used — hybrid workshop — may
be improved to bridge the polarizing challenges of the high cost of large in-
person workshops and the low knowledge retention in full virtual training. In
a focus group discussion, the participants validated the results of post-event
surveys that hybrid workshops are a viable training method in situations
where people involved cannot easily congregate in one place due to
distance or health safety concerns, and yet participants need tactile and
real-time experience in using the actual tools for skills enhancement.

To get the full picture, they stacked up seven team-based training formats
versus quality indicators such as scalability, learning, and retention; and the
aggravating factors of complexity, vulnerability, and cost. They decided that
small-group coaching is the best method for and hybrid workshops can only
measure up when the technical challenges inherent to online training are
minimized and audience interactivity is improved.

Finally, the results were submitted to the knowledge management office of
NXplorers Global for the improvement of the program. In the end, a positive
step towards wider adoption of systems thinking was implemented and
evaluated to equip high school students with timely and practical research
skills and contribute to increasing the number of early-trained social action
leaders and solution engineers in the country.

Keywords: NXthinking, knowledge transfer, hybrid workshop, Triple Helix

1. Introduction

NXplorers is an educational program that trains high school students with
the complex skills needed to solve problems involving food, water, and
energy sustainability (Shell Global Solutions, 2021). It is one of the
environmental, social, and governance actions of the Shell multinational oil
and energy company. It was advanced worldwide by the London-based
Shell Global Solutions International with the help of nonprofits and learning
institutions from participating countries.

In this paper, Shell collectively refers to the whole Shell business interests,
Shell Global Solutions International B. V., and non-profits involved in the
NXplorers program. Locally, the Pilipinas Shell Foundation, Inc. supervises
NXplorers' efforts in the Philippines.

The program implements NXthinking — a paradigm and practice built upon
systems thinking, scenario planning, and the theory of change (Shell Global
Solutions, 2019). Students are trained using NXtools, a set of graphic
organizers for analyzing societal problems and their feasible and scalable
solutions (Shell Global Solutions, 2020).

High school students were trained in the method through in-person
workshops. As an alternative, Shell used a webinar format in countries
affected by the lockdowns due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In the
Philippines, PSF! conducted workshops in the years 2018, 2020, and 2022.
An innovation contest, called The Bright Ideas Challenge, follows each
workshop season for students to showcase their achievements (Shell
Philippines, November 2021).

The NXplorers website lists the schools that benefited from the workshops
from Australia, Brazil, Brunei, China, Egypt, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia,
Kazakhstan, Malaysia, Netherlands, Oman, the Philippines, Qatar, Russia,
Singapore, Trinidad & Tobago, UAE, and Vietnam. Every two years,
NXplorers Global recognizes the best projects, teams, and facilitators from
these participating countries (Shell Global Solutions, December 2020).

Student teams from the Philippine Science High School - Cagayan Valley
Campus (PSHS-CVC) have been recognized as exemplary by NXplorers
Global in 2020 and 2021, resulting from their winnings in the national
NXplorers TBIC. As of September 2022, these students are coached, jointly
and severally, by sixteen NXplorers-trained teachers.

2. The Problem

As of September 2022, 27 Philippine schools are registered NXplorers
Schools, most of which offer the K-12 senior high school program. This is
about 0.25% of the 10,795 public and private high schools in the country
(Department of Education, May 2018). In contrast, developed countries
have significantly higher diffusion ratios. In Singapore, 56 out of 128
secondary schools participated in the program, or 43.75% (Hirschmann,
November 2021). In Qatar, it is 55.88% or 19 of their 34 secondary schools
(Web Solutions LLC, 2022). Based on this data, it can be argued that the
adoption of the NXthinking theory and practice is relatively slower in the
Philippines.

The PSFI prefer to conduct the workshops in-person and per host school.
However, memoranda issued by the education overseer on class disruption
(Department of Education, March 2005) and regulation of co- and extra-
curricular activities of students (Department of Education, October 2020)
are roadblocks to wider implementation. This research proposed that
adoption may be faster if (1) it is coordinated first with the Committee on
Education of target local government units, who may mediate the project to
the schools division head after endorsement by the regional office, (2) with
research teachers and students as the target audience, and (3) empower
local teachers trained in the method to serve as workshop facilitators.

This project implemented a NXplorer workshop based on these arguments.
In the technology management practice, this follows a Triple Helix approach
where success is dependent on the synergy between the academe,
government, and industry participants (Pique, Berbegal-Mirabent, &
Etzkowitz, December 2018). To leverage this collaboration model, the
PSHS-CVC, as a trainer pool, sought permission from the DepEd Region II
Office and then tapped the City of Cauayan to finance the project and assist
in onboarding the participant schools, while PSFI coordinated with the Shell
Global Solutions on the use of copyrighted NXplorers training materials (see
Annex J for the signed communiques).

The Philippine NXplorers Lead Facilitator was assured that the NXplorers
method will be transferred effectively to the students considering that it will
be delivered by teacher-facilitators and not by Shell in-house trainers (Dy,
September 2022). An agreement was reached on September 16, 2022 (1)
to use published NXplorers materials, (2) to evaluate the outputs of
participants, and (3) to evaluate the conduct of the workshop itself. PSHS-
CVC, as the training host, was also allowed to design a workshop format
that is acceptable for the target participants and compliant with existing
regulatory requirements on education, accounting, and COVID-19 safety.

10

2.1 Statement of the Problem

This project facilitated a NXplorers Hybrid Workshop, with Cauayan City,
Isabela senior high school research teachers and students as participants.
It sought to answer the question: “Will a hybrid workshop format cascade
the NXthinking paradigm to participants as well as other training formats ?”

2.2 Specific Research Objectives

1. Describe training coverage based on the number of schools
represented in the workshop versus the number of public and private
senior high schools in Cauayan City, Isabela (Philippines).

2. Compare the hybrid workshop with other training formats based on
the participant responses in a focus group discussion, with a focus
on the application of learning and improvement of the training format.

3. Determine the quality of the practice of NXthinking by the workshop
participants based on the evaluation of their outputs by NXplorers
experts.

23 Significance of the Study

Participants became more aware of their role as positive change actors
toward achieving the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals,
particularly along the nexus of food, energy, and water sustainability.
Indirectly, the workshop contributed to increasing the ranks of early-trained
researchers and innovators in the Philippines.

For participating schools, a pool of students was trained for innovation
competitions and got them to propose quality capstone projects that
effectively address the pain points of relevant stakeholders.

For the PSHS-CVC, their teachers and students gained more experience in
facilitating innovation workshops with the end goal of designing the School's
training program for innovation.

For the City of Cauayan, this activity served as an accomplishment towards
the promotion of the local government as the Smarter City in the North.

For the Pilipinas Shell Foundation, the adoption of NXthinking was further
advanced to the Philippine senior high schools. The results of the
evaluations served as a knowledge management feedback loop to
recommend improvements for the next season of NXplorers workshops.

11

3. Review of Related Literature

The cascading and subsequent application of new knowledge can be
morphologically different across factors such as context, quality of the
source, participant engagement, and method of instruction. Subsequent
topics in this section discussed these factors in order. First, literature
contemporary with the COVID-19 pandemic was cross-referenced to
surface issues about the continuing need to boost the number of
researchers and innovators with a socio-entrepreneurial mindset. Second,
a"systems thinking" paradigm by the Shell NXplorers Global was presented
as a platform to train highschoolers. Finally, methods to cascade said
knowledge was discussed with an exploration of their pros and cons for
promoting engagement and retention.

3.1 State of Talent in the Philippine Tech Landscape

In a benchmark survey, founders and funders expressed their constructive
recommendations on how to bridge the gap between the quality of
education and skills of the contemporary Filipino workforce versus the
specific needs of the nascent Philippine startup ecosystem (Gobi Partners
and Core Capital, November 2022). Experts agree that we should place a
premium now on workforce readiness and quality because resilience and
adaptability are already proven Filipino traits. However, they say that it will
require a quad-helix collaboration to equip the current workforce and new
graduates with the skills they need to contribute towards economic growth
(RiConfigure, May 2021).

This is neither new nor specific to developing countries like the Philippines.
Several works of literature from academics, regulators, and government
statisticians point out the correlation between the number of researchers
per capita and economic growth. Israel and Singapore, two of the top-most
innovative countries, both have the highest ratio not only in talent per capita
but also in the number of unicorns per capita, patents per capita, and R&D
fund ratio to country annual budget (Gobi Partners and Core Capital,
November 2022). Other factors catapult the economies of nations; however,
this research focused on the need for quality and patriotic talent.

According to The Future of Jobs 2020 report, critical thinking, creativity, and
complex problem-solving remain the top skills that future employers need
(World Economic Forum, October 2020). With the skill sets listed in the
teport geared towards digitalization and social action, the digital-native
Generation Z is naturally primed to take on the challenge. Regardless, the
needs of data-driven businesses require continuous upskilling and reskilling
of current human capital for them to adapt to market opportunities.

12

To teach 21st-century skills at college might be too late for new talents to
survive in these uncertain times. The Dream a Dream Trust posits that the
young must proactively acquire life skills and future-proof competencies to
adapt to the complex world (Talreja, July 2019). Thus, this paper argues
that future researchers and innovators must be trained as early as possible
by the academe and industry immersion partners.

In the first of three papers for a global study in 24 countries on the Future
of Education, Google highlighted three post-pandemic trends driven in part
by dire global issues and the accelerated rate of technological innovation
(Google EDU, December 2022). These trends mean developing new
paradigms and skill sets to become effective problem-solvers, and evolving
learning to be more outcomes-based and socially positive, to best train
future technopreneurs and leaders.

3.2.1 The rising demand for global problem-solvers

The academia will be at the forefront of helping future generations
embrace global mindsets and skill sets, beginning with guiding them
to ideate for civic and environmental issues affecting their
communities (HundrED, April 2022). From these learning
experiences, students can scale up towards making their ideas a
reality through investigatory projects, innovation contests, and social
advocacies (LoopMe Philippines, December 2019).

Creative thinkers as they are, the young need teacher guidance and
the right tools to properly frame their focus, consistently grit towards
completion, and reduce the effect of bandwagon or biases. It was
observed that when students see that their actions make a
difference, they gain a sense of agency and responsibility.

3.2.2 Change in the skill sets required for work

As technology advances, education focuses on equipping students
with the high-demand skills they will need to thrive in a new world of
work. The O*Net Resource Center categorized the skills needed
based on the cross-sectional factors of worker profile, specific
occupation, cross-discipline, and industry (O*Net, June 2022). From
these lists, the WEF highlighted what mindsets and skills the young
have to acquire, or at least be exposed to, to be more competitive in
the fast-changing world they are living in (World Economic Forum,
October 2020).

13

3.2.2 Shift to a lifelong learning mindset

As lifespans increase and societal change accelerates, the idea of
lifelong learning is gaining traction, with more tools available for
upskilling and advancement. More student-centered schools design
their curricula based on six Deep Learning dimensions: character,
citizenship, collaboration, communication, creativity, and critical
thinking (Quinn, McEachen, Fullan, Gardner, & Drummy, 2020).

The six global competencies in Deep Learning are a synthesis of the
most-relevant 21st-century skills — fewer and more measurable than
other literature proposes. Adherence and continual improvement
along these six dimensions drive innovative practices among lifelong
learners. Proponents of 6C designed several tools for planning,
adoption, implementation, and evaluation of the paradigm.
Ultimately, any individual or group may represent their 6C
compliance through a radar chart (Barcelona Field Studies Centre,
September 2022).

Figure 3.1
Sample Deep Learning Assessment Chart

Character

\

Qitizenship

Critical Thinking

Creativity, Coflaboration

\ Y

Communication

14

3.2 NXthinking and the Shell NXplorers Program

NXplorers as a program. NXthinking as a paradigm. and NXtools as
work templates are the intellectual property of Shell Global Solutions.
cha for fair use. all materials borrowed from NXplorers.com
redited. Access to privileged information is only given
gistered NXplorers. PSHS-CVC was recognized as a NXPlorers
| in May 2019. Compliance duly verified, NXplorers Philippines
wed the publication of this paper to the public domain (Annex L)

The NXplorers community at the Philippine Science High School - Cagayan
Valley Campus facilitated a NXplorers Workshop for this research. As a
recognized NXplorers School, trained teachers and scholars have access
to training materials saved in the knowledge base pages of the NXplorers
website. With this authority, the School is allowed to design, initiate, and
facilitate workshops promoting the program as long as the local NXplorers
partner was duly informed. The Pilipinas Shell Foundation, Inc. was the
local partner that represented the industry in this collaboration.

As described earlier, NXplorers is an ESG program of Shell that equips high
school students with a subset of the complex skills they need to solve
problems involving food, water, and energy sustainability. At present, it is
used as an alternative learning activity for students from 20 countries
including Filipino high school learners (NXplorers.com, June 2022).

To confirm the practice of the learned theory and skills, Shell hosts a yearly
competition — the NXplorers The Bright Ideas Challenge. This competition
accepts proposals for change from NXplorers teams of the trained schools.
The top ten or 15 entries usually present their work in an in-person science
fair and defend their solution to a panel of experts. During the pandemic,
Shell hosted TBIC through video-conferencing and live-streaming.

NXplorers is one of the ideal education platforms to train high schoolers on
systems thinking and 21st-century skills because of their expert-validated
end-to-end content and graphical ideation tools (NXplorers.com, July 2022).

3.2.1 The NXthinking Paradigm

As stated in their whitepaper, NXthinking offers a way to explore real-
world problems and generate potential solutions. It encourages
young people to be analytical and creative, to dig beneath the
surface, to appreciate the complex and interrelated possible and
preferred futures, and to think about what could be done differently
to bring about positive change (Shell Global Solutions, 2019).

15

NXthinking takes many of its ideas from the disciplines of systems
thinking, scenario planning, and theory of change. Integrating these
approaches creates a new way of looking at global complexities, and
shows young people how to approach the complex challenges the
world faces, now and in the future.

Specifically, the paradigm argues that:

1. Thinking about THE BIG PICTURE helps practitioners to see
beyond the pieces and appreciate the multiple connections and
relationships in a system.

2. Thinking about CONNECTIONS helps make complex problems
and situations easier to understand.

3. Thinking about the PERSPECTIVES of stakeholders helps
practitioners understand systems and their effect on the world.

4. Thinking about the FUTURE helps practitioners see how they can
act to create change in any situation.

5. Thinking about CHANGE considers the enablers and how they
can overcome the barriers and inspire others with their ideas.

3.2.2 Graphical NXTools

NXplorers equip high schoolers with the tools to reimagine the world.
It is a facilitated program, run in accredited learning centers, where
staff and students learn about and engage in real-world issues
(NXplorers.com, August 2022).

There are three stages to the NXplorer program - Explore, Create
and Change — with tools and resources for each. At present, their
library has the following NXtools available : (1) Perspectives Circle,
(2) Confidence Triangle, (3) Causal Loops, (4) Connections Circle,
(5) Change-Over-Time Graph, (6) Scenario Planning Quadrant, (7)
SCAMPER Tool, (8) Feasibility Funnel, (9) If-Then Chain, (10)
Persuasion Pyramid, (11) Ripple Effect, and (12) Compass Tool.

To quickly progress through the program with sufficient practice,
NXplorers workshops often take a focused progression through the
stages of the program using a priority set of NXtools listed next page.

16

. Explore — Perspectives Circle
Learners collate the sentiment of various stakeholders on a
specific sustainability issue, framed as a "How-Can-We" prompt.
Data-gathering in this exploration stage includes interviews,
FGDs, surveys, and a review of news and literature.

. Explore — Connections Circle
Upon group review, several factors emerge from the stakeholder
perspectives and are then laid out along the perimeter of a circle.
Causal relationships between the factors were determined and
then defined whether that relationship is reinforcing or balancing.
The teams decide on two leverage points that affect most of the
other factors, preferably in a positive manner.

. Explore — Scenario Planning Quadrant
The teams laid out the two leverage points from their connections
circle in a Cartesian quadrant with each factor on either axis. With
one axis direction the extreme opposite of its other end, the two
factors create 4 scenarios that the participants may consider.
They describe each of the scenarios and finally decide on which
one is the most ideal future.

. Create — Feasibility Funnel

Individually and independently, team members generate ideas on
how to achieve the ideal future scenario. They may ideate
inventions, innovations, training programs, advocacies or
campaigns, process improvements, web or mobile apps, and
other creative outputs with the end goal of generating as many
candidate solutions as possible. Aided by this practical tool, they
brainstorm whether each idea can pass through the criteria filters
such as capability, support, cost, scalability, social impact, etc.
where the team themselves choose the order of the filters.

. Create — Ripple Effect Tool

If a solution made it through the spout of the Feasibility Funnel, it
must be investigated further. With water ripples in a pool as an
analogy, teams consider that with every action is a reaction, and
that effect can be intended or unintended. A solution can only be
accepted if the intended positive results far outweigh the
multifaceted costs of unintended consequences. Else, they will
be creating more problems rather than solutions.

17

F. Change — Persuasion Pyramid
The teams train themselves in presenting their bright idea. The
structure of the persuasion pyramid enables them to create an
elevator pitch that communicates their solution effectively and
expediently regardless of the audience.

3.3 Training Format vis-a-vis Participant Engagement

Learnt skills and tools used by the students to adapt to remote learning are
here to stay. Having experienced the benefits of distance learning allowed
them to reconsider approaches to team learning. However, academic
discussions validated by human gestures are a social factor that should be
revived and encouraged with the return to face-to-face instruction.

While the world is cautious about opening completely post-pandemic,
training providers prefer online training rather than in-person workshops.
Companies, such as Butter.us, built their business model on this opportunity
by integrating workshop tools into their video-conferencing software
(Teresa, November 2020). This capstone project proposed an alternative
method that uses the best of both formats to address the social gap.

3.2.2 Learning and Working with a Team

Considering the nature of the problems the world faces today,
successful solutions are often inter-disciplinary and collaborative.
Gone are the days where a single individual can ideate, design, and
implement a panacea for a social ill, or engineer the most effective
and cheapest solution to a technology challenge (Banks, Scheyvens,
& Leonard, November 2020).

Renaissance thinkers and tinkerers had apprentices, Edison had a
workshop, AT&T had Bell Labs, and Alphabet designs software
solutions at their Googleplex. It can be argued that these setups are
run like companies but it is evident that employees are organized into
teams that look into specific projects (Gertner, 2013).

The same can be said about student projects, where teachers
sometimes purposely and equitably group students based on
parameters that promote group dynamics and encourage inclusivity
and agency, with the end goal of task expediency and output quality
(Forsyth, 2019).

18

3.2.2 Categories of Team-based Training

Arranged based on the estimated number of participants in a single
physical or virtual venue (Gore, January 2022), training may be:

A. Full Virtual Training

This format accommodates the most audience at once.
Mainstream video conferencing tools can host hundreds of video
participants and even be live-streamed on video-sharing sites.
This method has become the norm during the pandemic. Some
video-conferencing services revised their business model to
include breakout rooms, opt-in scheduling, SocMed interactivity,
and integration of collaboration tools (Teresa, November 2020).
However, this method can be adversely affected by technical
difficulties, weak connectivity, or unscheduled power cuts.

B. Large Group In-person
Mistakenly interchanged by many with the concept of "training",
participants benefit from plenary sessions and seminars, attend
parallel workshops, and consult with fireside mentors. However,
this method can be a logistical nightmare with all the venue
preparation, issuance of travel documents, and coordinating for
the accommodation of the participants and facilitators.

C. Hybrid Workshop
It is a compromise that takes the best features of both virtual and
in-person large group training to host situations where training in
a single location is too costly, logistically challenging, or a health
tisk. This requires, however, that training materials must be sent
to the participants first before the online training schedule. This
method was used in the Belt and Road Teenager Maker Camp
2022 where organizers send robot kits to the participating teams
while training is delivered through a secure website on-demand.

D. Focus Group Discussion
This format allows the participants to directly contribute to the
pool of knowledge by either asking questions, pitching their ideas,
or voting on certain concerns to be resolved immediately. The
process will require a moderator and a secretary. Learning is
bilateral because while the FGD participants are expected to give
verbal answers to FGD questions, the moderator may summarize
responses and discuss their implications. The feedback loop in
this method has a fast turnaround time and the opinions of all
participants are valued. This method is best for brainstorming but

19

may be challenging if the purpose is a top-down cascade of
knowledge, where the knowledge is not anymore open to
interpretation.

E. Small Group Coaching

This method is designed to mentor a team of students with the
end goal of finding a consensus at the end or coaching them to
complete a task they have started. This method is arguably the
most effective for small functional teams of two to six members.
As this method is designed for a very small group, a high ratio of
knowledge diffusion cannot be achieved unless this method is a
subset of a larger gathering and more trainers are available.

F. Courseware
Teams or individuals may learn through a self-paced or cohort-
based online or paper-based courseware. Many open online
courses offer training for free but masterclasses are offered at
cost to augment the text or to provide guided mentorship.

G. Self-study
In this method, the teams or learners are free to gather the
information they need from various sources, either through online
or in-person means. Because the content is not curated, there is
a possibility for misinterpretation.

In-person training is presumably the best, especially if the training is
immersive, experiential, outcomes-based, and mentors are within
arm’s reach. However, hosting a single-venue training becomes
proportionally complex with the number of participants, especially if
they are from different places. Transport, permits, and outsourced
accommodation are often aggravating logistical factors.

On the other end of the spectrum, online webinars tend to be a one-
sided transfer of knowledge, with low indicators of whether the
participants apply, or even recall, what was taught. It is cheaper to
host than large in-person training but the impact is less relatively.

Looking at these categories, there are formats in-between these
extremes, and one of them is a hybrid workshop. This study aimed
to prove or disprove the suggestion that a hybrid workshop is a win-
win method to deliver training where:

1. single-venue training is logistically not feasible, costly, or a risk;
2. participants must access local materials and respondents; and
3. speakers are from various places or prefer remote training.

20

4. Conceptual Frameworks
The conceptual framework of the study is presented in the following IPO
Diagram, based on the Lean Six Sigma practices (Sankar, July 2011).

Figure 4.1
Input-Process-Output Diagram of the Study

p PROCESS eee

(Hybrid) NXplorers Training Evaluation of
Workshop Design for Students Workshop and Outputs
Trained ; Researchues| ' $$$ ..-----) ¥ a 7
Teachers as ! Teachers as t Feedback Loop i
Facilitators | 1 Chaperons 1 for Improvement «
A ; z ee ed
1 ' 1 '
ooneeee ee ee eee eee eee)

The hybrid workshop itself served as the data-gathering venue and used a
Triple-Helix scheme (Chatzinikolaou & Viados, May 2019), as shown:

Figure 4.2
Triple-Helix Collaboration Diagram
[ACADEME] e Funding
e Stakeholder Mediation
Phlippine e Material Distribution
Science H/S -_+ TE
CVC / \
—— NXplorers [GOVERNMENT] | \
Planning & Legwork | Hybrid ner |
e On-boarding Schools Workshop F i}
e Workshop Facilitation for Cauayan eoreuGy
e Documentation City SHS : . ,
Pest

[INDUSTRY]

Training Materials

Pilipinas Shell Training of Trainors
Foundation xpert Evaluation

I _/ | ¢ Promotion

|

21

4.1 Definition of Terms

Coverage — an objective in this research defined as the ratio between
the number of schools participating versus the actual number of
senior high schools in the target geographical region.

NXperts — refers to NXplorers alumni with prior involvement in
training others or have had successes in innovation contests using
the NXtools and not organizers of the hybrid workshop itself.

Senior high schools — Philippine high schools, either public or private,
that offer grades 11 and 12 and are compliant with the K-12
education system.

Quad-helix — a collaboration between the academe, the government,
the private sector, and the community of volunteers.

Triple-helix — a collaboration between universities, the government,
and the industry.

4.2 Limitations of the Study

This study evaluated the implementation of a hybrid workshop by comparing
that to the earlier experience of the participants with the other formats of
team-based learning. It is possible that the participants might not have tried
out the other formats prior and thus might misinform their decision. To
balance out this phenomenon, it was aimed to onboard as many participants
from as many schools as possible within the geographical bounds of the
City of Cauayan, Isabela (Philippines).

The evaluation of the workshop came from the responses of the participants
to quantitative surveys and their qualitative feedback in the post-event focus
group discussion. The quality of learning was through quantitative
evaluation of the participant outputs by NXplorers experts. However, only
descriptive statistics were used as there are no population data to compare
the means of the sample with.

Furthermore, the results only reflect the sentiment of the 106 students and
teachers that participated in the workshop, the nine FGD active participants,
and the opinions of the nine experts that evaluated their outputs.

Finally, the study covers the knowledge transfer of NXthinking and no other

method of systems thinking. Thus, the results cannot generalize the transfer
of knowledge of similar paradigms even if using the same training method.

22

5. Methodology

The study is an action research for the benefit of the NXplorers community
and is evaluated by the participants and experts using quantitative and
qualitative means and the results interpreted using descriptive statistics.

First, a Triple-Helix collaboration between the PSHS-CVC, PSFI, and LGU
Cauayan City was signed to conduct a NXplorers workshop for the senior
high schools in the City. Next, training materials and financial support were
distributed to the schools followed by an online orientation and dry-run of
the event with the teacher-chaperons of the 18 participant schools.

On 21-22 October 2022, the workshop was conducted using a hybrid
format. That is, the training was delivered online semi-interactively by
PSHS-CVC teachers via Zoom® in 30-minute lectures followed by 30-
minute workshops. The participants follow through the instructions video-
streamed from a single computer only while working together inside their
tespective schools. This way, the participants were encouraged to use
printed worksheets they received earlier and not to rely on digital tools.

In each remote venue, the participants ideated solutions for food, water, and
energy sustainability issues affecting the City of Cauayan, with the guidance
of their teacher-chaperon. These three nexus issues cover most of the 17
Sustainable Development Goals of the United Nations. In each workshop,
they were taught how to use the NXtools to frame a "How-Can-We" problem
statement, identify factors and leverage points, contrast scenarios, and
critique their solutions toward achieving a desired future.

To gather stakeholder data, they interviewed random individuals within the

walls of their campuses on the questions:

1. What issues in food, energy, and/or water sustainability confront the
residents of Cauayan City?

2. What's causing the issue? How do you envision a future without this
issue?

3. As a/an {alternate role in society}, what are your actions or suggestions
that could bring about positive change?

They were considered NXplorers graduates after they presented their ideas
in a pitch session where their work was critiqued by the teacher-facilitators.
Their outputs were forwarded to experts gathered by PSFI for evaluation of
learning quality. Finally, the 106 participants evaluated the performance of
each speaker and the quality of the training itself as required by PSFI, and
then a stratified subset of the graduates validated their quantitative
evaluation through active participation in a focus group discussion.

23

5.1 Training Content and Program of Activities

Overall, the participants learned to use six of the twelve published NXtools.
They also attended lectures on the global progress of the NXplorers
program, the basis and myriad application of NXthinking, and how to frame
an actionable problem statement. There were also panel interviews with
previous winners of innovation contests on their team journeys, the direction
their innovative projects took post-competition, and best practices toward
expedient and efficient plans of action for opportunities.

The program of activities is shown in the following slide screenshot:

Figure 5.1
Program of Activities

DAY 4: Friday 21 October 2022
Start End Part

Twelve PSHS-CVC teachers, all trained by Shell Global Solutions, served
as speakers and trainers. They were assisted by ten PSHS-CVC students
and alumni, four of them were captains of winning teams in the first three
NXplorers TBIC iterations and similar innovation competitions.

In the week before the workshop proper, orientation and technical dry-run
were conducted to prepare the teacher-chaperons for their roles and to
answer their concerns. However, because the training was partly online,
there were technical glitches encountered but expediently resolved with
contingency plans set in place by the organizers.

24

5.2 Planning, Preparations, and Responsibilities

After an exploratory meeting with the Lead NXplorers Facilitator for the
Philippines on the sidelines of the third NXplorers Workshop for PSHS-CVC
on August 30, 2022, a Project Plan was submitted for review by the
stakeholders. On September 20, 2022, a conforme to initiate the plan (see
Annex A) was finally signed by:

Mr. Jenshiam Balgua, a PSHS-CVC teacher, representing facilitators
Ms. Angel Iniego, a PSHS-CVC scholar, representing host committees
Mr. Erick John Marmol, Director III, representing the PSHS-CVC offices
Ms. Beverly Berberabe, NXplorers Country Head, for Shell and PSF
Mr. Garry Galutera, City Councillor, representing LGU Cauayan City

OPRON>

From then on, planned activities were plotted into a Gantt Chart based on
a Work Breakdown Structure of the project, as shown below. The Gantt
Chart, both proposed and implemented, was documented in Annex B.

Figure 5.2
Work Breakdown Structure

NXplorers Hybrid Workshop
for Cauayan City SHS

PREPARATION EXECUTION CONTROL EVALUATION
Pilot Meetings Coach Orientation Sourcing Funds Proofread Slides
Project Planning Remote Dry-Run Fund Distribution Design Eval.Tools

Probono Speaking

Liaising —_ LL ae

Materials Prep Topic Webinars.

Live Pitch/Critique

Equipment Resp. Topic/Speaker Eval.

Hosting Dry-run NXtool Workshops

|

Speaker Dry-run Panel Discussions Time Direction Focus Group Disc.
I = I
Registration L Program Outro | Plan Contingencies Expert Evaluations
Paper Distribution Support & Promotion Certificates/Tokens Compliance Reports

25

Queuing Speakers Whole Event Eval.


In a RACI Matrix, the organizers considered the roles of all parties involved
including the participating schools. The focal persons — Mr. Balgua and Ms.
Iniego — were also categorized as project managers because of their
oversight roles. This served as a blueprint for success because the chart
specifies who was responsible, accountable, consulted, and informed of
each activity (Morris, October 2022). Role assignments were consistent with
PMBOK® (Project Management Institute, 2021), a definitive reference in
the project management discipline.

Table 5.1
Responsibility Assignment Matrix

ACTIVITY
Pilot meetings with stakeholder representatives
Project planning by the project managers

Liaising for approval of plans and permits
Preparation of training materials

|_Dry-run on the hosting activities

|_Dry-run of the lecture and workshops

Registration of schools and their participants
Distribution of physical training materials to schools
Orientation of and Q&A with the teacher-chaperons
Video-conferencing dry-run with the remote venues
Opening session to introduce the NXplorers program
Webinar-lecture of the NXthining topics

Hybrid workshop using NXtools

Panel discussion with winners of innovation contests
Closing session for wrap-up activities:

Support and promotion via SocMed and the official website
Sourcing of funding for materials, per diems, and tokens
Distribution of financial assistance to participating schools
Serving as pro bono teacher-facilitator
Responsible use of equipment in the broadcast room
Seamless queueing of speakers

D-|O) OOS

DPIDS|>|>) [Ol

D/D|>|>|>|>

DOQOQ|O\|OlO|}S|}H|D)/—|P| DD) |Q|O|e

|) |2}7)7)

>\_lslalsl_lsls[5[-[-|2

—|-|>|-|-|-|o]o]o|—||>|-|2

_Directing the program flow vs. time allotment
Contingency scenarios and risk treatment plans

Control of distribution of certificates and tokens
Proofreading presentation slides and emcee scripts
Design and validation of evaluation tools

Live elevator pitch and expert critique

Quantitative evaluation of the speakers’ expertise
Individual evaluation of the conduct of the whole event
Validation of evaluations through focus group discussion
Quantitative evaluation of outputs by NXplorers experts
Submission of post-event reports CLA 1

STAKEHOLDERS: 1. Project Managers R — Responsible

Facilitators/Mentors A-— Accountable
Hosts/Committees C —Consulted
PSHS-CVC Offices | — Informed
Shell NXplorers / PSFI
Cauayan City LGU
Participating Schools

2B) O)-|O|O|a\a\-|

BS) NO/O\O|}S|P|O|>

=|9)OIO|—|O|O/O|/-|a

>|—|=|—|-|9|>|0|2)0|-|-

=|AIAIA\A\AIO| |>|>\—

MlA|>|P|>/> 0] 0 O}D|DO|—|Q|9|D]O|—|DO/O)}—| =|) S| —|9|O|H| | | Dl =

Jee
m

2
fe)

IN OOP why

26

6. Results and Analyses

Concerning the Problem Statement and Specific Objectives stated in
Section 2, participants and experts evaluated certain aspects of the
conducted workshop to get an objective basis for the recommendations.
Data were gathered using surveys and a focus group discussion.
Interpretation of the results was through descriptive statistics.

6.1 Analysis of Results for Specific Objective #1

The first specific objective sought to describe the training coverage based
on the number of schools represented in the workshop versus the number
of public and private high schools in Cauayan City. This is a descriptive
statistic presented as a ratio.

Based on the DepEd website, there were 23 high schools in Cauayan City
offering various strands in the senior high school program of the K-12
education system of the Philippines. Of this number, 22 schools were invited
except for Linglingay National High School because of weak Internet
connectivity in the vicinity of the school.

The approved project plan aimed for a training coverage of at least 75%.
Likewise, based on the financial support from LGU Cauayan City, at least
96 participants (24 schools with 1 teacher and 3 learners per school) were
expected to register for the program.

At the end of the training, 18 out of the 23 schools completed the program,
or 78.26% training coverage. Likewise, 106 participants completed the
training (88 students and 18 teachers), 20 heads more than the target count.
This is because the schools decided to onboard more learners despite the
lesser distributed per-person per diem from the city government.

In a post-event Q&A with the NXplorers Lead Facilitator for the Philippines,

she disclosed that this workshop trained more schools in two days than

what they were able to reach from July to November 2022. As a result, they

awarded the following benefits to the 18 new NXplorers senior high schools

in Cauayan City:

1. Certificate of Completion for the teachers and learners and certificate of
participation for the school;

2. Access to the collaboration space and the NXplorers courseware on the
Official global website (NXplorers.com, September 2022);

3. Eligibility to participate in the forthcoming iterations of the NXplorers The
Bright Ideas Challenge.

27

6.2 Analysis of Results for Specific Objective #2

The second measurable objective evaluated the conduct of the workshop
using survey tools and focus group discussion. Two survey forms were
floated to the participants (1) to comply with the process improvement
requirements of the collaborating agencies and (2) to generate the best
questions to ask in the post-event focus group discussion.

The first survey was a quantitative evaluation of the competency of the
speakers. The results were not included in the main text because it was
fielded to comply with the Quality Management System of PSHS-CVC.
However, the results and analyses were included in Annex C.

The second survey was an objective evaluation of the workshop as a whole.
Before the event was closed out, the participants were asked to rate the
totality of the workshop using a secure Google Form. Shell often uses an
online qualitative survey for participants to evaluate the workshop they just
completed. However, in consultation with his faculty-adviser, the researcher
designed a questionnaire with the following sections: (1) Training/Workshop
Content; (2) Potential Impact of Learning; (3) Management of Training/
Workshop; and (4) Evaluation of the Hybrid Workshop Format.

SO#2 was concerned with comparing the hybrid workshop with other
training formats based on the participant responses in a focus group
discussion, highlighting the application of learning and _ iterative
improvement of the training format. While the survey results and its
subsequent analyses were the basis of the post-event FGD questions, the
data and statistics were post scripted to this report instead. The reader is
enjoined to refer to Annex D, Annex E, and Annex F, if necessary.

On 18 October 2022, 19 teachers and students took time to attend a Focus
Group Discussion called by the organizers to validate the results of the post-
activity evaluations. The FGD was moderated by the researcher. After a
short online socialization, the participants were informed that their
responses will be recorded and that the data waiver they signed earlier
covers this activity. They were encouraged to speak up their opinion on
each of the focus questions, preferably on-mic and on-camera.

Nine participants agreed to join and answer the FGD questions. For each
question, they selected from the preset options but not more than the set
maximum for each item. The options were distilled from the gathered
responses from the two surveys. The questions and the results are in the
next pages.

28

6.2.1 Discussions for FGD Item #1

The open-ended question in the second survey elicited the ways the
participants might apply what they learned from the workshop. Their
short responses were coded for similarity and the following themes
were collated:

A. Learning Material
NXplorers is a relevant and purposeful way to enhance the
curriculum. Teachers can use the NXtools as an experiential
template for their students to ideate solutions to a myriad of
problems. Students can use the materials and their experience
as primary references. They can also review the paradigm and
practice using the courseware on the NXplorers global website.

B. Contest Opportunity
The NXtools is a springboard for ideating innovation contest
entries and elevator pitches. The opportunities are not limited to
the NXplorers Challenge because the skills are transferable
regardless of the competition theme, complexity, and duration.

C. Research Focus
With SHS students and teachers as participants, their impetus
was to design capstone projects and action research that
addresses real-world problems. The paradigm and practice allow
deeper consideration of the United Nations SDGs, particularly
with the food, energy, and water nexus.

D. Social Action
NXplorers champions may horizontally scale their project to
benefit the community without asking for anything in return. It can
be their altruistic pursuit to hands-on address the pain points
affecting their beneficiaries and stakeholders.

E. Sharing Forwards
NXthinking is knowledge worth sharing in various ways
regardless of transfer media and audience. It can be an informal
conversational piece or presented as a formal topic by academics

F. Life Solutions
By reflection, NXthinking was used by everyone daily. Informed
decisions are best when after a study of facts and factors to
choose the best action forwards.

29

G. Work Improvement
The NXtools is loosely procedural and yet intentional. Thus,
students regardless of grade, and workers regardless of trade,
can form positive habits for improving their work and workplace.

The categories were listed based on their frequency in the coded
data. Because the responses were not grouped by demographics,
no further statistical test was conducted. However, the exact order of
categories was then fielded as options for the first FGD question:
“Within the next six months, in what ways will you use what you’ve
learned in the NXplorers training? (Choose 4)". The following
screenshot of the Slido poll was the summary of their responses:

Figure 6.1
Summary of Responses for FGD Item #1

Within the next six months, in what ways will you use what you've learned in the
NXplorers training? (Choose 4)

60

40

40

20

60'

Based on these results, participants from Villa Concepcion High
School — Baculud Extension recognize the power of the NXthinking
paradigm in proposing sustainability-aligned investigatory projects.
Teachers agree that it can benefit their action research, too. Mr.

30

Joseph Eco, the research coordinator of the Villa Concepcion
National High School shared that the training made him reframe the
problem statement of his research proposal for a scientific poster
presentation for teachers. Ms. Maricel Yadao of Saint Claire College
appreciated the quality of the program as a learning material for
learning social research methods (FGD, October 2022).

6.2.2 Discussions for FGD Item #2

The third quantitative item in the post-event survey asked the
participants to compare and contrast the hybrid workshop against the
two extremes of in-person and virtual training formats. To verify their
awareness of the other training formats for team-based learning and
to determine their willingness to attend training in such formats, this
question was asked next to the FGD participants: "Which are your
preferred modes of learning NXthinking while using the NXtools?
(Choose 4)". The following screenshot of the Slido poll results was
the summary of their responses:

Figure 6.2
Summary of Responses for FGD Item #2

Which are your preferred mode of learning NXthinking while using the NXtools?
(Choose 4)

89

67

22%

22

31

While Mr. Jerome Suigitan of Isabela Colleges agreed that FGDs are
an ideal training format, he was worried that their response might
also have been influenced by their democratic experience in the
current session. As for the students, Ms. Raki Santos of UPHS —
Isabela Campus mentioned that some students do not have stable
connectivity and that might be a reason why they haven't attended
training that uses some of the formats yet. (FGD, October 2022).

This two-strike dilemma prompted participants — with exposure to at
least five of the seven training formats — to review the results of the
poll for this FGD question by collaboratively editing values in an ad-
hoc Google Sheet. After 28 November 2022, they completed a
custom scorecard of the various training formats, taking into
consideration enhancing factors such as (1) audience scalability, (2)
experiential learning, and (3) knowledge retention; and negative
indicators such as (4) logistics complexity, (5) technical vulnerability,
and (6) cost of implementation. The absolute value of each score is
the collective rating of the volunteers about the relative extent of each
factor to the effectiveness of the training format under consideration.

Table 6.1
Custom Scorecard of the Training Formats
1 2 3 4 5 6 Score
A 3 1 1 -1 -3 -1 0
B 2 2 2 -3 -2 -3 -2
Cc 2 2 2 -2 -2 -2 0
D 2 2 3 -2 -2 -2 1
E 1 3 3 -1 -1 -1 4
F 2 2 2 -1 -2 -2 1
G 2 1 1 -2 -2 -1 -1
TRAINING FORMATS: CRITERIA:
A. Full Virtual Training 1. Audience Scalability
B. Large Group In-person 2. Experiential Learning
C. Hybrid Workshop 3. Knowledge Retention
D. Focus Group Discussion 4. Logistics complexity
E. Small Group Coaching 5. Technical Vulnerability
F. Courseware 6. Cost of Implementation
G. Self-Study

32

Comparing the scorecard with the previous poll results, the small
group coaching format rose through the ranking by having the
relatively lowest score on the aggravating factors. This was followed
by a tie of FGDs and courseware. In a follow-up call with the
presumptive leader of the volunteers, Mr. Jorich Primero of Centro
De Cultura clarified that for online courses to be effective, the
platform must have a pool of experts or a community of peers that
can provide on-demand mentoring time or certification. At the middle
of the spectrum are hybrid workshops and full virtual training. Mr.
Primero opined that this was because both formats were vulnerable
to almost the same technical difficulties (Primero, December 2022).

6.2.3 Discussions for FGD Item #3

To form a feedback loop for improvement, the FGD participants were
asked to reflect on their observations and experience with the hybrid
workshop format used to train them with the NXthinking paradigm
and practice. At that instance, the FGD participants were asked: "/n
what aspects should the NXplorers hybrid workshop improve to be
as effective as the other modes? (Choose 4)". This item is an
adaptive follow-up to the quantitative and qualitative responses of
the participants in the post-activity evaluation.

Mr. Nifio Basubas from San Antonio National High School and Ms.
Lian Ines from the Metropolitan Bible Baptist School discussed back
and forth selected difficulties in the conduct of the hybrid workshop
before prioritizing them using a Slido poll (FGD, October 2022).

These were the categories of issues considered, collated from the

results of earlier surveys:

1. More interactivity to get higher audience engagement

2. Stable connection (client side) to ensure technical availability at
the remote venues

3. Longer workshop time to prepare outputs for presentation

4. Longer lecture time for more depth of presentation/discussion

5. Stable connection (host-side) to ensure technical availability at
the broadcast center

6. Assured critique time to give all teams equal time with experts

7. More workshop days to pace discussion and breaks well

8. Social factor to be able to be with other participants (in-person)
or being able to interact via breakout rooms (virtual)

9. Fair chance to present to give all teams equal time to demo

10. Time-based dry-run to ensure smooth flow of the program

33

The participants prioritized the issues as shown in the next figure.

Figure 6.3
Summary of Responses for FGD Item #3

In what aspects should the Nxplorers hybrid workshop improve to be as effective as
the other modes? (Choose 4)

44

56

44

67

44

33

6.3 Analysis of Results for Specific Objective #3

Based on the results and discussion for SO#2, there was a consensus that
implementation issues affect the effectiveness of the hybrid workshop to
deliver NXthinking knowledge and skills. However, because there were no
Shell-approved studies conducted as of yet on the effectivity of transferring
NXthinking knowledge using any of the formats, the researcher accepted
the objective evaluation of the participants’ outputs by NXplorers experts as
an indicator of actual practice and retention of knowledge gained through
the hybrid workshop.

34

The data were gathered from the experts using an approach that assured
the integrity of the results. The double-blind survey format ensured that
neither the researcher nor the enumerator may influence the response of
the evaluators. This survey method was implemented as follows:

1. The researcher anonymized the outputs of the 18 schools and placed
them in a structured Google Drive folder.

2. Mr. Edan Viel Aguada, the team leader for evaluations, was instructed
(see Annex G) to invite nine NXplorer experts to evaluate the outputs.

3. The outputs were equitably distributed to the nine NXperts such that
each expert will rate three of the 18 output sets.

4. The evaluation form used was presented in Annex H. The tool includes
the link to the Google Drive folder and explicitly states the output set to
be evaluated.

5. Mr. Aguada did not know which outputs are from which schools; the
researcher never knew who were the evaluators; and the NXperts
themselves are not aware of the identity of the other respondents.

6. Inthe end, each output received evaluations from exactly three NXperts.

To further data privacy and expediency, Mr. Aguada translated the printed
form into a secure Google Form, as shown below, and embedded the same
in emails to the invited NXperts. As to their credentials, Mr. Aguada declared
that three were NXplorers facilitators from different countries, two were
PSHS-CVC teachers who did not serve as speakers in the workshop, two
were employees of research organizations who were themselves NXplorers
alumni, and the last two were members of past TBIC winning teams.

Figure 6.4
NXpert Evaluation Google Form

35

The NXperts evaluated the outputs in three dimensions: (1) Content Quality,
(2) Technical Fidelity, and (3) Idea Continuity. For each criterion, each
NXtool output was rated based on a 4-point Likert Scale (1 — Poor, 2 —
Average, 3 — Satisfactory, 4 — Excellent). The raw data are in Annex | and
the results are discussed in the specific subsections on the next pages.

6.3.1 NXpert Evaluation Results on Content Quality

First, nine NXperts evaluated if the participants were able to present
their ideas completely and clearly by using the NXtools. Means of the
scores for each NXtool output were taken, and then a Mean of Means
Test was implemented using built-in functions from Google Sheets
and compared to a 4-point Likert Scale. The results are as follows:

Table 6.2
NXpert Evaluation Results on Content Quality
NXtool Output Mean
Perspectives Circle ta kat _ 3.2778
Connections Circle 2.9074
| Scenario Planning Quadrant 3.2037
| Feasibility Funnel __ | 2.8889
| Ripple Effect Tool 3.0741
Persuasion Pyramid | 2.7407
Likert Scale for Interpretation.
3.50 to 4.00 — Excellent MeanichMesns 3.0154
2.75 to 3.49 — Satisfactory Standard Deviation 1.0234
2.00 to 2.74 — Average z
1.00 to 1.99 — Poor Interpretation Satisfactory

While the overall results were satisfactory, the substandard score on
the Persuasion Pyramid outputs was because some teams did not
submit the paper output after they did the viva presentation. Their
elevator pitches used the said NXtool as a script and were video-
recorded. However, sending the recordings to the NXperts will fail
the double-blind format because anonymity will be compromised.

The critique of the teacher-facilitators of their outputs, after each
elevator pitch, was that their outputs were of the level of quality
observed from first-time users of the NXtools. That is, points for
improvement are expected. The video recording of their elevator
pitches is at https://bit.ly/NXcyn-day2.

36

6.3.2 NXpert Evaluation Results on Technical Fidelity

Second, the invited NXperts checked if the graduates followed the
tules of using the graphical NXtools. Means of the scores for each
NXtool output were taken, and then a Mean of Means Test was
calculated using built-in statistical tools from Google Sheets and
interpreted according to the stated Likert Scale. The next table
presents the results:

Table 6.2
NXpert Evaluation Results on Technical Fidelity
NXtool Output Mean
Perspectives Circle el PRE
| Connections Circle - _ | 3.0556
Scenario Planning Quadrant 3.2963
Feasibility Funnel 3.0741
Ripple EffectTooh 3.2407
| Persuasion Pyramid _ ‘ a 2.8148
| Likert Scale for Interpretation: Mean of Means 3.1235

3.50 to 4.00 — Excellent
2.75 to 3.49 — Satisfactory Standard Deviation 1.0079

2.00 to 2.74 — Average ei é
1.00 to 1.99 — Poor 8 Interpretation Satisfactory

Overall, the participants were found compliant with the norms of
using the NXtools. These rules include (1) the direction of arrows to
show cause-and-effect relationships in the Connections Circle, (2)
the plus or minus labels to denote the acceptability of scenarios in
the Planning Quadrant and Ripple Effect Tool, (3) synching content
and speech time with the Persuasion Pyramid, etc.

These observations were highlighted by the teacher-facilitators when
they critiqued the participants’ outputs midway through the program.
The video recording can be accessed at https://NXcyn-day1.

6.3.3 NXpert Evaluation Results on Idea Continuity

Finally, the NXperts objectively rated the logical flow of the ideation
and polishing of their solution starting with the Explore NXtools up to
the Ripple Effect Diagram. The mean scores given for each output
set were found using Google Sheet statistical functions and then
compared against a 4-point Likert Interpretation Scale. Refer to the
table on the next page for the results of this criterion:

37

Table 6.2
NXpert Evaluation Results on Idea Continuity

Likert Scale for Interpretation: Mean 20
3.50 to 4.00 — Excellent 3.0556
2.75 to 3.49 — Satisfactory Standard Deviation 0.8777

2.00 to 2.74 — Average c z
| 1.00 to 1.99 — Poor Interpretation Satisfactory

These results suggest that the participants were able to hold on to
the goals of their project statement and ideated a feasible solution
towards achieving a desired future when they went from using the

NXtools in the logical order.

38

7. Conclusions and Recommendations

Based on the results of the NXpert evaluations and FGD scorecard, it can
be argued that the participants were able to learn NXthinking and practice
the same to ideating solutions for real-life problems using NXtools using a
hybrid workshop training format as the mode of transfer of learning. There
is room for improvement in the interactivity and choreography of the
workshop, and this was well noted by the organizers for the future iteration
of the workshop. The results were likewise acknowledged by the copyright
owner and, at their discretion, use the results to improve the content and
training materials used in in-person, virtual, and self-paced formats.

The “Satisfactory” outputs of the participants are as good as can be
expected from the maiden outputs of anyone who hears a concept, learns
a new skill, or uses new tools. The NXthinking paradigm is a particularly
demanding practice because practitioners are expected to think of ideas
that work and solutions that address societal pain points without adding
palliatives or unintended negative consequences.

In the Q&A meeting with the Shell representative in parallel with the FDG
on 28 October 2022, they recognized that six of the 18 outputs are already
pre-qualified for participation in the next NXplorers TBIC, the showcase
competition for ideas generated in the NXplorers workshops across the
country (FGD, October 2022), but there are still forms and waivers to submit
to comply with the data privacy and intellectual property regulations.

Shell recommended that the participants continue practicing NXthinking in
research, as this was the primary and long-term goal of the program. Dy
(2022) highlighted that NXthinking skills are not single-purpose knowledge
but a future-proof skill that can serve them well for their whole life. However,
retention and continued practice of learning, while ideal for future follow-up,
is beyond the scope of this research. For this reason, the researcher
recommends that:

1. Shell may conduct parallel workshops of different formats, gather
quantitative evaluations from the participants, and compare the results
using t-test statistical approaches;

2. The organizers to conduct a full in-person refresher for one-half of the
hybrid workshop graduates, and full virtual training for the other; and
compare the quality of their work in this cycle with the quality of their
work in the hybrid workshop to see if there was an improvement; and

3. To train teacher-chaperons first so that they can guide their students
well in each remotely-connected school in the next online workshops.

39

Bibliography

Banks, G., Scheyvens, R., & Leonard, S. (November 2020). Implementing
an interdisciplinary Masters of the SDGs. Retrieved from https://ic-
sd.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/1 1/Samantha-Leonard.pdf

Barcelona Field Studies Centre. (September 2022). Radar Chart Creator.
Retrieved from https://geographyfieldwork.com.

Chatzinikolaou, D., & Vlados, C. (May 2019). University-industry-
Government Linkages and the Helix Theory on the Fourth Industrial
Revolution. Semantic Scholar.

Department of Education. (March 2005). Department Order 9, Series of
2005: Instituting measures to increase engaged time-on-task and
ensuring compliance therewith. Retrieved from
https:/Avww.deped.gov.ph/2005/03/02/do-9-s-2005-instituting-
measures-to-increase-engaged-time-on-task-and-ensuring-
compliance-therewith/

Department of Education. (May 2018). List of Senior High Schools.
Retrieved from _https:/Avww.deped.gov.ph/k-to-12/senior-high-
school/list-of-senior-high-schools/

Department of Education. (October 2020). Memorandum OUCI-2020-307.
Retrieved from Suggested measures to foster academic ease during
the COVID-19 pandemic: https:/Awww.deped.gov.ph/wp-
content/uploads/2020/1 1/OUCI-2020-307_ACADEMIC-EASE-
DURING-COVID-19-final-version-01Nov2020.pdf

Dy, M. (September 2022). In-person meeting transcript.

FGD. (October 2022). Video Recording of Focus Group Interview dated 28
October 2022. (J. Balgua, Interviewer) Retrieved from
https://bit.ly/NXcyn-fgd

Forsyth, D. (2019). Group Dynamics, 7Ed. Cengage.

Gertner, J. (2013). The Idea Factory: Bell Labs and the Great Age of
American Innovation. Penguin Press.

40

Gobi Partners and Core Capital. (November 2022). State of Talent in Tech:
Philippines 2022.

Google EDU. (December 2022). Trend Forecast Report 2022, Future of
Education, Part 1: Preparing for a new future.

Gore, E. (January 2022). Different Types of Training Methods. Retrieved
from Learning Lab: https://elmlearning.com/blog/training-methods/

Hirschmann, R. (November 2021). Number of secondary schools in
Singapore from 1960 to 2021. Retrieved from  Statista:
https://www-statista.com/statistics/865463/singapore-number-of-
secondary-schools/

HundrED. (April 2022). Reap Benefit. Retrieved from
https://nundred.org/en/innovations/reap-benefit

LoopMe Philippines. (December 2019). NXplorers: TBIC 2019 Awards 10
Schools for Innovative Problem-Solving. Retrieved from LoopMe.PH:
https://www.loopme.ph/looptalk/nxplorers-tbic-20 19-awards-10-
schools-for-innovative-problem-solving

McGrath, J. (1964). Social Psychology: A Brief Introduction. Holt, Rinehart
& Winston.

Morris, L. (October 2022). Understanding Responsibility Assignment Matrix
(RACI Matrix). Retrieved from https://project-
management.com/understanding-responsibility-assignment-matrix-
raci-matrix/

NXplorers.com. (August 2022). NXplorers Facilitator Resources (Approved
access required). Retrieved from https://nxplorers.com/en/facilitator-
resources

NXplorers.com. (July 2022). NXthinking Toolkit (Partial public access
allowed). Retrieved from https://nxplorers.com/en/nxthinking

NXplorers.com. (June 2022). NXplorers Programme (Main Page, Public
Access). Retrieved from https://nxplorers.com/en/about

NXplorers.com. (September 2022). NXplorers Classroom (Alumni access
required). Retrieved from https://classroom.nxplorers.com/dash

41

O*Net. (June 2022). O*Net Content Model. Retrieved from O*Net Resource
Center.

Pique, J., Berbegal-Mirabent, J., & Etzkowitz, H. (December 2018). Triple
Helix and the evolution of ecosystems of innovation: the case of
Silicon Valley. Springer Open Access.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1186/a40604-018-0060x

Primero, J. (December 2022). Recording of phone call with Mr. Joseph
Primero. (J. Balgua, Interviewer)

Project Management Institute. (2021). A Guide to the Project Management
Body of Knowledge (PMBOK® Guide), 7th Ed.

Quinn, J., McEachen, J., Fullan, M., Gardner, M., & Drummy, M. (2020).
Dive into Deep Learning: Tools for Engagement. Corwin/SAGE.

RiConfigure. (May 2021). Quadruple Helix Collaborations in Practice:
Stakeholder Interaction, Responsibility and Governance. European
Commission.

Sankar, S. (July 2011). Lean Six Sigma. (A. Coskun, Ed.) Lean Six Sigma:
Projects and Personal Experiences.

Shell Global Solutions. (2019). NXthinking Poster. Retrieved from
https://nxplorers.com/uploads/docs/Shell_NXthinking_A3_Poster.pd
f

Shell Global Solutions. (2020). Facilitator Resources. Retrieved from
https://nxplorers.com/en/facilitator-resources

Shell Global Solutions. (2021). NXplorers Brochure. Retrieved from
https://nxplorers.com/uploads/docs/Shell_NXplorers_Brochure_202
1.pdf

Shell Global Solutions. (December 2020). 2020 NXplorers Recognition
Awards. Retrieved from https://nxplorers.com/en/events/2020-
global-recognition-awards

Shell Philippines. (November 2021). Shell NXplorers The Bright Ideas
Challenge: STEM student teams solve global challenges. Retrieved
from https:/Avww.shell.com.ph/media/media-releases/2021-media-
releases/shell-nxplorers-the-bright-ideas-challenge-stem-student-
teams.html

42

Talreja, V. (July 2019). World Youth Skills Day: ... the Critical Role of Life
Skills ... Retrieved from https://vishaltalreja.com/

Teresa, C. (November 2020). Meeting video recording via Butter App.
Retrieved from https:/bit.ly/outter-cheska

Web Solutions LLC. (2022). Qatar: Secondary Education. Retrieved from
https://education.stateuniversity.com/pages/1246/Qatar-
SECONDARY-EDUCATION. html

World Economic Forum. (October 2020). The Future of Jobs Report 2020.

43

Annex A
Project Initiation Sign-Off Page

—_————

Active Transfer of NXthinking Knowledge
to High School Research Practice Using a
Hybrid Workshop Format

Name Project Role Signature Date
ee f
enshiam Project Manager (PM). 1G SEPTEMBER
BALGUA Graduate Faculty 2022
Angel Nicole Project Manager (PM), 14 SEPTEMBER
INIEGO (SCALE Student 2022
Garry Stakeholder n~ fd.
GALUTERA (LGU Cauayan City) 202:
Beverly Precious Stakeholder 46 SEPTEMBER,
BERBERABE (Shell) 2022
Erick John Stakeholder fb SEPTEMBER
MARMOL (PSHS-CVC) 2022


‘suodas juano-ysod jo uorssuQns,

"
ssyadxo s10,0%dN a sindino jo uonenrens aAneVIUEND
varssnosip dnos6 sn29j yBno.g suonenyens jo vonepaen |
1

wana ojOYN 01g Jo YINPUOD Ot JO VONENVEAD FENPIAIPUI y_

‘suay0} pue saje2yru2e Jo vonnquisip Jo jonLOD,
‘sued yuounean x81 pue soueuoos Kue6unu0D

aoe an ss nog une ou cen] 2

‘ssayeods jo Buronanb ssoqweos, s

\woo1 ysepeoig oun Us wauidinbs jo osn oxgisuodsoR| y

sore 128}-104280} OU09 Ord se Buri

‘sjo0yos Bunedoned oj sourysrsse jeroueuy jo uonnainsiG,

‘su940) pue ‘swap 104 ‘sjeyayew 10; Burpuny jo Buminos

‘aysqam eyo pue peyyo0s e1A UOROWOId pue Hoddns
‘soqianoe dn-deum 10) uorssas BusoID WN

Annex B

‘sisa1u00 uonenoUUI Jo S12UUM YAMA UOISSNOSIP ued
‘S]001KN Bursn doysyom pugky 4

soo BaUUXN 9100 MD TEURONA, 9

uuseiGord ssoxordxN oun eonponu oh uoreeas Buuedo)| 3
‘sonuan sjowes O19 Lam Uni-Aip BuIaUase;UODORPIA 3

Gantt Chart of Activities

suoiedeyo-r042¢0) O47 LIMA WO PUB JO LORETUBO,

‘iooyos 01 srevorew Buuren reaysAyd Jo uoNNGIIS:O 4

‘Sueded sag pue sjooyrs jo uoneasiboy O

‘sdoysyoM pue ounjso) oun jo un-KiG

45

Legend: |) Planned Actual

soninnse Bunsou oun uo un-kig, ¥

¥
srevotew Buuren jo uonesedoid) y

‘Syuuod pue sueyd jo renoxdde 104 Bursier) ¢

sioGevew ypoford ou) fa Buuuerd old y

somewuasordes sapjouaxers wim s6unoaw ior

‘AUALOW


Annex C
Evaluation of the Facilitators

For each of the eight learning sessions, the participants evaluated both the
topic and the speakers using a survey tool deployed as a secure Google
Form. Ratings range with a 4-point Likert scale based on their agreement
to statements that pertain to the topic delivery and then with the facilitator
competency. If there were two or more speakers for that topic, they were
evaluated collectively. A screenshot of the Google Form follows:

Evaluation of Workshop Facilitator

NXplocers Hybrid Workshop for Cauayan Cty SHS
21-22 October 2022 via Zoom hips: y/Keyn

Connections Circle (21 Oct 2022, 10:15 - 11:15 AM)
'BRYLE C. EUSEBIO and CHRISTINE V. ORDINARIO.

The form was adapted from a standardized tool used by the Philippine Civil
Service and deployed as a client evaluation tool for the human resources
management office of PSHS-CVC. The ideal statistical treatment for this
metric is a Mean of Means Test. The analyses of the results were not
presented in this study as explained in Section 6.2. All the anonymized
responses can be retrieved from https://bit.ly/NXcyn-eval-data and the
dashboard summary of responses at https://bit.ly/NXcyn-eval-dash. A
screenshot of one set of results was presented on the next page.

46

Questions Responses @ Settings

Topic: NXthinking the Problem Statement (21 Oct 2022, 8:30-9:30 AM)
Speaker: JENSHIAM E. BALGUA and MONALEIZL DY

Topic/Subject Matter Attributes

4
MM Strongly Disagree MM Disagree NN Agree MINH Strongly Agree

The topic was discussed with depth fit The topic has enough scopelcoverage The topic was relevant/appropriate to the
for the audience for one sitting event objectives.

Resource Person a

BBE Strongly Disagree MM Disagree BN Agree MN Strongly Agree

ddd dd

Demonstrated Maintained comfortable Balanced the theories) Presented current Held my interest in the
command of subject pace and ting principles with trends/developments topic
matter applications related to the topic

Over-all, can you consider the resource person effective? Why or why not?

45 responses
Yes. He really guided us to build reliable and attainable solutions for a specific problem

Yes, because the speaker speaks with confidence and delivers his presentation well defined and clear.

The results may improve human resources at PSHS-CVC as they can be
used to assess teacher competency to facilitate NXplorers workshops or
similar training in the future. Based on the human resources quality manual,
found weaknesses are provided with interventions such as reskilling,
upskilling, or peer mentoring.

47

Annex D
Evaluation of the Training Content

Using a 5-point Likert scale (1 — Strongly Disagree, 2 — Disagree, 3 —
Neutral, 4 — Agree, 5 — Strongly Agree), participants expressed their
agreement to five evaluate statements about the training content and
manner of delivery.

The mean of means of evaluation for each of the statements informed the
quality of the workshop content and its delivery. Statistics were performed
using the functions available in Google Sheets and then interpreted using a
4-point Likert Scale of quality. The results are as follows:

Evaluative Statement Mean
The training/workshop objectives were clearly stated. 4.4318
The information was clear and well-organized. 4.4318
Examples/exercises reinforced training/workshop objectives. 4.3750
Audio/visuals reinforced program content. 4.3409
The content was relevant to my needs/functions. 4.4773
Likert Scale for Interpretation:

3.50 to 4.00 — Excellent Meanioh Means 4.4114

2.75 to 3.49 — Satisfactory Standard Deviation 0.0535

2.00 to 2.74 — Average a

1.00 to 1.99 — Poor Interpretation Satisfactory

Based on these results, the participants rated the training content as
satisfactory in meeting their expectations. For transparency, the raw data
can be retrieved from https://bit.ly/NXcyn-eval-data and the dashboard
summary of responses at https://bit.ly/NXcyn-eval-dash. Alternatively, the
next figure visualizes the summary of the evaluation in a chart format.

A. Training/Workshop/Activity Content

60 GEE Strongly Disagree HMI Disagree MEN Neutral MMM Agree MMI Strongly Agree

i |

The trainingiworkshop Information was clear and Examplesiexercises __AudiovVisuals reinforced Content was relevant to
objectives were clearly well organized reinforced training/ program content my needs/functions.
stated workshop objectives

48

Annex E
Evaluation of the Management of the Training

Using a 5-point Likert scale (1 — Very Dissatisfied, 2 — Dissatisfied, 3 —
Neutral, 4 — Satisfied, 5 —- Very Satisfied), participants expressed their level
of satisfaction with five critical aspects of the management of the training.

The mean of means of evaluation for each of the statements informed the
sentiment of the participants on the training management. Statistics were
performed using the functions available in Google Sheets and then
interpreted using a 4-point Likert Scale of quality. The results are as follows:

Critical Factors Mean
Length of the program 4.3864
Schedule of activities 4.3864
Venue (at your school) 4.6705
Technical support 4.5114
Mentor support 4.6818
Likert Scale for Interpretation:

3.50 to 4.00 — Excellent MeahlouMeans 4.5272

2.75 to 3.49 — Satisfactory Standard Deviation 0.1452

2.00 to 2.74 — Average z 7

1.00 to 1.99 — Poor Interpretation Satisfactory

Based on these results, the participants collectively rate the management
of the event as excellent. However, the lower scores in training duration and
scheduling can be attributed to technical difficulties. For transparency, the
raw data can be retrieved from https://bit.ly/NXcyn-eval-data and the
dashboard summary of responses at https://bit.ly/NXcyn-eval-dash.
Alternatively, the next figure visualizes the summary of the evaluation in a
chart.

C. Management of Training/Workshop/Activity

WE Very Dissatisfied MI Dissatisfied IN| Neural MM Satisfied NI Very Satisfied

daildd

Length of the program Schedule of activities Venue (at your school) Technical support Mentor support

49

Annex F
Evaluation of Hybrid Workshop

Using a 5-point Likert scale (1 — Strongly Disagree, 2 — Disagree, 3 —
Neutral, 4 — Agree, 5 — Strongly Agree), participants expressed their
agreement to five evaluate statements regarding and interactivity of a hybrid
workshop versus the two extremes of in-person and virtual training.

The mean means of evaluation for each of the statements informed on the
potential of hybrid workshops as a substitute for the said training formats.
Statistics were performed inside Google Sheets and then interpreted
against a 4-point Likert Scale. The results are as follows:

Evaluative Statement (*The hybrid format) Mean
*... may substitute an in-person training. 4.4091
may substitute a full virtual training. 4.3409
has the same interactivity as that of in-person training. 4.2273
... has the same interactivity as that of full virtual training. 4.2955
[Twill likely attend a hybrid workshop/training in the future. 4.4432
Likert Scale for Interpretation: M fM
3.50 to 4.00 — Strongly Agree salle Ls 4.3432
2.75 to 3.49 — Slightly Agree Standard Deviation 0.0867
2.00 to 2.74 — Slightly Disagree e
1.00 to 1.99 - Strongly Disagree Interpretation Slightly Agree

Based on these results, the participants slightly agree that the hybrid
workshop may substitute the two formats. However, the low scores on the
interactivity criteria are points for improvement. For transparency, the raw
data can be retrieved from https://bit.ly/NXcyn-eval-data and the dashboard
summary of responses at https://bit.ly/NXcyn-eval-dash. Alternatively, the
next figure visualizes the summary of the evaluation in a chart format.

D. Evaluation of the Hybrid Format

IM Strongly Disagree HI Disagree INI Neutral MMM Agree MI Strongly Agree

ddd

“The hybrid format may ‘The hybrid format may ‘The hybrid formathas the _ The hybrid format has the | will ikely attend a hybrid |
substitute a full in-person substitute a full virtual same interactivity as a full same interactivity as a full workshopiraining, if given
training training In-person training virtual training the chance,

50

Annex G
Instructions to Data Gatherer

Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

PHILIPPINE SCIENCE HIGH SCHOOL
CAGAYAN VALLEY CAMPUS

2 November 2022

EDAN VIEL C. AGUADA
Team Leader on Evaluations
SCALE Program

This School

Re NXplorers Hybrid Workshop for Cauayan City Senior High Schools
EXPERT EVALUATION (Double Blind Rating of Participant Outputs)

ar Team Leader

As we have discussed in earlier meetings, you are tasked to seek nine NXplorers
Experts (facilitators or winners who are not organizers of the Workshop itself) and ask
each one to rate six of the outputs of the eighteen participant-schools.

So that neither you nor me may influence the experts, the evaluations will use a
double-blind format, ie. l anonymized the outputs and only you who must know who the
expert-evaluators were (while the survey is on-going) based on this matrix:

zi{eiujs

2] 03 [ov] os | 06 | ov [oa [9] x

E - Evaluator, S ~ School
ah evaluation form a. er replication) is attached herein and the outputs are
here: ive oin/sinive/folders/1Vc9CO1NtmG)-Ds3hzraelUSqxemf 2SIN.

You may field an online version of the tool but I must not have access to it.

When the evaluations are complete, 1 will ask for the average numbers of each

imetric and the list of expert-respondents. We expect results on or before 16 November
022. Thank you.

Best regards,
)
al

JENSHTAM B.BALGUA Received:
Project Manager (Paculty)

EL C. AGUADA
Date: 1) #3 /202~

Prprine Science High School - Cagayan Vasey Campus
‘egy Masoc, Bayobong, Nueva Vizcaya, 3700

ror eve pate. edu ph

520-243-5158

975-987-0090

51

Annex H
Expert Evaluation Tool

NXplorers Hybrid Workshop for Cauayan City Senior High Schools
EXPERT EVALUATION (Double Blind Rating of Participant Outputs)

Dear NXplorers Expert,

Thank you for taking time to evaluate the outputs of our Workshop completers.
Because this is a double-blind evaluation, we hope this encourage you to be objective on
giving your quantitative assessment of the completed NXtools based on the criteria.

You shall be assigned by Mr. Edan Viel C. Aguada, the Evaluation Team Leader,
six out of the eighteen output sets to evaluate. Please access the outputs assigned to you
at: https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1Vc9CO1NtmG]-Ds3bzraeUSqxemf 2SIN.

For each of the criteria below, place a check mark on the column of your rating.

NXtools Output Set
to evaluate using this form:

1. Evaluate the following completed NXtools based on CONTENT QUALITY, i.e., how
the team were able to surface their ideas completely and legibly using the NXtools:

Poor Average _| Satisfactory | Excellent
Connections Circle
Perspectives Circle
Scenario Planning Quadrant
Feasibility Funnel le

Persuasion Pyramid
Ripple Effect Tool

2. Rate the following completed NXtools based on TECHNICAL FIDELITY, i.e., how they
properly used the graphical tools of each of the NXtools to structure their ideas:
Poor Average _| Satisfactory| Excellent

Connections Circle
Perspectives Circle
Scenario Planning Quadrant
Feasibility Funnel
Persuasion Pyramid

Ripple Effect Tool

3. Finally, evaluate the CONTINUITY of their ideas from Connections, Perspectives,
Scenario Quadrant, Feasibility Funnel, Persuasion Pyramid, and up to Ripple Effect.
Poor Average _| Satisfactory| Excellent _|

Continuity of Ideas

Name of Evaluator Signature of Evaluator Date of Evaluation

52

Annex |
Summary of Expert Evaluation

lev 6s zz zeouese4

hy erst zzozeus

jr ozs zzozezs

hi ses zzozezn

roves zzozazss

Jezen vs zoe

[zs 90 v1 zeoesweiit

jes ze zu zeozezn

lezezz zzozezns

lss'sz2 zzozezn

jozioz 2 zzozmzit

lev ene zeozezis

feo ws « zeozeziun
lec u4 2 zeozeziis

onuavoo| teo1

AurTaaia|
JWOINHOSL|_WOINHO3L

53

Summary of Expert Evaluation
(Continued)

6200 vezoe luonaeg puepuns use wey

sere wstoe sun0y 10 ureR wet

jesog'0§=—jotzz0 | vogg'0 | Iys0z'0 7 jzeve'o = |zvoso «= fezeeo «= fezeot © fstez'0 © uonevec piepuns werrang

dovze = |uvcore—egeze 1 leesze rm bocore = eaeez = |zeoze = [vzosz

sv 9001 zzazrezs
Js s0.0 zzozreet
lszese zzazazs
iz ise zeazert
lzerezzozmre
es eve zzozares

y
fe

y
g

le

ry
le
y
‘

G
q

le
‘

G
fe
fe
fe
le
fe
y
le
le
fe
fe

aunaaii] _ AuTaaid Aunaais
JWwoINHOaL | TWOINHOAL) WOINHOIL|_WOINHOSL| 41N31N09|

54

; Annex J
Linkage Communique During Planning and Preparation

September 16, 2022

Cauayan City,

RE: NXplorers Workshop for High School Research Students

THRU: HON. GARRY G. GALUTERA
Chairperson, Committee on Education
Sangguniang Panlunsod ng Cauayan

Sir:

Respectfully requesting your collaboration on the aforementioned project of our
faculty and scholors.

Xplorers is an educational program of the Pilipinas Shell that trains high school
students to be pesitive change actors for problems involving food, water, and energy
sustainability. At-ched herewith is a reprint of the Shell Brochure for the programme.

Our teachers are certified facilitators of the programme and our students - some
of them residents of Cauayan City - have been winners in innovation contests thanks to
their NXplorers training.

‘We intend 1» conduct the workshop ina hybrid online-offline format on October
14 and 21, 2022, for all public and private secondary schools in Cauayan City. Details of
the collaboration ~r- presented in the attached Project Plan.

Participe >ts will be constrained to ideate for solutions that will benefit Cauayan
City and furthe- «‘ilify ‘ts position as the most innovative city in the North.

If you fin# our proposal acceptable, please designate the office of Hon. Galutera
forsean ‘ess. ~ ¢ asi + of the activity. For concerns, please contact Mr. JENSHIAM E.
BALGUA, mole 2 sir bee 99175665501, email jebalgua@cvc.pshs.edu.ph.

Thank you.

Respectfully you +,
OS

Wea |

ERICK } H. MARMOL
CampuyPirector

Letter of intent for collaboration with LGU Cauayan City
signed by Mayor Ceasar S. Dy Jr. on 28 September 2022

55

Linkage Communique During Planning and Preparation
(Continued)

Participating Schools:
 Cauayan City Stand-Alone SHS
Gappal NHS
West Tabacal Region NHS
San Antonio NHS
Sillawit NHS
Pinoma NHS
Villa Concepcion NHS
Cauayan NHS - Marabulig Ext
Villa Concepcion HS - Baculod Ext.
Villa Concepcion HS - Rogus Ext.

Centro de Cultura Inc.

University of Perpetual Help
Children of Lourdes Academy

Our Lady of Pillar College

Nansing Schoo!

Merry Sunshine Montessori School
Top Achievers Private School
Isabela Colleges

Starland International School
Saint Claire College

Linglingay NHS
Cauayan Cily S&T High School

Metropolitan Bible Baptist LC
STI College

Funding by LGU Cauayan City
© Scenario 1 ~ 24 public and private SHS x (5 students + 1 teacher)

Qty. Items Unit Cost | Amount

144 | Per Diem (h jeals & Incidental Expense of Participants) PHP 500 | PHP 72,000
24 | Intemet Load (for meetings, dry-run, & workshop days) 500 12,000
3 | Fuel/ Vehicle Rerial (for distribution runs to the schools) 2,000 ; 6,000

Total = PHP 90,000
© Scenario 2 ~ 24 public and private SHS x (3 students + 1 teacher)

ary. a Items Unit Cost | Amount
96 | Per Diem (Meals & Incidental Expense of Participants) | PHP 500 | PHP 48,009
24 | Intemet load (for meetings, dry-run, & workshop days) 500 42,000 |
3 | Fuci/Vehicia Rentel (for distribution runs to the schools) 2,000 |_--—=S 000
Scenario 3 ~ 12 public SHS x (5 students + 1 teacher) +
ty. Items Unit Gost | y
Per Diem (Meals & Incidental Expense of Participants) PHP 500
Internet Load (for mestings, dry-run, & workshop days) 500
Fuel / Vehicle Rental (for distribution runs to the schools) 4,500

Total = PH? 40,500

Funding by PSHS-©VC (Refer to separate PSHS-00-F-DSA-01 Activity Plan)

Approved funding for financial support (per diem of partici

, ants,

internet data load of schools, fuel for logistics runs) earmarked by the
Accounting Office of LGU Cauayan City on 7 October 2022

56

Linkage Communique During Planning and Preparation
(Continued)

JENSHIAM BALGUA

les Academy

Shell
NXplorers

Teacher)

ARDEN ae

re VALOR

Reyrm Ay Q. ORTEGA

T, Sams

TG C. Fer, a
Peseds FTDRINGAN IN

Ten &. Gatdoney

Globe-09175665501

| O47 te oy | foil

| oarrertee

(01178727900
|

Email: nxplorers@cvc.pshs.edu.ph

aiver Forms, References
ure and date of receipt

Mobile Number |  Signatureof | Date

(pref. GCASH acct.) | Receiver (mm-dd-yy) |
24048450241 | BR | jo- mn |
|

| | |

} ge sae

CLOTeTent | 1D=\4a2 |
0%6 He 0653 | SS tba |

041M DQ 304 |

2927 858.2009

097104 734
0935 S@ S634 |

My owe

Baptist LC
ing

Our Lady of Pillar
College

Saint Claire
College

tN

| 0at-74-3n}_ Aa

OF rcasey)

amene eee vee

OU ud |

fo-/4-92:
Jo-ly-2? |

Stariand int’!

\Aerauna Co Dale Lay

A portion of the receiving log for training materials

distributed on 14 October 2022

4


Linkage Communique During Planning and Preparation
(Continued)

Letter of request for support from the Schools Division of Cauayan City
received by SDS Alfredo Gumaru Jr. on 28 September 2022

58

Linkage Communique During Planning and Preparation
(Continued)

et

LJ

Republic of the Philippines
Department of Education

Region II - Cagayan Valley
CITY SCHOOLS DIVISION OF CAUAYAN CITY

September 29, 2022

ERICK JOHN H. MARMOL

Director Il

Philippine Science High School Cagayan Valley Campus
Bayombong, Nueva Vizcaya

SIR:

2022 on your request to endorse project

In response to your letter dated Septembe
NXplorers Workshop for Senior High School Research Students, this office in consultation
with the Curriculum Implementation of this division hereby recommends that such outsourced
academic project/activity/training, ete. from external stakeholders, is subject to endorsement
and approval from higher authorities including but not limited to the National Educator's
Academy of the Philippines (NEAP) and DepED Regional Office

Aside from this, it is worthwhile too to mention this that the activity must be compliant

with DepED Order 09, s. 2005 entitled “Instituting Measures to Increase E ed Time-on

Task” and to ensure that no disruption of classes is done on school days, ¢ specially that we are

on the verge of piloting our transition to S-day in person classes in support to the

implementation of our Learning Recovery and Continuity Plan for Schoo! Year 2022-2023
Nevertheless, DepED SDO Cauayan City is very much grateful and humbled to
recognize your initiative and generosity in providing our teachers and learners’ exemplary

knowledge and skills particularly in the research discipline

x}
ALFREDO/B. GUMARU JR, EdD, CESD V
Schools Division Superintendent ath

Reply of SDS Gumaru of SDO Cauayan City RE DepEd Compliance

59

Linkage Communique During Planning and Preparation
(Continued)

Letter of request for approval by the DepEd Region II Office
received by RD Benjamin Paragas on 03 October 2022

60

Linkage Communique During Planning and Preparation
(Continued)

fo a off

Repub of he Philippines ae ae
i) DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Pc PHILIPPINE SCIENCE HIGH SCHOOL

‘ CAGAYAN VALLEY CAMPUS

October 10, 2022

29 September 2022
To: Schools Division Superintendent of Cauayan City
Dr. BENJAMIN D. PARAGAS: This Region
Regional Director
Department of Education ~ Region It
For your information and appropriate action
CC Dr JERRY B.SARIO
‘Chief Education Supervisor a >
National Education Academy of the Philippines - Region I be
BENJAMIN D. PARAGAS, PhD, CESO IT
Dr. ALFREDO B.GUMARU JR. Director, IV /Regional Director
Division Superintendent a
Schools Division of Cauayan City HRDD/JBS/ dma

Re: Request to Conduct a NXplorers (Research innovation)
for Senlor High School students of Cauayan City on October 21-22, 2022
(GAD/ESG Triple-Helix Outreach of PSHS-CVC. Shell Foundation, and LGU Cauayan City)

Dear Sir:

aad 0-0-2.

Regarding our stated request. may I refer you to the attached response letter of the SDO
CCouayan City. May you be informed of the adjustments we did to comply with their requirements
and lend us your support to deliver NXplorers ~ an innovative and structured ideation method ~
to the SHS practical research students in the City.

1. Because this workshop is external of DepEd, It is subject to the endorsement and
approval of higher authorities. hence this request letter. We hope that. with respect to
Jurisdiction, your approval will enable us to proceed with our project timeline.

2 With respect to DepEd Order 09, 5 2005, we will adapt to October 21 (Friday) and 22

{peearda to rplac the srighal bee. friey sheting.
‘We hope that you allow us to conduct Day 1 on a Friday because the participants will
take random surveys and it would be safer ifit would be within school grounds.

b. The program will excuse a maximum of S students (per school) from their classes on
Day 1 and let into the school grounds on the weekend on Day 2.

© The workshop will be delivered in a hybrid mode, Le. the participants will be in their
respective schools: the trainors will interact with them via a Zoom videoconference.

3. With respect to data privacy, all the workshop outputs will forever be the intellectual
property of the participants. We shall only ask that their outputs be critiqued by experts,
and for the participants to rate the workshop Itself, in order to improve the future
Iterations of the project. Data analysis will be performed by a PSHS-CVC teacher and UP
graduate student, Mr. JENSHIAM BALGUA (0917566-5S0S, jebalgua@cvepshs.eduph).

Your positive action to our request is appreciated.

Spy ene, gerry, Nore Vaca, TED ass
Grace: meas (
oare-as7-0000

Approval of the conduct of the hybrid workshop
forwarded to SDO Cauayan City on 10 October 2022

Linkage Communique During Planning and Preparation
(Continued)

V. Activity Risk Assessment
Potential Hazards/Risks Identified Safety Precautions

Ensure tight comms of stakeholders;

Delays May be rescheduled but not later than Oct.22

Media Release Form; IPR Waiver;

Data privacy and intellectual property earant consent

Choose digital delivery, if possible;

Transport risks for logistics team
Pp sentry Delivery vehicle and driver insured

LGU to fund internet data load;

iT i 1,
Kasragiawemibedaineanes Host school to find alternate location of node

LGU to perform swabbing; Host schoo! to
defer attendance or replace participants

COVID-19 transmission in remote nodes

Hazard is anything that could cause harm. Risk is the chance that someone will be harmed by the hazard.

KGHIEN
Prepared by: h\ (“~~

} 9/26/2022
nature of Student Date Prepared

CERTIFICATION:

i certify that | have understood the potential hazards and risks that may be encountered by my
child/ward, as well as the benefit that my child/ward will be getting from the said SCALE activity.

| certify that | have understood the projected expenses that will be incurred,
as well as the benefits that my child/ward will be getting from the said SCALE activity.

With these knowledge, | am allowing him/her to undertake the said SCALE activity
as part of his/her SCALE program.

AVY,
' 9/26/2022
Signatute of Parent/Guardian Date Prepared

Page 3 of the SCALE Action Plan of Angel Nicole Iniego, Student Project
Manager, containing her Parent Consent. All student team members
submitted their own signed Page 3 of this form. SCALE is a student

leadership and social action enhancement program of the PSHS-CVC.

62

Linkage Communique During Planning and Preparation
(Continued)

DATA PRIVACY AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RELEASE FORM

in compliance with the Data Privacy Act (RA10173) and Intellectual Property Code (RA8293) of the
Philippines, the following guidelines govern the conduct of the NXplorers Workshop for Cauayan City
Senior High School Research teachers and students:

1, That the aforementioned workshop is a Triple-Helix collaboration of: (a) the NXplorers
Philippines and the Pilipinas Shell Foundation, Inc., collectively referred to as “Shell”, as the
content provider; (b) the Philippine Science High School - Cagayan Valley Campus, herein
referred to as “PSHS-CVC” as the training provider; and (c) the City Government of Cauayan,
herein referred to as “LGU Cauayan City”, as the funding agency.

2. That the participants of the Workshop are bona fide senior high students of the participating
schools for the academic year 2022-2023, as attested by the teacher-chaperon, and that they
commit to attend all the learning sessions of the Workshop.

3. That the PSHS-CVC teachers are certified facilitators of the NXplorers program, their credentials
presented before their assigned training session.

4. That the student participants, and the legal guardian of minor participants, are duly informed of
and agree to the following:
a. Torespect the copyright of Shell with regards to the NXplorers training materials;
b. To allow their workshop outputs to be critiqued by experts for research purposes;
c. Toallow their survey responses to be analyzed for research purposes;
d. Toallow themselves to be photo/video/audio-recorded with the Workshop recording;
e. Tosubmit their work in the NXplorers website for documentation purposes.

5. That the student participants, and the legal guardian of minor participants, grant the provisions
of item #4 to Shell, PSHS-CVC, and LGU Cauayan City with no expectation of royalty or damages,
in perpetuity, having informed well that their workshop outputs remain the intellectual property
of the participants, also in perpetuity.

6. That it is the responsibility of the participants to register their workshop outputs to the
Intellectual Property Office of the Philippines as a legal basis for their copyright, without
assistance from Shell, PSHS-CVC, or LGU Cauayan City.

7. That the teacher-chaperon and parent/guardian warrant that they are 18 years old or more and
legally competent to sign this document.

ar
les Prem > Flint

Name ond Signature of Guardian Name ature of Chaperon

kgm

Nome and.

ES: fotown
re of Student

Specimen waiver of participants with parent’s consent

63

Annex K
Documentations Posted at the NXplorers.com Website

September 28, 2022 October 4, 2022

Cauayan City Mayor Jaycee Dy greenlighted the With reference to directives of the Philippines’

project with P66,000 funding for the participants’ education authority, the Department of Education,
meals and Internet expense for a two-day particularly DO#9 S.2005 and Memo OUCI-
NXplorers workshop. 2020-307, we wrote DepEd Regional Office 2,

citing the changes made to comply with both
The Schools Division Office was then notified for directives.

cascading of the opportunity to all the public and

private senior high schools in the City. UPDATE: Approval granted by DepEd-RO2 Director
Ben Paragas on September 10, 2022. After that the
Estimated number of participants: 96 Creatives Committee started producing the NXTool

24 schools * (1 teacher + 3 students) worksheets in earnest.


Documentations Posted at NXplorers.com Official Website
(Continued)

October 14, 2022

Our Logistics Team visited 24 secondary schools in
Cavayan City to distribute the workshop packets

that contain the NXtools worksheets and the special

Waiver. In the end, 22 schools accepted our

invitation

October 17, 2022

Technical Team conducted a Dry-run of the event

during the Orientation meeting with the teachers

chaperoning the students participating in the
NXplorers hybrid workshop on October 21-22. We
had a fireside chat with Martein Dela Cruz of Team
Agribon where she shared about their NNXplorers
adventure from workshop to contest, and to carrying
over their winning project as their formal research

project in PSHS-CVC

65

Documentations Posted at NXplorers.com Official Website
(Continued)

October 19, 2022

Another good news!
The Treasurer's Office of the City of Cauayan started

distributing the training allowance to the

participants.

October 21, 2022 (AM)

Day 1 of the workshop started on a high note with
lectures from Sir Jenshiam Balgua (NXthinking the
Problem Statement), Ma'am Christine Ordinario and
Sir Bryle Eusebio (Connection Circle), and Sirs JR

Manalo and AC Viernes (Perspectives Circle).

The workshop data used by the participants came
from their interviews with teachers and students from
within their own campuses. The questionaire:

1. What issues in Food, Water, or Energy confronts
the residents of Cavayan City?

2. What's causing the issue? How do you envision a
future without this issue?

3. As a/an (alternate role in the society}, what are
your actions or suggestions that could bring about

change?

October 21, 2022 (PM)

Our Ate Angel Iniego metamorphosed from being a
Team Leader into a NXplorers Mentor! After
inspiring us with the continuous growth of their
AgriHub project, she then gamely answered
probing questions in the fireside chat, critiqued the
outputs of her Cavayan City peers, and co-piloted

the topic "Scenario Planning Quadrant" with Arch

Bobby Argote Il.

October 21, 2022

We thank Villa Concepcion High School - Baculud
Extension for faithfully documenting their NXplorers
journey. We were inspired that even if their
experience was limited by the small screen and
intermittent connection, their learners were able to

create top-notch outputs with gusto!

66

Documentations Posted at NXplorers.com Official Website
(Continued)

October 22, 2022 (AM)

Edan Aguada reminisced about the journey of his
NXplorers team, El Terra Tix, in a fireside chat with
Sir Jenshiam while he was in Japan for the Sakura
Exchange Program. We were inspired how fast his
team reframed their problem statement to come up
vith an alternative and better solution when their
original idea was thumbed down by the Ripple
Effect Tool

To know more about the projects of our teams, the
Persuasion Pyramid pitch of El Terra Tix is at
hitps://youtu.be/MVnxrXFNpK4 and of AgriServe
at https://youtu.be/nmHAol6pCmA

October 22, 2022 (AM)

We welcome back Kuya Paolo Lumanlan, the team
captain of the first-ever TBIC champion in PH (news
about their win here:
hitps://youtu.be/DNt6DFD4wDs). He gamely
answered questions about innovation competitions,
research direction and grants, startup opportunities,
quad-media exposure, and social action that may

stem out from everyone's NXplorers experience.

Attached to this post are the slides for the topic,
"Generating Bright Ideas", for your reference. If you
want to adapt the presentation for your own

NXplorers workshop, email

nxplorers@eve.pshs.edu.ph

October 22, 2022 (AM)

Moving on to the Change Stage, Mam Roana
Caban-Gurat and Sir Joseph Philip Addauan
expertly connected the use of the Feasibility Funnel
NXtool with chemical filtering (sciences), eliminating
options (maths), and informed decisions (liberal
arts). We were amazed at how fast the students

learned and practiced the concept. Excited to hear

their elevator pitches soon!

October 22, 2022 (AM)

To boost the speaking confidence of the
participants, the dynamic duo of Sir Asley Gurat
and Mam Dianne Bangloy walk the participants
through the "script" known in the NXplorers
community as the Persuasion Pyramid. It's fun to
watch how Zoom make one speaker appear and
then disappear :D when there are 2 persons in the

field of the camera


Documentations Posted at NXplorers.com Official Website
(Continued)

October 22, 2022

Kudos to Cavayan City Science and Technology
High School for sharing their innovative solution for
a water pain point affecting many residents of the
City. We are also blown away at how their school
redefine "Green Campus” with their ingenious green
arches, student-maintained vegetable gardens,

SDG murals, and hydroponics. Their excellent

Persuasion Pyramid pitch video is here:

hitps:/ /drive.google.com/file/d/ lim 1drt_XIPeZ3

For more updates,
apply for access
thru email:
nxplorers@
cvc.pshs.edu.ph

October 22, 2022 (PM)

While half of each team rehearse their elevator
pitches, the other half were coached by fellow
Kabataang Cavayefio awardee, Sir Lyndon Lazaro,
to find the intended and unintended consequences

of their solution using the Ripple Effect NXtool.

Workshop of this tool was after that for Persuasion
Pyramid in order for the teams to prep earlier for the
Viva Pitch, considering that the usually 4-day

training was crammed into 2 days only.

Output shown is the excellent work of the learners
from Pinoma National High School. Good job,
guys!

68

Documentations Posted at NXplorers.com Official Website
(Continued)

22, 2022 (PM)

fnoo-hoo! The live and recorded elevator pitches
of our participants faithful to the Persuasion Pyramid
style were awesome! Congratulations to all of you,

guys!

We thank the insightful remarks of our NXplorer
teacher-facilitators and the smooth flow by our
esteemed moderator, Mam Lady Labuzon

Addavan.

October 23, 2022

Who said you can't transition a live presentation
using a single camera format? Well, be amazed by
the creativity of the Centro De Cultura students as
each member shifts in front of the frame to drive their
Elevator Pitch. Great script, great directing

congratulations CDC!

Pitch and Comments recordings are here
hitps://bit.ly/CDC-NXplorers

October 24, 2022

Our happy bunch of learners from the Cavayan City
Stand-Alone Senior High School considered the
connection between rainfall and electricity. Using
the blackboard to brainstorm ideas, they transferred
their insights to the eponymous NXtool to consider

the best scenario arising from the combination of the

said factors.

For more updates, apply for access thru email: nxplorers@cvc.pshs.edu.ph

69

Annex L
Public Access Approval

@

January 11, 2023

Dear Mr. Balgua,

Congratulations on completing your capstone project for your Masters study.

We reviewed the thesis manuscript and we agree that the results will contribute towards
improving the NXplorers programme, particularly in the adaptive delivery of training.

It was already forwarded to the London office of Shell Global Solutions International B.V.

As to your request regarding intellectual property rights, we would like to inform you
that you are given permission to publish the results for public access.

‘This is because we found that you provided sufficient citations and disclaimers, with
ind the secured content themselves were provided

complete w:
with links that requires eat to the official website.

We are happy that you chose NXplorers as the platform for your study and we look forward
to our continued collaboration in the future.

Best regards,

Beverly Precious Berberabe
NXplorers Country Head
Philippines

70

