SUSE WTY OCS 502 PERL
COR AVIODE AA AOE oy
LPO ers ey Se WIN

HO COMMORDPS UCD:
LESCOL OL: 04

MASTEO ECLRU
(MOMOLOGY)

DOST-STI| LIBRARY

ET

STI-21-0211

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS

Master of Science in Entomology

CARL JOHNJAY A. AYEN

SUSCEPTIBILITY OF GERMAN COCKROACH, Blattella germanica (Linnaeus)
(BLATTODEA: ECTOBIIDAE) TO COMMONLY USED
INSECTICIDES IN URBAN PEST CONTROL

VIRGINIA R. OCAMPO, Ph.D.
Adviser

Date: September 1, 2021

This thesis can be made available to the general public YES

This thesis can be accessed only after consultation with the author and thesis
adviser

This thesis can be accessed only by those bound by confidentiality agreement
= —l_

~~CARL Jasin AYEN

Dlagerrssa VAs
VIRGINIA R. OCAMPO, Ph.D.


SUSCEPTIBILITY OF GERMAN COCKROACH, Blattella germanica (Linnaeus)
(BLATTODEA: ECTOBIIDAE) TO COMMONLY USED
INSECTICIDES IN URBAN PEST CONTROL

CARL JOHNJAY AQUINO AYEN

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF GRADUATE SCHOOL
UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE
REQUIREMENTS FOR
THE DEGREE OF

MASTER OF SCIENCE
(ENTOMOLOGY)

AUGUST 2021

The thesis attached hereto, entitled “SUSCEPTIBILITY OF GERMAN COCKROACH,
Biatella germanica (Linnaeus) (BLATTODEA: ECTOBIIDAE) TO COMMONLY USED
INSECTICIDES IN URBAN PEST CONTROL” prepared and submitted by CARL

JOHNJAY A. AYEN in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of MASTER OF
SCIENCE (ENTOMOLOGY) is hereby accepted.

hawtinn, PPT Beperitene
IGUSTO C. SUMALDE DINAH PURA T. DEPOSITARIO

Co-chair, Guidance Committee Member, Guidance Committee
September 1,2021 September 1, 2021
~~ Date Signed Date Signed

me
“get R. OCAMPO

Chair, Guidance Committee
September 1,2021
Date Signed

Accepted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
MASTER OF SCIENCE (ENTOMOLOGY)

SHERY} A. YAP
Director, Institute of Weed Science, Entomology and Plant Pathology
College of Agriculture and Food Science
September 1, 2021
Date Signed

JOMAR F. WABAJANTE
, Graduate School
University of the Philippines Los Bafios
2 September 2021
Date Signed

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

The author is the third child among the six children of Mr. Oscar Bustarga Ayen and the
late Mrs. Shirley Aquino-Ayen. He was born in Santiago Old, Nabua, Camarines Sur on 11" day
of August 1992. He started his elementary education at Nabua Central Pilot School where he
finished as 4" Honorable mention. He continued his secondary education at Nabua National High
School and graduated as Valedictorian in Revised Basic Education Curriculum (RBEC) class
2009. He pursued his undergraduate degree in BS Agricultural Biotechnology (ABT) at UP Los
Bafios. He was one of the first two BS ABT graduates who successfully passed the Licensure
Examination for Agriculturists (LEA). After making history, succeeding BS ABT graduates

followed them in taking agriculturist exam. In 2014 after completing bachelor’s degree, the author

was hired as product research and development officer in a local private company distributing
agricultural and household chemicals. From that experience and exposure to pest management, the
author changed his dream of becoming a world-renowned agri-biotechnologist to an entomologist.
In 2016, he was admitted as part-time student in Graduate School for the degree of MS Entomology
(field of specialization: Insecticide Toxicology) and minor in Agribusiness Management and
Entrepreneurship. After qualifying as a DOST-ASTHRDP scholar the following year, he decided
to resign from his job and became a full-time student. Although it took him about five years to
complete his master’s degree due to several setbacks and frustrations, the author promised to
become one of the greatest entomologists in this present time and give back all the glory to the
Almighty God.

CARL JOHNJAY A. AYEN

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The author would like to express his deepest gratitude to the following personalities for helping him to
accomplish this manuscript:

First of all, to the LORD Almighty for all the blessings and for constantly
going through roads of life. He is truly the GOD of Miracles.

ing him the strength to keep

To his major adviser, Dr. Virginia R. Ocampo, for the motherly care and invaluable support, guidance,
patience, advice, and time; Dr. Augusto C. Sumalde and Dr. Dinah Pura T. Depositario, members of the
advisory committee, for their comments and guidance throughout the study.

To the DOST-Accelerated Science and Technology Human Resource Development Program and UP
Presidential Graduate Scholarship for giving the scholarship to pursue his master’s degree program in
UPLB.

To the owners of establishments, market administrator and assigned security personnel for allowing him to
conduct his collection of cockroach samples from their sites. To NCPC staff - Tita Alice, Tita Emma, Kuya
Lito, Kuya Lyle, RJ and Megan for helping him to purchase the necessary materials in Divisoria for the
experiments. To his student assistants, Diego, Sunshine, Naj, and Karlynne for helping him during the mass
rearing of the insect samples as well as the preparation of materials in the conduct of the study.

To Dr. Gina Balleras and Ma’am Kath Dizon for inspiring him to finish the study. Special thanks to Ma'am
Kath for helping the author in the statistical analysis and her guidance in the organization of the data
presentation. Much gratitude also to Ma'am Kath for the use of the Toxicology Laboratory in the duration
of the experimental phase of the research. To the previous advisees of Dr. Ocampo, Kuya Patrick and Ate
Abby for the support and time during his consultation with them.

To his mentors for the support group environment. To Dr. Bonifacio F. Cayabyab for challenging him and
inspiring him to persevere in finishing his master’s degree. To Pastor Verge & Doc Ann Ascabano, Engr.
Joseph Pagtananan, Engr. Paulo and Ate Rheyn Altoveros, Kuya Wilbert & Ate Rachel Lirag, for being his
constant encouragers and prayer warriors whenever the author wants to share the stress during his
manuscript writing. To Prof. Arian Jacildo for helping him to present the paper more cohesively.

The author wishes his special gratitude to his family, both DMI Family (they are too many to mention) for
their prayers and encouragement and his biological family, Papa Oscar, Kuya Dha & Ate Mick, Ate Harrieth
& Conrad, Agoy, Karlynne and Biboy for the inspiration to move forward.

Lastly, the author would like to thank his most beloved woman and dearest mother, the late Shirley Aquino-
‘Ayen. The completion of the whole experiment up to the manuscript writing became possible because of
the promise of the author to his deceased mother to “never give up even until the end.”

CHAPTER

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Title Page

Approval Page

Biographical Sketch

Acknowledgments

Table of Contents

List of Tables

List of Figures

List of Appendices

List of Abbreviation

Abstract

INTRODUCTION

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

Overview

German cockroach, Blattella germanica (Linnaeus)

Public Health Importance
Nuisance

Carrier of Diseases

PAGE

xii
xiii

xiv

Control Measures against German Cockroach
Environmental Management
Physical and Mechanical Control
Biological Control
Chemical Control

Urban Pest Control
Global Urban Pest Control

Philippine Urban Pest Control

Specific Approaches of Professional Pest Control Operators against

German Cockroach
Cockroach Inspection
Treatment Selection
Monitoring
Documentation
Insecticide Resistance
Insecticide Resistance Mechanisms
Bioassay Technique

uu MATERIALS AND METHODS

vi

22

23

25

26

28

29

32

34

Iv

Collection of Test Insects
Mass Rearing of Test Nymphs
Preparation of Test Insecticides
Selection of Test Insecticides
Preparation of Stock Solutions
Preparation of Serial Dilutions
Treatment of Glass Jars
Nymphal Bioassay
Set-up for Final Bioassay
Data Analysis of Final Bioassay
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Geographical Analysis
Susceptibility of Different German Cockroach Populations
Los Bafios Town
Calamba City
Bay Town
SUMMARY, CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION
LITERATURE CITED

APPENDICES

vii

35

39

41

41

42

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

52

52

62

2B

92

95

107

12

LIST OF TABLES

Insecticides commonly employed in the control of cockroaches
Registered insecticides for cockroach control in the Philippines

Estimated annual business for chemical manufacturers in Philippines

Classification of various pesticides by usage
Common harborage of German cockroaches

Insecticide formulations used in the bioassay test against B. germanica

Location source of the nine test populations of B. germanica used in

bioassay tests and chemicals used to control the cockroaches

Toxicity of five insecticides against LBK population of B. germanica

using glass jar assay method.

Toxicity of five insecticides against B. germanica from IBM population

using glass jar assay method.

Toxicity of five insecticides against B. germanica from LBV

population using glass jar assay method

Toxicity of five insecticides against B. germanica trom CALMI

population using glass jar assay

Toxicity of five insecticides against B. germanica from CALM2

population using glass jar assay method

vill

20

23

42

Si

56

58

60

67

69

13

14

15

16

Toxicity of five insecticides against B. germanica from CALC

population using glass jar assay method

Toxicity of five insecticides against B. germanica from BAYM

population using glass jar assay method

Toxicity of five insecticides against B. germanica from BAYS

population using glass jar assay method

Toxicity of five insecticides against B. germanica from BAYK

population using glass jar assay method

Toxicity ranking of five insecticides against B. germanica from three

towns of Laguna.

i

19

81

83

85

FIGURE

LIST OF FIGURES

Life cycle of the German cockroach, Blattella germanica L. based on
laboratory study by Mendoza (1976) and redrawn by the author

Global pest control market based on application

Global pest control market based on type

Schematic diagram of the methods done in the current study

A portion of the map of Laguna showing the nine collection sites
The specific locations of collection sites in Calamba, Laguna

The specific locations of collection sites in Los Baflos, Laguna

The specific locations of collection sites in Bay, Laguna

Collection of Blattella germanica

Cylindrical plastic jar used as mass rearing container of B. germanica

Open shelves housing the mass rearing containers of B. germanica
collected from three towns of Laguna.

Five commercial insecticides used in the current study
Illustration showing the serial dilutions

Glass jar and non-heating dog roller used in the preparation of treated
glass jars

Holding container showing the front and upper portion

8

18

19

35

36

36

37

37

38

39

40

4l

43

44

45

16

7

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

Concentration-mortality lines of five insecticides against B. germanica
from LBK population.

Concentration-mortality lines of five insecticides against B. germanica
from LBM population.

Concentration-mortality lines of five insecticides against B. germanica
from LBV population

Concentration-mortality lines of five insecticides against B. germanica
from CALMI population

Concentration-mortality lines of five insecticides against B. germanica
from CALM2 population

Concentration-mortality lines of five insecticides against B. germanica
from CALC population

Concentration-mortality lines of five insecticides against B. germanica
from BAYM population

Concentration-mortality lines of five insecticides against B. germanica
from BAYS population

Concentration-mortality lines of five insecticides against B. germanica
from BAYK population

xi

357

59

61

68

70

nr

80

82

84

APPENDIX

3A
3B

4A

4B

4c

4D

4E

4F

4G

4H

4l

LIST OF APPENDICES

Stock Solutions Computation

Cost analysis of five commercial insecticides for one month application
period in 100 m? area.

Raw Data Recording Sheet
Excel Worksheet for Quantal Response Data.

Probit Analysis of five insecticides against B. germanica from LBK
population using PoloPlus software version 2.0

Probit Analysis of five insecticides against B. germanica from LBM
population using PoloPlus software version 2.0

Probit Analysis of five insecticides against B. germanica from LBV
population using PoloPlus software version 2.0

Probit Analysis of five insecticides against B. germanica from
CALM population using PoloPlus software version 2.0

Probit Analysis of five insecticides against B. germanica from
CALM2 population using PoloPlus software version 2.0

Probit Analysis of five insecticides against B. germanica from CALC
population using PoloPlus software version 2.0

Probit Analysis of five insecticides against B. germanica from BAYM
population using PoloPlus software version 2.0

Probit Analysis of five insecticides against B. germanica from BAYS
population using PoloPlus software version 2.0

Probit Analysis of five insecticides against B. germanica from BAYK
population using PoloPlus software version 2.0

xii

PAGE

107

108

109
110

um

14

17

121

125

129

133

137

141

ACh
AChE
Al
CPR
cyP
DDvP
DEET
DEF
DMP
EC
EPA
F
FL
FDA
GABA
GPC
IGR
IPM
IRM
TRAC
LDso
LCso
MoA
MSDS
op
PBO
PCO
POLO plus
ppm
RR
RTU
sc
SE
ss
WHO

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

Acetyl choline
Acetylcholinesterase

Active Ingredient

Certificate of Product Registration
Cytochrome Monooxygenase
2.2-dichlorovinyl dimethyl phosphate
N, N-diethyl-3-toluamide

S, S, S-tributyl phosphorotrithioate
Dimethyl phthalate

Emulsifiable concentrate
Environmental Protection Agency
First Filial Generation

Fiducial limit

Food and Drug Administration
Gamma-aminobutyric Acid
General Pest Control

Insect Growth Regulator
Integrated Pest Management
Insect Resistance Management
Insecticide Resistance Action Committee
Median Lethal Dose

Median Lethal Concentration
Mode of Action

Material Safety Data Sheet
Organophosphate

Piperonyl butoxide

Pest Control Operator

Probit or Logit plus

Parts per million

Resistance Ratio

Ready-to-use

Suspension concentrate

Standard Error

Stock Solution

World Health Organization

xi

ABSTRACT

AYEN, CARL JOHNJAY AQUINO. University of the Philippines Los Bafios, August 2021.
Susceptibility of German cockroach, Blattella germanica (Linnaeus) (Blattodea: Ectobii
to Commonly Used Insecticides in Urban Pest Control.

Major Professor: Virginia R. Ocampo, Ph.D.

The present study was designed to determine the susceptibility of nine (9) field-collected

populations of German cockroach, Blattella germanica L. to five (5) different classes of

insecticide:

organophosphates, carbamates, synthetic pyrethroids, phenyl pyrazoles, and
neonicotinoids. One representative chemical from each class was selected: Dichlorovinyl
Dimethyl Phosphate (DDVP) from organophosphates, propoxur from carbamates, a-cypermethrin
from synthetic pyrethroids, fipronil from phenyl pyrazoles and thiamethoxam from neonicotinoids.
The six-week-old nymphs of German cockroach were bio-assayed against these insecticides using
the WHO glass jar method, with slight modifications, to determine the LCso values and slope after

conducting probit analysis.

The two most toxic chemicals were fipronil and thiamethoxam. Propoxur was more toxic
than a-cypermethrin. DDVP was consistently the least toxic against German cockroaches coming
from all collection sites. This suggests that the older classes (OPs, carbamates and pyrethroids)
which have been used through time have shown reduced efficacy against German cockroach

compared to the newer compounds.

Keywords: Blattella germanica, susceptibility, toxicity, urban pest control, insecticide
resistance

xiv

INTRODUCTION

The German cockroach, Blatiella germanica (Linnaeus) (Blattodea: Ectobiidae) is an
important household insect pest and is commonly found in bakeries, restaurants, and kitchens
worldwide (Gadd and Raubenheimer 2000; Lee and Lee 2000). Aside from its economic
importance, the German cockroach is a significant health hazard, serving as a mechanical vector
and reservoir for pathogenic agents (Pridgeon et al. 2002). It contaminates food by carrying filth
and microbial pathogens on body and legs (Watanabe et al. 2003; Fasulo et al. 2005). Examples
of major allergic reactions in humans are asthma, itching, swelling of eyelids, dermatitis, and
severe respiratory problems (Sarinho et al. 2004; Pechal et al. 2007). There is little information on
incidence of cockroach-related diseases in the Philippines but Sia Su et. al (2016) reported that
common parasite observed from the cockroach collected from the streets of Metro Manila, Pasay
City and Quezon city was rhabditiform larvae - the major causative agent of strongyloidiasis in
humans.

Urbanization provides opportunity and favorable conditions for the rapid increase of B.
germanica (Hill 2002). The proximity of living quarters in most urban centers allows German
cockroach to spread easily. This is exacerbated by factors like overcrowding, inefficient waste
disposal, and poor building structure. Thus, the need for urban pest control has come from a
common realization that presence of B. germanica represents unhygienic condition causing
problems for residents and commercial businesses.

‘When one mentions pest control, the immediate reaction of many is to refer to chemical

method of control or the use of chemical poisons to kill the German cockroach population. What

as chemical pesticides especially when used together in an integrated pest management approach.
There are five general categories of control methods practiced by non-professional individuals and
the pest control operators (PCOs). These include the cultural control, physical control and
mechanical control, biological control, and chemical control methods. Cleanliness and sanitation

are results of good cultural practices. Valles (1996) discussed that by eliminating food and water

sources and clutter, the infestation and population of German cockroaches decreased significantly.
In physical and mechanical method, sticky traps and electrified traps can be used to monitor and
reduce population size of B. germanica (Ballard and Gold 1984). Biological control is also gaining
importance as one strategy against cockroaches. There are reports that B. germanica populations
and other species of cockroach have been successfully reduced in certain locations by introducing
parasitic wasp Aprostecetus hagenowii which oviposits in egg cases of pest organism (Cook
Islands Biodiversity Database 2016).

Although all these control methods are considered crucial components in the control of
German cockroach, the use of insecticides is still the most popular and effective method so far
(Lee and Robinson 2001). The review on B. germanica by Jacobs (2013) indicated that the use of
baits containing hydramethylnon, fipronil, sulfluramid, boric acid or abamectin is an effective
chemical method. Insecticidal dusts such as boric acid, silica aerogel and diatomaceous earth can
provide additional contro! while residual sprays or aerosol foggers are of little value and may
disperse B. germanica.

In the Philippines, recommended insecticides against cockroaches belong to the following

insecticide groups: organophosphates, carbamates, synthetic pyrethroids, neonicotinoids,

avermectins, phenyl pyrazoles, oxadiazines and hydramethyInon. These are currently marketed

and supplied by agrochemical companies whether as proprietary products or commodity products.
Some household chemicals are displayed in groceries, hard wares, and drugstores as part of their
marketing and promotion campaign. Moreover, these insecticides must be registered with the
Philippine Food and Drug Administration (FDA) before offered for sale and use. As a requirement
for the issuance of certificate of product registration (CPR) for household or urban pesticides, local
bio-efficacy must be conducted to prove its effectivity against cockroaches. With the use of FDA-
registered chemicals, regular insecticide application by the homeowners or hired pest control
operators (PCO) is the common strategy for control of German cockroach. In most cases,
treatments are applied to sites where cockroaches have been observed and where they are suspected
to be living. Aside from CPR, PCOs'’ criteria in choosing chemicals for German cockroach control
include the price of the product and safety to human and environment.

However, problems or concems encountered to effectively eliminate the German
cockroaches include their being closely associated with food and people, their rapid reproduction,
and their tendency to gather in inaccessible places, The German cockroach has also been reported

to have developed resistance against many groups of insecticides. This problem transcends

geographical regions (Ladonni 2001; Pai et al. 2005) and different classes of insecticides
(Holbrook et al. 1999). Moreover, Lee et al. (1996), Lee and Lee (2002) and Ahmad et al. (2009)
reported that insecticide resistance is prevalent in Southeast Asia such as Singapore, Malaysia, and

Indonesia. With these factors affecting efficacy of insecticides, the PCOs need more information

to address the concerns of their clients on cockroach control.

Much of the works on insecticide efficacy and insecticide resistance on the German

cockroach were done in other countries and very little or no data are available in the Philippines.

The only available literature was done by Mendoza (1976) who reported some chemical control
on adult German cockroaches with notes on its biology. Furthermore, the separate studies
conducted by Verdeprado (2008) and Jarilla (2010) focused on the effectiveness of commercial
bait formulation containing indoxacarb as compared to regular diet inside bait station.

Studies conducted in the laboratory usually use adult male cockroach (Koehler and
Patterson 1988) but the late instar six-week-old B. germanica nymphs were also used. The latter
had been found to be significantly more tolerant to insecticides, including pyrethroids, carbamates,
and organophosphate than adult males and females in topical and residual bioassays (Koehler et

al. 1993; Valles et al.1994; Qian et al. 2010).

The present study sought to determine the susceptibility of the six-week-old German
cockroach nymphs to five (5) commercially available insecticide with different active ingredients
commonly used by local pest control operators. These five insecticides were selected to represent
the five groups of insecticides: namely, organophosphates, carbamates, synthetic pyrethroids,
phenyl pyrazoles, and neonicotinoids. The data generated by the biological assays can then be used
to guide non-professional applicators and PCOs in their choice of pesticides against German
cockroach and to serve as baseline information in future studies to detect possible resistance of
German cockroach populations to these insecticide groups. Field monitoring is essential to

determine whether tolerant or resistant in

uals are already present in the field. Monitoring of

local cockroach populations is essential for effective control of Blattella germanica by households

and establishments with or without hiring PCOs and for insecticide resistance programs. The

specific objectives of the study are:

1) To determine the toxicity of five available commercial insecticides to nine populations

of B. germanica collected from three towns of Laguna using LCso values,

2) To establish the slope of different insecticides against field-populations of B.

germanica in the laboratory using residual contact method and,

3) To identify the most effective insecticide group used in the study against the nine field-

collected populations of B. germanica.

This research was conducted at the Toxicology Laboratory. Institute of Weed Science,
Entomology and Plant Pathology, College of Agriculture and Food Science, University of the

Philippines Los Bafios, Laguna from February 2019 to April 2020.

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

OVERVIEW

This chapter is composed of six sections. The first one is the general background of the

test insect, the German cockroach (Blattella germanica), its biology, and i

life cycle; followed
by its public health importance as nuisance and carrier of diseases. To help solve this pest problem,
control measures are briefly discussed such as environmental management, physical and
mechanical control methods, biological control method and the chemical control method. Under
the last control method, different types of application were presented. There is also a section on
specific approaches of pest control operators (PCOs) against cockroaches. The urban pest control
industry is responsible in handling the German cockroach problem because of the expertise and
professionalism of PCOs. However, PCOs face serious problem due to failure of control against
B. germanica. One reason is the possible development of insecticide resistance, and this was
described in the fifth section. Lastly, to investigate the possible resistance or susceptibility of

German cockroaches, an appropriate bioassay technique was reviewed.

German cockroach, Blattella germanica (Linnaeus)

The German cockroach, Blattella germanica (Linnaeus) is one of the most common
cockroach species. They are small, with adult measuring about 10-15 mm in length. They have
flattened, boat-shaped body while possessing fully developed wings covering the abdomen. The
wings are functional but usually used for downward flight. They are light yellowish brown with
two dark longitudinal bands on their pronotum near the head. Their head is oriented downward
and not much visible from above due to an extended pronotum covering the head. Their
filamentous antennae are longer than their body (Capinera 2004).

The German cockroach is a paurometabolous insect with three life stages: egg, nymph, and
adult. The ootheca (egg capsule) which is produced by the accessory glands of female cockroaches
encloses the eggs (Cochran 2003). The ootheca is light brown in color and about 7-9 mm in length.
According to Mendoza (1976), sexually mature females produce the first ootheca in about 11 to
12 days. They carry the ootheca for 10 to 17 days until the eggs are hatched. Ross and Mullins
(1995) reported that females may also drop the egg capsule within a short time before hatch. After
ootheca deposition, the females continue to copulate several times to produce additional ootheca.
The observed shortest time in which two oothecae are laid is 22 days. Mendoza (1976) reported
that on the average, females can produce six egg capsules throughout their life span. Each ootheca
contains 30 to 48 eggs (Capinera 2004).

After deposition, the egg capsule splits along the seam and then young cockroaches escape.
The newly hatched cockroaches work their way out by pulling their antennae and legs free from

individual eggshell. The young cockroaches are initially whitish in color but gradually turn brown

after one to two hours. The nymphs go through a total of six molts to reach maturity wherein each
stadium lasts for eight days, with a total of 48-day developmental period. Figure | shows the life

cycle of B. germanica based on laboratory study done by Mendoza (1976)

Egg Capsule

10 days 30 days

Nymphal
hatch

6 nymphat

Figure 1. Life cycle of the German cockroach, Blattella germanica (Linnaeus) based on
laboratory study by Mendoza (1976) and redrawn by the author.

Public Health Importance

Nuisance

The German cockroach shares food, water, warmth, and shelter with humans. According
to Capinera (2004), they consume same food with humans as well as dead plant or animal
materials, leather, glue, wallpaper, fabrics, books, and feces. Contamination of the food is one of
the damages caused by cockroach They contaminate food by crawling around and defecating on it
or by leaving cast exuviae (insect’s old skin), empty egg cases or insect cadavers in foodstuffs or
by regurgitating saliva and intestinal fluids from their mouths while feeding. They also discharge
a rancid secretion from their mouths and gland opening on their body resulting to a long-lasting,

offensive cockroach smell to areas or food visited by them.

Carrier of Diseases

German cockroaches also serve as vector of pathogens, cause allergic reactions and
psychological distress (Brenner 1995). They are proven and suspected carriers of organism causing
diarthea, dysentery, cholera, leprosy, plague, typhoid fever, and viral diseases such as
poliomyelitis (WHO 2006). There were also accounts of cockroaches entering body orifices such
as ears and nose. Moreover, inhalation of a few protein fractions found in cockroach secretions,
body parts and excrement by sensitive individuals can cause asthma and allergic response such as
skin rashes, watery eyes, and sneezing (Capinera 2004; Cochran 2003). There is little information
on incidence of cockroach-related diseases in the Philippines but Sia Su et. al (2016) reported that

common parasite observed from the cockroach collected from the streets of Metro Manila, Pasay

10

City and Quezon City was rhabditiform larvae - the major causative agent of strongyloidiasis in

humans.

Control Measures against German Cockroach

Effective control is easier in temperate countries than in tropical areas because the
cockroach populations cannot survive outdoors in winters in the former. The limiting factor for
surviving appears to be cold temperature and B. germanica is unable to survive in locations away
from humans or human activity (Valles 1996). Crucial to effective control is cleanliness since
infestation of B. germanica is aggravated by poor hygiene. In Iran, Shahraki et al. (2011) stressed
the importance of sanitation and sanitary factors against the infestation of B. germanica and
discussed the effectiveness of educational program on sanitation. The use of pamphlets, posters,
and lectures were utilized to describe the importance of sanitation which led to reduction of
infestation. The major control measures against the German cockroach are listed below, and some

are lifted from World Health Organization (2006).

Environmental management

Cleanliness and Hygiene. \t is the first step in cockroach prevention. Good and detailed
sanitation are important components of successful pest control work. Hiding spots, food, and water
available at night must be eliminated by cleaning the kitchen, reducing the clutter, throwing away

dead cockroaches and cleaning the frass and areas where there are cockroaches with simple soap

u

and water. According to Valles (1996), the removal of food sources, debris and potential clutter

lessen the B. germanica population and the risk of encouraging new infestations.

Reduction of accessibility. \n this method, peeled wallpapers, shelf liners, cracks, and holes

where cockroaches could get through must be sealed or fixed though use of silicone caulk, copper
mesh, screens, and door sweeps. Jacobs (2013) noted that B. germanica are smaller than other
cockroach species and can conceal themselves in many places inaccessible to larger species; thus,
sealing cracks and crevices can be effective in reduction of harborage space and its population
size. Consequently, openings for drain water and sewer pipes, drinking water and electricity cables

should also be closed.

Physical and Mechanical Controt
The use of sticky traps and electrified traps can monitor and reduce the population size of
B. germanica (Valles 1996). Vacuuming technique is another method on German cockroach

control. Although vacuuming will not kill the insects but at least they will not be able to escape.

Vacuuming up icant dent in B.

ible cockroaches and in their hiding places will make sig

germanica population providing increase chance of success during treatment. Kaakeh and Benneth
(1997) reported that sticky traps and vacuuming technique were effective as monitoring devices
and provided acceptable control of B. germanica. Moreover, thermal remediation treatment as one

example of physical control method is gaining popularity against B. germanica. This method

works by heating the residential or commercial properties up to 140 F and maintaining that

temperature for up to four hours allowing the treatments to reach even the hard-to-reach areas.

12

Biological Control

According to Suiter (1997), pathogens and in particular fungi appear to be the most
promising biological control against B. germanica. The study of Ren et al. (2005) reported the
successful infection of Metarhizium anisopliae against B. germanica under laboratory conditions.
‘The infected cockroaches showed erratic movements while hyphae of the fungi were found in most
body parts of B. germanica after 4-5 days of infection. Other reported symptoms of infection of
M. anisopliae are sub-lethal effects such as reduction in mean number of oothecae laid by females,
cothecal production, hatchability, and nymphal production (Quesada-Moraga et al. 2004).
Meanwhile, the parasitic wasp Aprostocetus hagenowii have also been used as biological agent by
laying its eggs in the egg cases of B. germanica and other species of cockroach (Cook Islands
Biodiversity Database 2016). The recent study of Yuan Pan and Zhang (2020) highlighted the new
directions of B. germanica control using Wolbachia or paratransgenes and the use of fungal

insecticides with synergistic agents to enhance insecticidal efficacy.

Chemical controt

The judicious use of chemicals for the control of German cockroach can be a successful
component of cockroach management. Table | lists a number of these insecticides and the
percentage of active ingredients based on WHO (2006). In the Philippines, the Food and Drug
Administration regularly publishes in its website the insecticidal products for cockroach control

(Table 2).

les commonly employed in the control of cockroaches (WHO 2006

Insecticide Formulation Type Concentration (%)
Synthetic pyrethroid a-cypermethrin ‘Spray 0.015
betacy fluthrin Spray 125
cyfluthrin Spray 5-10
cyphenothrin Spray 0.125-0.25
Aerosol 0.1-0.3
deltamethrin Spray 0.0025
Dust 0.05
Aerosol 0.02
permethrin Spray 0.125-0.25
Dust 05
Carbamate bendiocarb Spray 0.24-0.48
Dust T
Aerosol 0.75
dioxacarb Spray 0.51.0
propoxur Spray 1
Bait 2
Organophosphate chlorpyrifos Spray 05
dichlorvos Spray 05
Bait 19
fenitrothion Bait 25
Spray 0.5-1.0
Aerosol 0.75
jodfenphos Spray 1
malathion Spray 3
Dust 3
pirimiphos methyl Spray 25
Dust 2
propetamphos Spray 0.5-1.0
Dust 2
Aerosol 2
Insect growth regulator flufenoxuron Dust 0.001
Electron transport hydramethyInon Aerosol 1-2

inhibitor

13


Grow
‘Organophosphates

Carbamates

Pyrethroids

Neonicotinoids

Phenyl Pyrazoles

Avermectins

Oxadiazines
Hydramethyinon

DDVP

chlorpyrifos

propoxur

a-cypermethrin

beta-cy luthrin
cypermethrin
imiprothrin, cypermethrin
imiprothrin, cyfluthrin
4d, trans-cyphenothrin
deltamethrin

deltamethrin, tetramethrin, pbo
esfenvalerate

bifenthrin, imidacloprid
permethrin

transfluthrin, cyfluthrin
d-tetramethrin, cyphenothrin
lambda-cyhalothrin

imiprothrin, cyphenothrin
imidacloprid

dinotefuran

smethoxam

fipronil

fipronil

abamectin

emamectin benzoate &
denatonium benzoate
indoxacarb
hydramethyinon

Concentration
(%)

25

1

18.7
1S

2.5

5

0.1,0.1

0.1, 0.1
3

0.2

10,10, 80
5

4,5

10
0.4, 0, 025
0.01, 0.015
25

0.1, 0.0015
215

0.5
21.6
0.05
2.6
0.05
0.1
0.0002
05
0.0165

14

Formulation type

‘emulsifiable concentrate (EC)
gel bait

emulsifiable concentrate (EC)
suspension concentrate (SC)
suspension concentrate (SC)
emulsifiable concentrate (EC)
Aerosol

Aerosol

emulsifiable concentrate (EC)
chalk form

suspension concentrate (SC)
flowable concentrate (FL)
suspension concentrate (SC)
emulsifiable concentrate (EC)
Aerosol

Aerosol

emulsifiable concentrate (EC)

ready-to-use (RTU)
gel bait

gel bait

‘suspension concentrate (SC)
gel bait

suspension concentrate

gel bait

gel bait

paste bait
gel bait


15

Currently, there are many cockroach insecticides sold in the form of liquid spray,
insecticidal dust, aerosol, smoke, baits, and traps. The information below helps us to understand
some advantages in using different pesticide formulations:

Residual sprays. Residual sprays are usually applied using hand-held compression air
sprayers. The insecticide can also be applied with a paint brush when other equipment is not
available. The commonly used insecticides are the organophosphates, carbamates, synthetic
pyrethroids and more recently insect growth regulators. Ameen et al. (2000) reported that residual
sprays of chlorfenapyr provided 80% reductions in infested apartment at eight weeks post-
treatment.

Dusts. Dry powder formulations are made by mixing insecticide powder with talcum or
another inert carrier powder. They are useful in treating hollow walls, false ceilings and other

cockroach hiding places which cannot be easily reached. It is applied using hand-operated puff-

duster or a plunger-type duster. Boric acid, silica aerogel and diatomaceous earth can provide

control against B. germanica (Jacobs 2013).

Aerosols. Aerosols are fine sprays of very small (0.1-0.50 1m) droplets of insecticide. They
are not suitable for residual treatment, but they can be used for space spraying because droplets
remain in air for some time killing insects by contact. Aerosol usually contains pyrethrins,
pyrethroids or another irritant to drive cockroaches out of their hiding places. It causes quick
reduction in cockroach numbers but no longer lasting control. The use of insect growth regulators

(IGRs) in total release aerosol has been of interest due to its low mammalian toxicity. However,

because of their modest efficacy against cockroaches, they have never gained acceptance. In a

16

study of Ameen et al, (2005), noviflumuron sprays applied in infested apartments provided up to
90% reductions of German cockroaches.

Smokes. They are clouds of insecticide particles produced by heat. The particle size (0.001-
0.4m) is smaller than aerosols. Smokes can penetrate deep into hiding places particularly in
basements of building, sewer, and drainage systems. The study on efficacy of smoke-generator
containing pirimiphos-methy| and cypermethrin conducted by Aulicky et al. (2010) resulted to 100
% mortality of B. germanica during first three (3) hours of exposure. Gas chromatography method
confirmed the airborne concentration of active ingredients decreased significantly within 6 to 12
hours after preparation release.

Baits and Traps. Toxic baits are used without trapping device. They consist of a mixture
of attractive food material and an insecticide. Commercially available toxic baits can be in the
form of pellets or paste. In a review by Jacobs (2013), he indicated that the use of baits containing
hydramethylnon, fipronil, sulfluramid, boric acid or abamectin is a successful method of chemical
control. Also, in the study conducted by Verdeprado (2008), male and female German cockroaches
preferred the regular food over bait stations containing indoxacarb as they tend to approach it first.
They also had frequent visits to the regular diet compared to bait. However, once they approach
the baited diet, they tend to stay fora longer period. In a follow-up study, Jarilla (2010) emphasized
that to ensure the success of baiting program in controlling B. germanica, elimination of all
alternative food sources by cleaning the area and covering the leftovers, garbage, and other food
sources before placing the bait formulation is important.

Repellents. \t is the use of different essential oils such as mint oil, spearmint oil and

eucalyptus oil that are known to repel cockroaches. In the study conducted by Tabaru and

7

Mochizuki (2005), they discussed that B. germanica was repelled by ethanol extracts of some
herbs under laboratory conditions. Herbs which showed repellent effects were Anetheum
graveolens (dill), Apium graveolens (celery), Carum carvi (caraway), Cuminum cymimum
(cumin), Coriandrum sativum, (coriander), Cinamomum zeylanicum (cinnamon), Myristica
fragrans (mace) and Capsicum anuum (chili pepper). However, best results are obtained with the
synthetic products that are easier to standardize such as dilutions of DEET (N, N-diethyl-3-
toluamide) or DMP (dimethyl phthalate). This was proven by the study of Schultz et al. (2006)
and reported that solutions with elemol and DEET exhibited greater significance in contact

repellency compared to catnip essential oil.

Urban Pest Control

Global Urban Pest Control

Global pest control is a growing industry at a rapid rate and was valued at USD 20.6 billion
in 2019. Bilagi et al. (2021) forecast that the global pest control market is expected to reach USD
30.0 billion by 2027.The key driving force influencing growth include the rise of urban
developments, growing consumer awareness concerning health and other hygiene issues, changes
in weather patterns, increasing demand for “green” and environment-friendly technology and a
general rise in the intolerance for pests. There is an increasing number of customers relying on do-
it-yourself techniques or the non-professional individuals in handling pest problems. However.
professional pest control operators (PCOs) are predicted to continue to grow over the next several

decades due to the need for experts who can handle pest populations quickly, effectively, and

18

humanely before things get out of hand. Pest control market based on place of application is
classified into commercial, residential, agriculture, industrial and others. Among all, the
commercial segment has the largest share in 2019 due to necessity in preventing pest infestation

to protect the health of employees and customers in commercial buildings (Figure 2).

Figure 2. Global pest control market based on application (Bilagi et al. 2021).

Moreover, the global urban pest control market is driven by rising insurance-based pest
control services, growing hospitality, pharmaceutical and food processing industries, and
complexity of pest control procedures and safety protocols for chemicals used in pest control. Pest
control market based on type is classified into chemical, mechanical, biological, and others. The
chemical segment has the highest revenue generated in 2019 and expected even until 2027. This
is because of its cost-effectiveness and practical use. Thus, the demand for chemicals is high

compared to biological, mechanical, and other methods (Figure 3).

19

Figure 3. Global pest control market based on type (Bilagi et al. 2021).

Philippine Urban Pest Control
Philippines is one of the fastest growing urban pest control market next to Thailand and
Malaysia in Southeast Asia. There is no latest survey or consolidated data available in the

Phil

pines for an estimate value of the present business. However, looking from various

agrochemical industry suppliers, it could be estimated that annual market size is around 5 to 8
million US Dollars. The client comprises pest control operators, private institutions, and local
government units (LGU). Table 3 shows the USD 2.0 million estimated value of annual business

for chemical manufacturers in the Philippines (Dhang 2012).

20

Table 3. Estimated annual business for chemical manufacturers in Philippines (Dhang 2012).

Category of Pesticide Estimated Annual Business (2011)
Termiticide USD 1.0 million

Insecticide USD 750,000

Rodenticide USD 500,000

Total USD 2.25 million

Table 4 shows the usage pattern of various categories of urban pesticides. Chlorpyrifos and
DDVP are the two active ingredients most used by pest control operators. Both chemicals are the
cheapest in the market compared to synthetic pyrethroids. Meanwhile, termite baits and insect

baits are both becoming popular with 15% and 5% annual growth respectively.

Table 4. Classification of various pesticides by usage (Dhang 2012)

Category of Pesticide Classifications by volume
Term Chlorpyrifos (50%)
Repellent Termiticides (20%)
Non repellents (15%)
Baits (15%)
Insecticides Residual spray (15%)
Non residual spray. e.
Space spray (50%)
Baits (5%)
Rodenticide Consumer market (60%)
PCO (40%)

DDVP (30%)

In 1997, Mr. Bailey Yu, then President of Pest Control Association of the Philippines
(PCAP), reported that the existing two hundred PCO companies at that time had estimated gross
sales turnover of Php | billion. It came from the following breakdown: fumigation service 35%,

structural pest control (SPC) 30%, and general pest control (GPC) 35%. Cockroaches ranked as

a

the most important pest concern in GPC while estimated market was at Php 220 million and Php

235 million in 1996 and 1997 respectively (Faylona 1998),

The use of chemical pesticides by the pest control industry is regulated by various state and
federal authorities and must adhere to environmental laws. Pesticides should always be used in a
lawful manner. consistent with the product’s label. Consequently, relevant authority should be
consulted to determine which products are legally allowed in one country when considering
chemical control. The agency regulating the approval of household and urban pesticides in the
Philippines is the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). FDA-registered chemicals are the only
pesticides that should be used by the individual non-professional homeowners or hired PCOs in
the control of German cockroach and other urban pests. There is a perception that the stringent

regulations of FDA hamper the registration of generic and generally cheaper pesticides.

Specific Approaches of Professional Pest Control Operators
against German Cockroach

Cockroach control program is the “bread and butter” service offered by professional pest
control operators as part of general pest control (GPC) service line. The target markets of the local
PCOs are the commercial and industrial establishments like shopping malls, offices, food chains
and outlets, drug factories, restaurants, ships, hotels, and banks along with class A and B residential
subdivisions, condominiums, and villages. Prior to cockroach treatment, the professional PCO and
the prospect client must agree with the written proposal submitted by the exterminator. This

proposal includes the scope of work and the methods to be done, the cost of treatment, and the

22

terms of payment (Robin Pest Control, personal communication 2021). Once agreed, the local

PCO may conduct the following operations:

Cockroach inspection

The first part of a successful cockroach control program is the inspection. It is necessary
to identify the pest species in the area (German cockroach or American cockroach), their breeding
sites and the degree of infestation. When looking for cockroaches, all senses must be used. If it is
difficult to locate the German cockroaches, sense of smell can be used due to their distinctive odor
caused by the presence of their feces and pheromones. Inspections should focus on pest-vulnerable
area where food and water are present. The use of flashlights and mirrors are helpful to see German
cockroaches in difficult to reach areas. Unsealed openings such as loose pipes, sinks and cabinets,
wall-mounted electrical panels, mirrors, light fixtures, fire alarms or emergency lighting, and
hollow-legged tables and chairs must be inspected. Equipment where heat is generated: behind
refrigerators and freezers, ovens, stoves, and electrical junction boxes should also be examined.
Cockroach observed during daytime maybe an indication of extremely large population. Table 3
shows the common harborage of German cockroaches as lifted from National Pest Management

Association (2019).

23

Table 5. Common harborage of German cockroaches (NPMA 2019).

‘Area

Type of Equipment

Purpose

Dishwashing
area

Food
preparation area

Miscellaneous

Three Compartment Sink
Dishwashing Unit

Grease Trap/ Interceptor

Garbage Disposal Unit

Hand wash sink

Prep Sink
Ovens
Soup Kettles

Thermalizer

Pantry/ Dry Storage

Employee Lockers

Cleaning and sanitizing, cooking, and serving tools
Cleaning and sanitizing dishes, utensils, and glassware

Device to intercept grease and solids prior to
wastewater moving into sewer system

Device used to shred solid food particles into small
pieces to travel into wastewater stream

‘Small sink designated for use by staff for washing
hands.

Sink used for washing foods for serving and cooking
Used for baking and cooking of foods
Used for cooking large batch soups

Equipment which can be used for holding food to
maintain serving temperature or for re-heating food.

Areas where dry goods are stored without refrigeration.

Areas where employees store personal belongings and
take breaks

Treatment selection

After a thorough inspection and familiarization of the job site, the different control

methods available for use must be reviewed (e.g., biological control, mechanical control, cultural

control, chemical control) and will be determined which one would be the most applicable.

Usually, integrated control procedures have a better effect than a single control procedure. It is

24

best to combine the sanitation program with some forms of mechanical control plus chemical
control procedures.

The sanitation and cleanliness of the area is primarily responsibility of the client prior to
the pest control treatment. The collaboration between the pest control operators and the staff of
establishment is essential for the successful cockroach control program. Cockroach control should
include better storage of leftover food and proper collection and disposal of garbage to reduce
amount of trash and garbage (Cariaso 2003). Food, water, and harborage must be eliminated to
increase pest control success. Cleanliness and sanitation are requisites for a preventive action in
cockroach control program.

Meanwhile, determining the entry point or the source of pest is an important corrective
action during the control program done by professional exterminator. Mechanical alteration such
as sealing of cracks around wall-mounted electrical panels, light fixtures, bulletin boards, sinks
and cabinets while repairing of door gaskets, or self-closing doors are necessary. The use of
vacuum cleaners to remove heavy infestation provides immediate control and instant customer
satisfaction. It also reduces the infestation into a manageable level.

In the use of pesticides in managing German cockroaches, products shall be appropriately
evaluated for the intended use and site. These pesticides may be residual, non-residual, in bait
formulation or an insect growth regulator (IGR). In an area heavily infested with German
cockroaches, the initial treatment is called a “clean-up treatment”. Spraying is done thoroughly to
significantly reduce the cockroach infestation. It is necessary for regular and continuing follow-up
treatments after the initial clean up. Residual chemicals are used for cockroach control due to its

killing action which continues for about week thereby causing death of newly hatched nymphs.

25

Knockdown insecticides on the other hand works by irritating the cockroach and flushing them
out from their hiding places. German cockroaches targeted by knockdown insecticides run wildly
until killing effect of chemical causes death in about 5-10 minutes (Catan and Catan 1980).

According to some PCOs, it is prescribed to use the combination of both residual and knockdown

insecticides for clean-up and follow-up preventive treatments. In areas where spraying is not
possible due to possible contamination of food or food utensils such as restaurants and food outlet,

the preferred chemical method are insecticide baits and IGRs. Cockroach bait formulations can be

gels, liquid or dry-flowable. The baits are placed where the cockroaches have been observed to be
active during the night. German cockroaches will be attracted to the bait and will die several hours
afier ingestion. It is advised to keep bait stored separately from other chemical products that might
contaminate it resulting its unpalatability to B. germanica, Consequently, the IGRs mode of action
is to prevent the normal development of immature cockroaches so they cannot reproduce as adults.
Also, IGRs cause the ootheca to release prematurely (Oi et al. 2017). In warehouse or non-food.
storage area, dusting may be utilized for cockroach control. In this method, insecticide powder can
be blown into spaces with hand-operated puff-duster or a plunger-type duster (Jacobs 2013). Extra
caution must be observed during application though since dusts easily floats in the air and may

contaminate non-target areas.

Monitoring
Cockroach control is an ongoing process. The constant monitoring of the facility for the

pest activity would be a great help to hired PCOs of one establishment. However, the pest control

professionals most likely visit the facility on weekly or bi-weekly basis. Thus, the staff of the

26

establishment needs to report any signs of pest activity. Another monitoring device which can be
used are the sticky traps. They can be the “eyes” of hired PCOs in the property and are working
for 24/7.They are placed in dry areas along structural lines, adjacent to walls, and comer where
cockroaches travel and close to suspected cockroach harborages. Monitors can give sufficient
information to the professional pest control operators such as the presence of all life stages of
German cockroaches indicates that they are dealing with an established infestation, while one to a
few adults indicates that PCO is dealing with a new introduction (Oi et al. 2017). Moreover,
monitors may suggest of which direction the cockroach came from to better focus the routine

inspections.

Documentation

Reporting and documentation may be required as part of agreement between the hired
PCOs and the client (personal communication). Important documents include a scope of service,
pest activity reports, service reports, corrective action reports, trap layout maps, lists of approved
pesticides, pesticide usage reports and applicator licenses. In the documentation, it should also
include notes when corrective actions were implanted to determine which steps have been
successful and should be integrated into part of cockroach control program. Up-to-date pest control
documentation benefits the two parties either the PCOs or the client. For the client, it is a good
sign to an auditor that the facility is taking pest control seriously. While for the hired PCOs, it can
be used by the client as basis for the renewal of the contract since it can serve as tool to offer as

part ofa quarterly or annual review prior to any scope of alteration (NPMA 2019).

27

A successful control program against the German cockroach has the four specific
approaches mentioned above. Nevertheless, control failure is also possible if factors such as the
close association of German cockroaches with people and food, their rapid reproduction, and their
tendency to gather in inaccessible places are not taken into consideration. Control failure can also
result if German cockroach has developed resistance. Scharf and Rollins (2020) discussed that B.
germanica are becoming more difficult to eliminate as they developed cross-resistance to the pest

management industry's insecticides in urban areas.

In the Philippines, the history of insecticide resistance of German cockroach was not well
documented. In fact, there is no published data on insecticide resistance of German cockroach to
any novel and conventional insecticides. The only available literature is on chemical control of
German cockroach by Mendoza (1976), Verdeprado (2008) and Jarilla (2010). Because of this
dearth of information on cockroach resistance, many PCOs nowadays face this serious problem
due to ineffective control against B. germanica in different establishments such as malls,
supermarkets, restaurants, and bakeries. This problem results to negative effect to local PCO
industry due to frequent complaints, “call-backs” and the worst case are the cancelled contracts.
Gonzalez (1981) gave this challenge to those in academe and research to undertake studies in
biology and control of pests found in urban areas which would be a big help for the pest control

industry and the general public.

28

ide Resistance

IRAC (2019) defined insecticide resistance as the heritable change in the sensitivity of a
pest population which is reflected in the repeated failure of a product to achieve the expected level
of control when used according to the label recommendation for that pest species. It arises because
of artificial selection of insect populations with an insecticide. As a result of continued application
over time, some naturally occurring traits that confer resistance are favored and thereby selected.
Thus, the surviving insect population becomes increasingly difficult to control at the recommended
rate and application interval, as individuals with these traits selectively thrive and proliferate.
Insecticide resistance is an increasing problem faced by those who use insecticide for the control

of medical, veterinary, and agricultural insect pests. On the contrary susceptibility is defined as the

state of being likely to be harmed by exposure to a particular thing, in this case, exposure of test
insects to an insecticide. Susceptible organisms are those who were killed after insecticidal

exposure while tolerant individuals are who survived. The decreased susceptibility of a pest

population to an insecticide that was previously effective at controlling the pestis called insecticide
resistance (Heong et al. 2013).

Resistance can lead to increased application rates, frequency of pesticide-use and ultimate
loss of efficacy (Scott et al. 2000). Infinite supply of novel insecticides to replace current
insecticide cannot be assumed due to the increased difficulty in discovering new compounds, high
cost of product development and the loss of currently available materials because of the stricter
policy of the government institution regulating the pesticides (Georghiou 1986; Hammock and

Soderlund 1986). Operational factors in insecticide resistance are those related to application of

les. These factors include the chemical nature of pesticides, the relationship of previously

29

used chemicals, the persistence of residues and formulations, the application and selection
threshold, the life stage selected, the mode of application, space limiting selection and, the
alternation selection (Georghiou and Taylor 1977). Operational factors are under man’s control

and their manipulation may help to delay insecticide resistance

Insecticide Resistance Mechanisms

Yu (2008) explained that there are four possible types of resistance mechanisms to main
insecticide groups in all insecticides to date. These are reduced penetration, target site insensitivity,
metabolic resistance (simplified as physiological resistance) and behavioral resistance.
Explanation of each type follows:

Reduced penetration. \t is the situation in which toxins are incapable to penetrate the
cuticle of insects. This can be explained by the binding protein or lipid reservoir that traps the
insecticide in the cuticle; the degrading enzyme located in cuticle: and the high lipid & protein
content which become impermeable cuticle.

Target insensitivity. \t is mutation-based resistance mechanism and results to alteration of
target sites. It occurs when the previously binding site protein is altered in the structure or
conformation which leads to failure of the toxicant to bind to the target (Brooks 1976).

Metabolic Resistance. tis the ability of the insect to increase detoxification of insecticides.

This can be explained by three processes such as gene amplification, gene over-expression and

increased enzyme activity. Gene amplification is the production of greater number of genes for
resistance. Resistance via gene over-expression is when one gene can transcribe greater number
while increased enzyme activity occurs when a detoxifying enzyme performs faster than the

normal one. Examples of detoxifying enzymes that have been shown to be involved in insecticide

30

resistance are the cytochrome monooxygenases (CYP), hydrolases and esterases and the
conjugating enzymes.

In the control of German cockroach, provided that insecticides are an integral part of pest
control programs, the potential for development of physiological resistance will be significant
(Rust 2001). Strategies to rotate the use of different insecticides have often recommended
counteracting this type of resistance.

Behavioral resistance. \t is the development of ability of the insect to avoid a dose that
would be lethal. It is stimulus-dependent and can be classified as hypersensitivity or hyper-
irritability. Insect’s response once they have this mechanism is to move away from the affected
area, avoidance of initially a phagostimulant or autotomy (the casting off a part of the body by an
animal under threat), Aside from studies showing the existence of physiological resistance in
German cockroach, there have been few examples of behavioral resistance. The study of Silverman
and Bieman (1993) reported one strain of B. germanica was observed to have aversion to feeding
on glucose in diet and did not consume toxic bait containing glucose. Moreover, strains collected
from Republic of Korea and USA showed glucose aversion (Silverman and Ross 1994). These
reports suggest that rotation of baits with different active ingredient will not be enough to prevent
reduced performances of the toxicants. Also, monitoring of food preference and necessary changes
should be evaluated to prevent avoidance. These scenarios are extremely important and should be
considered in German cockroach control.

The most important principle for resistance measurement is the dosage-montalily response.
When the dose increases, the mortality of the tested population also increases. With some

mathematical transformation (e.g., mortality to probits and dosage to logarithm), it is possible to

31

get a straight-line relating dosage and mortality. This line can help in estimating the dose expected
to kill a certain proportion of the insect population. Commonly used levels are LDso, LDso and
LDss (Cochran 1995). According to Yu (2008), LDsois a more sensitive index of toxicity than any
other concentrations and is used as standard for comparing the relative toxicity of insecticides due
to following reasons. First, LDso has narrower 95% confidence interval than other LD values.

Added to this, according to normal distribution for the logarithms of tolerance concentration

(Finney 1972), there are more individuals that respond at LDo levels (and is at maximal) compared

with indivi

luals with high tolerance or low tolerance. Lastly, the sigmoid curve is steepest in the
region of 50% response so that small change in concentration in this region of the curve causes
large change in percent mortality. Thus, LDso is more sensitive index of toxicity than any other
dose. The LDso is commonly expressed as milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg). However, there are
instances that exact dose initially administered to test insect cannot be determined thus, LCso is
alternatively used. LCso is the concentration of the insecticide in the external media which can kill
50% of the test population. The 95% confidence interval (upper and lower limits) on LCso are
parameters to indicate whether the difference of toxicities of certain insecticide to a test population
is significant if no overlapping is observed.

The slope of log dose-probit straight line provides a useful information as well. Slope value
is related to the variance of the population. If line is steep having high slope (b>2), population is

relatively homogeneous while a flat line or shallow slope (b<I) indicates a heterogeneous

population showing a large variance in response to the insecticide (Yu 2008).
Although German cockroaches have been reported to have developed resistance against

many groups of insecticides, it does not mean that all German cockroach populations are resistant

32

to all insecticides. Some populations of B. germanica that are resistant to some insecticides may
be susceptible to other types of insecticides (Cochran 1995). The current challenge to
entomologists and to pest control industry is to propose management strategies to delay or prevent
the development of insecticide resistance in German cockroaches. Effective tactics can best be
proposed when a complete field monitoring and status of its susceptibility to currently used

insecticides are achieved.

Bioassay Technique

In the monitoring of insecticide resistance and bio-efficacy of different insecticides, the
choice of the bioassay is essential. To date, a wide range of bioassay and biochemical tests are
available, but results may not be comparable since different tests measure dissimilar parameters
thus, leading to complicated analysis of monitoring data (IRAC 2019). In detecting insecticide
resistance in the German cockroach, there are two commonly used types of tests: the topical
application test and the jar test. Topical application had been used to monitor resistance in
numerous insect species (Ffrech-Constant and Roush 1991), whereas the jar test (Keller et al.
1956) was specifically developed for the use with the German cockroach. Several researchers

studied these two methods in tests with numerous insecticides such as propoxur, diazinon,

chlorpyrifos, cypermethrin, bendiocarb, chlorpyrifos, fenithrothion, and pyreth

s and concluded
that jar tests are more reliable than topical applications since they rely on tarsal contact with

insecticide deposits (Scharf et al. 1995). The WHO jar test is a standard method in measuring the

susceptibility levels of a German cockroach population to a given insecticide. This technique is

33

designed to investigate the emergence of an insecticide-resistant strain and devised to detect
physiological resistance in cockroaches. The method employs treating glass jar with insecticide
solutions diluted in analytical grade acetone. The treated jars will be rolled horizontally allowing
solutions to run evenly over the bottom and side until the acetone evaporates. Afterwards, the adult
German cockroaches will be bio-assayed on the treated glass jars for | hour and then transferred
to holding container. The results of mortality will be recorded after 24 hours (WHO 1970).

In various studies, researchers have paid attention on using the adult male as test insect
because of its uniform size and weight. On the other hand, Koehler et al. (1993) reported that late-
stage nymphs of B. germanica were significantly more tolerant to bendiocarb, cypermethrin, and
chlorpyrifos than adult males. Valles et al. (1994) obtained same results on some pyrethroids. Qian
et al. (2010), also discussed that late instar B. germanica (six-week-old nymphs) were more
difficult to kill than adult males and females with dichlorvos and propoxur. The author used the
late instar of Blattella germanica (six-week-old nymphs) in the current study after rearing in the
laboratory to ensure same age range during the bioassay procedure.

In light of the above literatures, the present study was undertaken to shorten the gap in the
unavailability of published data on the current status of susceptibility of German cockroach to
commercial insecticides in the Philippines. Results obtained from this study can improve on
decision making in urban pest control industry in considering an appropriate insecticide for

effective control of German cockroach.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Figure 4 shows the schematic diagram of the methods used in the current study. The
cockroaches were collected from nine sites, three sites from each of the three towns in Laguna.
The collected gravid female German cockroaches were brought to laboratory and mass reared at
temperature 28 °C and relative humidity of 58 £2% to ensure enough samples of six-week-old
nymphs during the bioassay procedure. Afterwards, five commercial insecticides were prepared
which served as representatives of five insecticide group (organophosphates, carbamates,
pyrethroids, phenyl pyrazole and neonicotinoids). When all materials were ready, the bioassay
procedures were conducted. Prior to final bioassay, preliminary dose-fixing experiment was useful
step in the selection of the test dosages to be applied in the final bioassay. At least five to six
concentrations were used in the final bioassay using the WHO glass jar method. The final step was
the data analysis using the POLO plus version 2.0 software program to conduct probit analysis.

The detailed description of each step presented were described in the following subsections.

35

Los BANOS CALAMBA, BAY
cole eave | Calex grave | catex grave | cals grave | colez ga | cola gave “yo | cae | cae ge
fensie Germ | female Geman | female Geman | femae Geman | femae Geman | female Gen le Geman | ferae German | female German
coaread fm | carter fon cadmach fen | ech fom gare) fam | cea rom | cra om
{Bxpematen | LEM pson BV pandaon | CA ppdaion YM mpdaion BAYS opdaon | BAM popaaon

i \ N Si Ca

'Massrearngin the laboratory with 28¢C+2andelative humidity of 58 +2.

J

Preparation of five commerilinsectcdes

PMR AY (ESL A AE

Preliminary Bioassay
a
Final Bioassay
7

‘Data Analysisusing POLO Plussotware

Figure 4. Schematic diagram of the methods done in the

Collection of Test Insects

current study.

Insect collection was done from three towns of Laguna namely: Los Baflos, Bay, and

Calamba City. In each town, the collection was done from three (3)

locations, each location was

at least 1.5-2 kilometers away from the other locations to reduce the possibility of cross population

mating (Figure 5). The collection was done at night (7:00 pm ~ 10:

pm), with each location

visited once a week thereby ensuring enough gravid females to provide the F: nymphs for the

bioassay.

36

Figure 5. A portion of the map of Laguna showing the nine collection sites (Google My Maps 2020)

paar eeaner

CALAMBA, LAGUNA

Figure 6. The specific locations of collection sites in Calamba, Laguna (Google My Maps 2020)

Figure 8. The specific locations of collection sites in Bay. Laguna (Google My Maps 2020)

37

Figure 9. Collection of Blartellu germanica, A-B. Colony of field population of B. germunica C
inspection D: collection via vacuum cleaner E: collection via brush method. F-G: collection via stick
method

39

Mass Rearing of Test Nymphs

The collected German cockroaches were brought to the Toxicology Laboratory, Institute
of Weed Science, Entomology and Plant Pathology. College of Agriculture and Food Science,
University of the Philippines Los Bafios and reared in the laboratory with temperature of 28°C+2
and relative humidity of 58 +2%. Gravid females from each collection site were transferred to
cylindrical plastic jar with petroleum jelly at the top and covered with ladies’ stocking to prevent
the escape of the cockroaches (Fig. 10). The rest of the collected cockroaches were killed and
disposed of properly. The gravid females were provided with water and dog pellets and monitored
daily for egg laying and egg hatching. Once first day old nymphs were observed, the remaining
gravid females were transferred to a new cylindrical plastic jar while those without oothecae were
killed. This was done daily. Nymphs were provided with dog pellets and water soaked in cotton.
The jars were checked daily for signs of feed deterioration, excessive moisture, and mold

accumulation. Six-week-old nymphs were used for the bioassay tests.

Figure 10. Cylindrical plastic jar used as mass rearing container of B, germanica.

Figure 11. Open shelves housing the mass rearing containers of B. germanicu collected from
three towns of Laguna,

40

41

Preparation of Test Insecticides

Selection of Test Insecti

Five formulated insecticides (Figure 12) from five insecticide groups. namely:
organophosphates, carbamates. synthetic pyrethroids, phenyl pyrazoles, and neonicotinoids were
used in this study. One representative chemical from each insecticide groups was selected:
Dichloroviny! Dimethy! Phosphate (DDVP) from organophosphates. propoxur from carbamates.
a-cypermethrin from synthetic pyrethroids. fipronil from pheny! pyrazole and thiamethoxam from

neonicotinoids. All compounds were purchased from the suppliers. Table 4 shows the list of

insecticides that were used in the bioassay tests.

Figure 12. Five commercial insecticides used in the study

42

Table 6. Insecticide formulations used in the bioassay test against B. germanica

Insecticide Group Common name % Active Ingredient Type of formulation
Organophosphates __ DDVP 25% emulsifiable concentrate
Carbamates propoxur 18.7% emulsifiable concentrate
Pyrethroids a-cypermethrin 13% suspension concentrate
Phenyl pyrazoles Fipronil 2.6% suspension concentrate
Neonicotinoids thiamethoxam 21.6% suspension concentrate

Preparation of Stock Solutions

Stock solutions of the five insecticides were first prepared at 10.000 ppm. Known quantity
for each insecticide was dissolved in analytical grade acetone as solvent. The formula below was

used in preparing the concentrations.

CiVi=C2V2
where:
Ci= Initial concentration C2= Final concentration
Vi= Initial volume V2= Final volume

Preparation of Serial Dilutions

From stock solutions (SS), serial dilutions were done using the equation C;V\=C2V2, where

Ci= initial concentration. Vi=initial volume, C2= final concentration, and V2= final volume to
obtain four concentrations (1,000 ppm: 100 ppm: 10 ppm: and | ppm) using the analytical grade

acetone as solvent as shown in Figure 13.

43

Hint a

10m! 9m 9mt

bla Jl

10° dilution 107dilution 10° dilution 10“dilution

Figure 13. Illustration showing the serial dilutions

Treatment of Glass Jars for Residual Bioassay Test

Glass jars with a volume of 325 mL, height of 14 cm, and diameter of 5 cm were used
for the tests (Figure 14A). The insecticide solution was dispensed into individual glass jars using
a disposable syringe to deliver 2 mL solution. Immediately after treatment, the glass jars were
rolled horizontally on a flat surface and then on a non-heating hotdog roller (Figure 14B) so that
solution ran evenly over the bottom and sides until the solvents had evaporated completely. The
upper inside lid of the jars was smeared with a thin layer of petroleum jelly and enclosed with

mesh cloth to prevent the cockroach escape (WHO 1970: Scharf et al. 1995).

44

Figure 14. Glass jar (A) and non-heating hot dog roller (B) used in the preparation of treated glass jars

Nymphal Bioassay

The bioassay was performed within the framework of WHO (1970) and Scharf et al.

(1995) techniques. with slight modifications. From the nymphal rearing jars. healthy and active

individuals were chosen while lethargic and abnormal individuals were discarded. The nymphs
were transferred first into a holding container for one hour to verify ifthey were healthy and active

individuals.

Batches of ten (10) six-week-old nymphs were transferred to treated glass jars with extra
care. The unhealthy or damaged nymphs were removed and replaced. Exposure time of contact
was one (|) hour. Afterwards, the cockroaches were transferred to clean holding containers (Figure

15) provided with ample food and water. The number of dead/moribund insects was recorded after

45

24 hours. A cockroach was considered dead if it was unable to turn back to its normal posture by
itself within 2 min after being touched on the abdomen with a pair of forceps (Scharf et al. 1995).
When the control mortality exceeded 10%, the test was considered unacceptable. Each treatment
including the control used four (4) jars containing ten (10) cockroaches in each concentration. A

total of three (3) preliminary trials were conducted for each population.

Figure 15. Holding container showing the front and upper portion.

Set-up for Final Bioassay

After determining the range of mortality of nymphs from preliminary bioassay. the final
concentrations (at least 5-6 concentrations) yielding 5% - 95% mortality in 24h were used. In each
dose/concentration, 40 insects were used per insecticide treatment. For ease of handling and to
save on space, ten (10) cockroaches were put in each of the four (4) jars to complete the 40 insects
per concentration. There were five (5) batches of final bioassay trials for each population. ‘The

batch trials were done per population testing the five-insecticide treatment. These five trial

46

bioassays were done to randomize effects related to laboratory procedure. After 24h observation,

insects (dead or alive) used from the final bioassay test were discarded.

Data Analysis of Final Bioassay

Mortality data from all five trials in the final bioassay in each German cockroach
populations were used for analysis. LCso values were calculated from log dosage-probit mortality
regression line using POLO plus version 2.0 software program. The program automatically
computes the corrected mortality. Standard deviation or confidence intervals of the means of LCso

values, and slopes were also determined.

In this study, each population of B. germanica from nine collection sites were bio-assayed
to five commercial insecticides and were analyzed independently. Purposive sampling was done
on three collection sites on each town where the abundance of Blattella germanica was observed
to ensure sufficient samples were used until the end of the study. Due to sampling method used
(which is non-probability), samples taken from each collection sites cannot represent the whole

population of main collection sites from Los Bafios, Calamba, and Bay. Furthermore, due to

limitation of time and labor force, the author performed bioassay method by batch on each German
cockroach population as well as the data analysis.

Aside from the bioassay results on each population done in laboratory, the owners or staff
securing the collection sites were interviewed regarding to cockroach control methods employed

during the collection period. Moreover, chemical insecticides previously used for cockroach

control as well as the manner and frequency of application were asked.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

This chapter is divided into two (2) parts. Part | presented the description of each collection
site within the geographical framework of each of the three main collection sites namely: Town of,
Los Bafios, City of Calamba and Town of Bay. Each collection site was at least about 1.5-2. km
away from another collection site to avoid population migration which can affect the gene
frequency of German cockroach. The susceptibility status of six-week-old B. germanica from nine
populations when tested in five commercial insecticides was presented in Part II. Susceptibility is
defined as the state of being likely to be harmed by exposure to a particular thing, in this case,
exposure of test insects to an insecticide. Susceptible organisms are those who were killed after
insecticidal exposure while those survived are tolerant individuals. On the other hand, the
decreased susceptibility of a pest population to an insecticide that was previously effective at

controlling the pest is called insecticide resistance (Heong et al. 2013). Determination of

insecticide resistance is done by comparing the susceptibility of field population to a confirmed
susceptible strain (a population which was known not exposed to any insecticide for a certain
number of generations). In this study, the focus was on determination of toxicity of five

insecticides used and not on insecticide resistance due to lack of susceptible strain of German

cockroach. LCs was the parameter utilized to compare the relative toxicity of five insect

ides

while the 95% confidence interval on LCso indicates whether the

ifference of toxicities of certain
insecticide to a test population is significant if no overlapping is observed. The higher the LCso

value, the lower the toxicity while the lower the LC5o value, the higher the toxicity.

48

Geographical Analysis

Table 7 presents the location source of the nine test populations of B. germanica used in
bioassay tests. The chemical insecticides used by the owner or personnel assigned in the collection
sites are also listed in Table 7. The geographical descriptions below present a clear picture of the

location of each site in relation to the rest of the sites.

Los Bafios. The municipality is located at 14°10°N 121 °13°E. Elevation at these coordinates is
estimated at 118 meters or 387 feet above sea level. Its land area is about 54, 22 km?, It has a
tropical wet climate which has monthly mean temperatures above 18°C in every month of the year
(Mcknight and Hess 2000). It is classified as an urban area (NSO 2006). The three (3) collection
sites were restaurant kitchen with a population code LBK: a meat shop with a population code
LBM and a vegetable store with a population code LBV. The distance of the collection sites from
each other is ca. 2.5 km, The town of Los Bafios is bounded at northwest by City of Calamba (7.22

Kilometers) while on the east by the town of Bay (6.32 kilometers).

Calamba. The city is situated at 14.1877° N, 121.1251° E. It has a land area of 149.5 km? with
elevation estimated at 98 meters or 322 feet above sea level. It has a tropical monsoon climate with
a short dry season (which lasts only from January to April) and a longer rainy season. The city of
Calamba belongs to first city income class of the province of Laguna. Due to highly urbanized
location and increase in population (PSA 2020), many restaurants, markets, and meat shops are

widespread to fulfill the demand of the society. The collection sites in this town were two (2) meat

49

shops with population code CALMI and CALM2 respectively, while CALC is a coconut grater

shop. The distance of the collection sites was ca. 1.5-2.5 km away from each other.

Bay. The town is located at 14.1320° N, 121.2569° E. Elevation at these coordinates is estimated
at 17 m (56 ft) above sea level. This town belongs to a 2™ class municipality in the province of
Laguna and has a land area of 42.66 km?. The town of Bay has tropical wet climate with a short
dry season (from January to May) and a longer rainy season. The average precipitation in a year
is 108 mm. The three collection sites were a meat shop with population code BAYM, a sari-sari
store with population code of BAYS, and a small food stall kitchen (BAYK). The collection sites
were ca. 1.5-3.5 km away from each other.

The establishment of population of Blattella germanica depends on the availability of food,
water, and harborage (Valles 1996). This is supported by the study of Tanaka and Motoki (1993)
that heating and food supply influence the distribution and population of B. germanica. Therefore,
one population of B. germanica will not simply migrate to form another colony or population if
there is enough source of food in the current habitat. This scenario was considered in the selection
of sites for collection of the cockroach populations since population mobility is a very important
behavioral factor for resistance development (Yu 2008). When susceptible insects migrate to
another population, the influx of migrants dilute the frequency of resistance among survivor after
insecticide treatments. However, Barcay and Bennett (1991) discussed that starvation increases
the distance travelled, velocity and the proportion of time in motion of adult males and final instars
but not adult females. In the current study, average distance of each collection site from another

collection site is 1.5 to 2.0 kilometers to avoid the cross-mating of the different populations. Only

50

the adult gravid females were collected which proved to be less mobile than adult males and final

instars. Further, gravid females are not affected by the starvation or lack of food supply and
remain in the respective harborage. In the current study, collection sites are food plenty such as
restaurant kitchen, meat shops, vegetable stores and kitchen food stall, therefore no movement of
German cockroach from one collection site to another. Only accidental transport which can be by
humans, animals, or shipment of baggage might be a possible reason for migration of the German
cockroach from one population to another.

Sanitation is the first step in effective German cockroach control program. The removal of
food sources and water reduce the population of German cockroach and lessen the risk of
encouraging new infestations. Failure to maintain the cleanliness might lead to the increase of
German cockroach population in an area. This primary control strategy should be done before
doing any insecticide applications (Ogg et al. 2006). However, some individuals skip this
necessary step to see dramatic effect on German cockroach control. This condition was evident
and observed by the author on some collection sites selected in this study. Owner or staff of
selected establishments apply commercial insecticides whenever German cockroaches are noticed
even without eliminating the resources needed by cockroaches such a water, food, and shelter.

Thus, frequent application of chemicals is practiced which might be a possible reason on the

susceptibility status of nine populations of B. germanica and discussed in the next section.

%S1-0 wsyIN|yAD wayyy

“%60'0 wisyrosd! losory MAVE aeg lets pooy 6
%S00'0 soudipoweze weg SAVE 8
%§ uLsyraussads aigeseids WAVE L

doys
VIN UO ov Joyes® inuo303 9

%S1'0 UyoUUDds> require
“ee QUUyoUESIA Josoray ZWIv> doys ray s
%S'7 YaWeIaP aiqeceads IWTv2 doys 1a b
VIN 3UON AGT SITS S]qUIDTD A, €
% ol uuyjouuad aigeceads wat doys ay z
-%0 1-0 wyousydco

“%01'0 wisyrosdt us, Jososay soueg $0'] aya
luejoeme 2p Saaisaype eg yaT queineysay 1
pasn pop, “ON
(suarpas3uy any — suonenusoy jeotWayD ——_uoneindog UMOL — ang uONHDaI1109 —_uoNeIndog

sayjavo14909

3y} JosIUOD 01 pasn sjea1wayo pur sisa Aesseoig UI pasn H2/uMUAaS -g Jo SuoNeindod 1S9) DUIU DY) JO 2910S UONI0"] “Z 9142,

52

Suscepti

of the Different German Cockroach Populations

Los Bafios Town
The results of bioassays of five commercial insecticides against the six-week-old nymphs
of Blatiella germanica collected from the three sites are discussed below.

LBK population (Site 1). The insecticidal potency of five commercial insecticides at 24
hours after treatment (HAT) is shown in Table 8. Among five insecticides, fipronil was the most
toxic having the lowest LCso value (LCso=22.59 ppm) while DDVP was the least toxic having the
highest LCso value (LCs0=2,568.28 ppm). Based on overlapping confidence interval at 95%, the
toxicity of propoxur and thiamethoxam are the same. Hence, the decreasing toxicity was fipronil
> thiamethoxam = propoxur > a-cypermethrin > DDVP.

Slopes generated based on concentration-mortality responses varied from 1.001 to 4.93.
The response of B. germanica to DDVP had the steepest slope (4.93) while response to fipronil
had the flattest slope (1.001) as illustrated in Figure 16. This shows that response of the LBK
population is more homogeneous to DDVP (the least effective insecticide) but less homogeneous
to fipronil (the most effective insecticide). It appears that the LBK population has shown tolerance
to DDVP and possibly starting to develop resistance to it. According to Brown and Pal (1971), the
frequency of resistant genotypes increases in populations under insecticide pressure. With this
information, PCOs can decide to minimize the use of DDVP or other insecticides in the
organophosphate group.

The source of the LBK population is a restaurant kitchen (Table 7) which only implements
in-house control of the German cockroach. Based on observation and personal interview, the

restaurant staff monitor the cockroach infestation using bait trap. This product contains a food

53

attractant which lures the German cockroach, which then gets stuck in the adhesive within. The
commercial roach trap is effective in monitoring as well as in reduction of the cockroach
population. Once the infestation level became unmanageable, the restaurant staff resort to using
aerosol formulation available from the nearby hardware or supermarket. The formulation contains
a mixture of imiprothrin 0.10% and cyphenothrin 0.10% from the class of synthetic pyrethroids.
Rahayu et al. (2016) reported that commercial aerosol insecticides containing pyrethroids cause
low to very high level of resistance to German cockroaches in Indonesia. In the current study, a-
cypermethrin, a synthetic pyrethroid was less toxic against the LBK population compared to

fipronil or thiamethoxam.

LBM population (Site 2). Based on LCso values, the general trend of toxicity of five
insecticides against the LBM population was thiamethoxam > propoxur = fipronil > a -
cypermethrin > DDVP (Table 9). Thiamethoxam was the most toxic compound with the lowest
LCso value (LCso = 38.36 ppm) while DDVP was the least toxic with the highest LCso value
(LCs0=2,120.39 ppm). Meanwhile, propoxur and fipronil are equally toxic to the LBM population.

The slope values of the log-probit lines for the five insecticides ranged from 1.29 to 3.78

(Figure 17). These responses are i

ication that LBM population has less heterogeneity to the
selection pressure provided by the five commercial toxicants. This shows that response of B.
germanica from the LBM population is most homogeneous to a-cypermethrin (3.78) and DDVP
(3.55) and least homogeneous to propoxur (1.29). The small variance in slope shown by the
homogeneous response to a-cypermethrin and DDVP by LBM indicates possible chance of the

presence of resistance gene developing in the population thus decreasing genetic variation

Sa

(Rosenheim & Hoy 1986). The decrease in genetic variation might be due to continued selection
pressure which in this case - frequent application of synthetic pyrethroids, thus eliminating
susceptible individuals and artificially selecting individuals with resistant genes. With this
information, PCOs can be informed to altemate their choice of chemicals from synthetic pyrethroid
class into other groups to slow down the rate of insecticide resistance.

The collection site (LBM) is a meat shop located at the Los Bafios public market (Table 7).
Based on interview, the market administrator assigns an in-house group to treat the area with
synthetic pyrethroid (permethrin 10%) through misting and spot spraying. Since a-cypermethrin
is related to the currently used chemical (permethrin) with respect to mode of action, it would be
prudent to shift to another class of insecticide except organophophates. Pyrethroids are neurotoxins
acting on the production of action potential. As sodium channel modulators, they slow the closing
and inactivation of the channel causing it to remain longer than normal mode. Keeping sodium
channel open re-excite the same area of membrane resulting to repetitive firing and hyperexcitation
in targeted insect (IRAC 2019). Nerve axons occur throughout the insect’s body, when pyrethroids
enter the body, the symptoms are extremely fast-acting resulting to immediate “knockdown”

(BASF 2013).

LBV population (Site 3). Thiamethoxam and fipronil are equally toxic to LBV population
having the lowest LCso values (LCso= 30.78 ppm for fipronil and LCsy= 43.59 ppm for
thiamethoxam) while the least toxic compound was DDVP having the highest LCso value
(LCso=1,671.20 ppm). The toxicity of DDVP, a-cypermethrin, and propoxur are different from the

other toxicants based on confidence interval (Table 10).

55

Figure 18 shows the slopes of the concentration—mortality responses of LBV population to
five insecticides. The slope values of fipronil and thiamethoxam were 0.89 and 0.98 respectively
indicating more heterogeneity response of LBV population. The slope values were 3.92 and 4.07
for a-cypermethrin and DDVP respectively indicating more homogeneous response. The
homogeneity response of German cockroaches in the latter insecticides indicates possible
development of tolerance in the insects. Using this information, PCOs and individual pesticide
applicator can be advised to minimize the use of pesticides containing organophosphate and
synthetic pyrethroids in the meantime and instead use the newer fipronil and thiamethoxam if
available.

LBV population was collected from a vegetable store (Table 7). Abundant German
cockroaches was observed every collection trip due to availability of food source such as rotten
coconut husks and coconut meat. Environmental modification is the main cockroach control
method and no hired pest control operator is servicing the establishment (personal
communication). Without insecticide exposure, the LBV population could be a source of a
susceptible strain. According to Syed et al. (2014), resistance does not develop unless and until an
insecticide is applied repeatedly over a certain period of time. However, bioassay results showed
the reduced toxicity of DDVP and possible presence of resistance gene in LBV population as

discussed in homogeneity response.

sjeaiaiut aouapyuoa Hurddeyian0 ayi Jo asnesaq wasaysip Aque: tou aze uuinjoo awes ay) ut sonia] sues axp YI Sanwa ,

P(LLS'189°% — EL9'8SP'2) 9L7'898°7 Z67'0FE6'Y S6L'91 - 976 = K daqa

9(€Z6'7ZL -L10°019) Sl€'b99 SEL OFLST O74 - xS9S'7 = 6 unyrauuadéo-n

4 (6SL'€Z1 - 898°6S) Sores vOl'OF0L'I ooe'e - x10L1 = 4 anxodosg

Q (ble L9 -1SE9E) Sbe'or VOF9P'L Lev z > XOSbL =A wexoyrawery |
BCLS BZ “LIS LI) b6s'2z 650°0# 100" SS€1-x100'1 = 4
(teasayur asuapyuos %s6) uid 057 aS Fadojg uoyenby worssosdoy

“poujoul Ausse sel supe TuIsn UONeIndod Yq] Pyunudas | Isulede Saploloosuy OAL] JO AUDIKO] § 914°,L

99%

‘Response percentage

%

55

10

100

1000

100

109000

57

1) tk fpronit

+ 2 wh thiamethorom
3 tok_propoxur
4 tok aloha
5 tok cave

Probits

Figure 16. Concentration-mortality lines of five insecticides against B. germanica from LBK population.

steaiaiut aouapyuos fuddelsano Jo asnesaq waLa4yip Ate:

Fs tou axe uuunjoo ates ays Ut Jona] auHeS ayy UIE SanyeA ,

P(LS-9€8' — €0°06h' 1) B8C07IZ ETOFSS'E ZOB HL > xBpS'E = & daaa
9(186°OPb - EZ E6E) ley oly IZOFBL'E 6686 - X6LL'E = 4 uuyrouiiedco-v

q (ZO'pbI- 9PE'7L) P8201 B81 0FSI'T 69L'b > XbSVT=A jodi |
q(S58°9€1 — $86°9S) 656°06 6L0°0F67'I pES'T - XBBT 1 = A anxodod
®(L9L'SS ~6L'SO) Ssr'se L80°0F IS‘ £6CT- XOIS T= 4 wexoylawely,

(1easayur aauapyuo %56) uidd 37 as tadois uonenbg worssas3ay apronaasuy

ee

“poytawi Kesse sef sseif Rursn uoneindod wa] P2umwsas “gq sureBe sopio|ioasu! Balj JO AUDIXOY, “6 142,

59

wy
1 fom thinmethoxae
| Po Soares
| @ tom fron
lee 4 omaha
| 3 = 5 tom. dap
Fa F 5
|
Pr
§ |
a” 55
eo |»
5 3
BG 54
2 £
He | 4
3 y
fu 45
By
\ 4
0 é ! o |
95
\s
| |
% .
1 0 100 1000 10000

Figure 17. Concentration-mortality lines of five insecticides against B. germanica from LBM population

sjeasaqut aouapyuoo fuiddepado Jo asneaag 1wasayyIP C41

1S 10U aze ULUNJOD aUIBS ay) UL A9TI9] DUBS YL YILA SON|EA ,

P(08°016'1-€6'°0Pb'1) SOriLo't BET OFLO'Y 901'E1 + x90" = £ dada
(7ST OPP - PLE LOE 9zE'SOb L7Z‘0F6'E ZITZO1- X91G'E = 4 unyjauuadéa-0
Q(SbL'€91 -9S7'8) 6Ls'8i1 $8009" ZEO'E - XZ9H'L = A anxodorg
®(1b9'ZL -107'b2) ose £90°0F86'0 £19‘ - XP86'0 = 4 wexoyrauery |

® (867'ZL-£8'01) £8L'0€ LS0°0F68'0 Lig’ - xS88°0 =< woud}

(jeasayu aauapyuos %56) wdd 0597 as ¥ dois uonenbg worssas3ay apionaasuy
“pours Resse Tel seep Mursn uoneindod Ag] PIunusae g isulede Saproniossur aAlj JO AUSIXOL “Ol AIGEL


61

oy
b 1) tov fiproni
— > 2 tov.thiamethoxam
Pe 3 tbv_propowur
© m a eat
; tbv_déve
Pe)
El
$0 55
3° g
Bey pn 53
$0 i &
e | 45
5° H iad
2 |
; 1
0 |
25
| 25
3
a1 j 0 Cn an en)

Figure 18. Concentration-mortal

lines of five insecticides against B. germanica from LBV population

62

Calamba City

The results of bioassays of five commercial insecticides against the six-week-old nymphs
of Blattella germanica collected from the three sites are discussed below:

CALMI population (Site 4). The LCso of five commercial insecticides against six-week-
old nymphs of Blattella germanica at 24 hours after treatment is shown in Table 1. The toxicity
of five insecticides has the general trend of thiamethoxam = fipronil = propoxur >a-cypermethrin
> DDVP. Thiamethoxam has the lowest LCso value (LCso= 42.69 ppm) but did not significantly
differ from fipronil and propoxur based on confidence interval. DDVP was the least toxic with the
highest LCso value (LCso= 2,527.28 ppm).

Slope values obtained from probit analysis of five commercial insecticides against German
cockroach ranged from 1.11 to 6.02. This shows that CALMI population of B. germanica are
homogeneous to the selection pressure provided by DDVP and to a lesser extent a-cypermethrin.
Homogeneous population is an indication of small variation of response of German cockroach to
the insecticide. This reflects a possible chance of the presence of resistance gene in which continued
pesticide application can lead to artificial selection of resistant individuals. With this information,
PCOs can be informed to alternate their choice of chemicals belonging from organophosphate and
synthetic pyrethroids to other class such as neonicotinoids.

Collection site 4 is a meat shop in Calamba market (Table 7). The common methods of
cockroach control are sanitation and use of residual spray insecticide containing synthetic
pyrethroid (deltamethrin 2.5%). According to the assigned personnel, the establishment utilizes
non-professional staff assigned by the market administrator and application method is through

misting and spot spraying. Syed et al. (2014) reported that deltamethrin 2.5 SC showed moderate

63

to high level of resistance against adult Periplaneta americana. On the susceptibility status of
German cockroaches in Iran, Mohebbi Nodez et al. (2018) presented that dormitory and hospital
strains of B. germanica were tolerant to lambda cyhalothrin (WP 10%) and cyfluthrin (WP 10%).
In the present study, a-cypermethrin which has the same mode of action with the currently used
insecticide, deltamethrin, exhibited lower effectivity among five commercial insecticides. The
reduced efficacy might be due to the frequency of application resulting to increased selection
pressure on German cockroach from CALMI population. When the selection pressure becomes
more intense, the development of resistance progresses more rapidly. There are at least 10 to 15
generations required for the development of resistance in insect (Yu 2008). German cockroaches
have high reproductive potential, higher number of eggs per ootheca, shorter hatching time and
shorter nymphal stage. Thus, surviving population after series of insecticide application can

produce a colony of resistant German cockroaches.

CALM? population (Site 5). Table 12 shows the contact toxicity of five insecticides
against six-week-old nymphs of Blattella germanica from CALM2 population at 24 hours after
treatment. The general trend of toxicity of five commercial insecticides against B. germanica from
CALM2 was fipronil > thiamethoxam = propoxur >a-cypermethrin > DDVP. Fipronil was the
most toxic with the lowest LCso value (LCso= 7.75 ppm) while DDVP was the least toxic with the

highest LCso value (LCs = 2,238.32 ppm).

For homogeneity response (slope of the log-dose probit relationship), the slope values

ranged from 1.05 (fipronil) to 5.88 (a-cypermethrin) (Figure 20). This shows that response of B.

64

germanica population is most homogeneous to a-cypermethrin and least homogeneous to fipronil.
The homogeneity response of German cockroaches when tested in a-cypermethrin indicates
possible presence of resistance gene in the population which is starting to increase in frequency.
The frequency of resistance gene can be favored if continuous selection pressure (e.g frequent
application of synthetic pyrethroids) is employed. Thus, eliminating susceptible individuals and
artificially selecting individuals with resistant genes. The development of resistance in response to
intensive pesticide pressure is an example of this adaptive continuous evolution (Stockwell et al.
2003). Therefore, it is advised that professional and non-professional pesticide applicator to
alternate their choice of chemicals from synthetic pyrethroid class into other groups.

CALM2 collection site is a meat shop in a small ~talipapa” (Table 7). There is no hired
PCO or in-house pest control operator servicing the establishment. The abundance of B. germanica
population was observed every collection trip due to abundance of food supply for the cockroach
such as carcasses and meat blood. Moreover, poor sanitation in the said establishment was
observed due to accumulated garbage in the nearby area. The meat shop owner is dependent on
the use of commercial insecticide in aerosol formulation containing mixture of tetramethrin 0.5%

and cypermethrin 0.15% to control the cockroach. During the collection, the owner volunteered

that German cockroach was no longer affected by the pesticide application. This information
confirms the result of bioassay tests showing the lower effectivity of a-cypermethrin (second to
DDVP) to the homogeneous tolerant CALM2 population (observed slope of a-cypermethrin 5.88).
This is in accordance with the report of Cochran (1995) that if an insect population has a large

(steep) slope, this population is homogeneous in its response to the insecticide. However, this claim

must be further analyzed in the future studies regarding to the resistance status of the said

65

population using another parameter - the resistance ratio (RR), in comparison to an established

susceptible population as standard.

CALC population (Site 6). The insecticidal potency of five commercial insecticides against
six-week-old nymphs of Blattella germanica from CALC population at 24 hours after treatment is
shown in Table 13. The general trend of the toxicity of five commercial insecticides against B.
germanica is thiamethoxam = fipronil = propoxur > a-cypermethrin> DDVP. Among five
insecticides, thiamethoxam was the most toxic with the lowest LCso value (LCso= 102.16 ppm)
while DDVP was the least toxic with LCso value 2,666.46 ppm. The toxicity of fipronil, propoxur,
and thiamethoxam against B. germanica were not statistically different from each other based on
overlapping of confidence interval while DDVP and a-cypermethrin were significantly different
among the five insecticides. Thus, we can infer that responses of B. germanica to fipronil, propoxur
and thiamethoxam were the same but not with DDVP and a-cypermethrin.

The slope values ranged from 0.80-4.94. Slope of fipronil was less than | indicating high

heterogeneity response of B. germanica to this insecticide whereas the other four insect

les
showed more homogeneity response of B. germanica, with the steepest slope of the regression line
for DDVP as presented in Figure 21. Homogeneous population indicates small variation of
response of German cockroach when tested in DDVP and a-cypermethrin. The small variance
indicates the possible presence of resistance gene which was artificially selected through time and
might eliminated the susceptible individuals (Hoskins and Gordon 2003). On the other hand, large
variation among individual response is reflected in shallower slope of fipronil. With this
information, PCOs and individual pesticide applicator can be guided to minimize the use of

pesticides containing organophosphate and synthetic pyrethroids but rather, use of fipronil is

66

recommended as the most toxic insecticide to a heterogeneous population of the German

cockroach.

CALC collection site is an old coconut grater shop (Table 7). Poor sanitation and moisty
environment observed in the area resulting to large colony of cockroach species (B. germanica and
Periplaneta americana) during collection trips. No hired pest control operator servicing the said

establishment while do-it-yourself technique is currently done to control the German cockroach

population. The use of chemical is mi

sjeasaqut 2ouapyuos Surddejsano Jo asnesaq 1u9J24}1p AjlueD\jtUAIs tou ase UUINJOD >UIRS ayp UI Zana] SUES ON YLIA San|EA ,

9 (817'600'E ~ 675'F80'2)
q(06b'9zS - 9L9'7EE)
P(pLLLbe-S10 121)
B(c8z'PlE - 1p9°0S)

2 (89L'09 - 96562)

_(feasaquy a2uapyuos %56)

S8b'0Z - x0Z0'9 = 4

is

IscLzs'z 6be0F70'9
ESe'llb 1L10F66'7 808'L - XL86'¢ =
BIC8LI £80°0FEb'L 87Z'E- XPEbL =A
668°b91 ELOOFIZ'L 949°C - XLOT'1 = &
989° LOO'OFIN'L So8'l = X21
wdd 537 ¥adois uonenby wossoszay

dAaa

umypawsadko-v

anxodord

wexoyrawery |,

apranaasuy

“poyraws esse sef sseja Bursn uoneindod |WTVD wos) nryumWAas gq suLEHe soplonoasuy DAY JO AUDIKO, “11 142L

rt)

68

] calmi_thiamethoxam
——- 2 calmt fioronil

68 3+ calm1_propoxur

4- calm1_alpha
<= Be calmi_ddvp

Lal |

a0 a

b "
:

Figure 19. Concentration-mortality lines of five insecticides against B. germanica from CALMI population

sjeassqut 20uapljuos Fuiddelsano aun jo asneaaq 1uaJ9})1p StwueDy}UAIS you ave uujo9 sues ay) UE L9N2] ALES 241 YTIM SanyEA |

P(ZIO'SISZ -PSb'ZL6'1) e7eRETZ 8ITOFS9'E ITT - XOHI'E = K daaa

9 (6€8°0£€ -8E'LOE) S8o'8lt LEC OF8S'S TILL - X9LB'S = & ursyjeuuadko-n
q(So'ZIZ- 815°9€) 697'S6 8LO0FPE'| 59°C - XOvE 1 =A anxodosg

4 (9L1°€6 -91Z'Lb) SbeLo 680°0FES'I ZoL'z - x875' 1 = 4 wexoyrowery |

® (891 -S8E'f) Sel 190°0FS0'I 1£6°0- x9P0'1 = & [woud

(1easayuy aguapyuos % 56) uidd 537 ‘as = adoig uonenbg worssosday aptonaasuy

—_—_—_—_—___>_>>S[_ Se

‘poyrow Aesse sef ssej Buisn uoneindod ZWTVD wos PrUDUAAR “gS

69

ef sap.

1D9SUL AALJ JO AUDIXOL “ZI GEL

70

99 calm? foronil

| i]

, cand thametioxan
| 3. em? oroour
| 4: caida

| had memes 6 calmed
%0 2
le

3
g70 |s5
ry ’
4 2
:° “=
a0 | a
3
G2 ! las
a 2

\ 4

35
3

1%
° 0 100 1000

Figure 20. Concentration-mortality lines of five insecticides against B. germanica from CALM2 population

syeasiuy a0uapyuoo Fuiddeysano aun Jo asnedaq war9yyIP AjtuEDYTUAYS tou axe UUINjOD aurES a4 USOT] BLUES ay YALA SONIA,

9 (L8ESBL'Z — 619 1SS'Z) 9SP'999'7 Z67'OFh6'b L691 - XI PGP = & dAdd

4 (S16°€1S-906'26£) 86'0Sb €LVOFOI'E 6178 - XL60'E = 4 upyrouaddo-p
B(SS'ILE “Ibb'ebI) 197'SEZ LOVOFIO'Z TLL'b - XZ10'T = 4 anxodosg
®($Z0'9S 1 - 889°06) csvolt Sb0'0F08°0 659'I - X66L°0 = 4 juosd!
®(86E°PEI “1E7'LL) 9rzol LIVOFE6'I 7aB'e - XZE6'| = 4 wexoysaurest |,

_ (easayuy aauapyuos % 56) widd 03977 as tadois uopenby worssasday apransasuy

‘powpau Aesse sef sso Guisn uonnejndod Jy] wos voyUDUas -g suede sopianoasul AAYj Jo AUDIXOL “E] 9192,

w

72

ba shorethoren
-- foron
| 4 cle spho
| mormon Be ale dp
© 2 |
6
55
*
#
53
fA
a
45
‘
10 4
35
3
%
! 10 100 1000 10000

Figure 21. Concentration-mortality lines of five insecticides against B. germanica from CALC population

B

Bay Town
The results of bioassay test of five commercial insecticides against six-week-old nymphs

of Blattella germanica were described below.

BAYM population (Site 7). Table 14 presented the insecticidal potency of five commercial
insecticides against six-week-old nymphs of Blattella germanica from BAYM population at 24
hours after treatment. The decreasing trend of toxicity was fipronil > thiamethoxam = propoxur
>a-cypermethrin > DDVP. DDVP was the least toxic compound with highest LCso value (LCso=
1,978.69 ppm) while fipronil was the most toxic insecticide with lowest LCSo value (LCso = 15.65
ppm). It was observed that the toxicity of propoxur and thiamethoxam against B. germanica were
the same while toxicity of fipronil, DDVP, and a-cypermethrin were different from the rest of the
compounds based on overlapping of confidence interval.

Slope values based on concentration ~ mortality responses of B. germanica from BAYM
population to five insecticides were varied from 0.96-7.38. The response of B. germanica to DDVP
(the least effective insecticide) was the steepest slope (7.38) while response to fipronil (the most
effective insecticide) was the flattest slope (0.96) as shown in Figure 22. The steep slope on the
response of B. germanica to DDVP reflects the possible chance of the presence of resistance gene
developing in the population thus, decreasing genetic variation (Rosenheim and Hoy 1986). The
reduction in genetic variation might be due to prolonged used of DDVP or insecticides belonging
to organophosphate class resulting to artificial selection and eliminating susceptible individuals.
On the other hand, current status of the BAYM population reveals the mixed genotypic frequency
(both resistance gene and susceptible gene) present in German cockroach when tested to fipronil

showing large variance in the response. These data are informative for PCOs and individual urban

74

pesticide applicator for effective German cockroach control in decreasing the selection pressure.
The minimal use of DDVP and the shift to other insecticide class (e.g. phenyl pyrazole) can slow
down the rate of insecticide resistance.

BAYM collection site is a meat shop store in Bay Market (Table 7). Blattella germanica
population was abundant every collection trip of the student due to available food source and water
(e.g meat blood and meat carcasses). According to the market personnel, the current control of B.
germanica in the area is done by in-house pest control operators assigned by the market
administrator. The in-house pest control individuals used commercial insecticide containing
synthetic pyrethroids (cypermethrin 5%). This can be the reason for the less efficacy of a-

cypermethrin against German cockroaches from BAYM population

BAYS population (Site 8). From the eighth collection site, the toxicity of five insecticides
against German cockroach has the general trend of thiamethoxam= propoxur= fipronil = a-
cypermethrin > DDVP (Table 15). Based in LCso values, thiamethoxam was the most toxic (LCs0=
60.71 ppm) and DDVP was the least toxic (LCs0= 2,094.98 ppm). The toxicity of thiamethoxam
is not significantly different from propoxur, fipronil and a-cypermethrin based on confidence
interval.

The slope of concentration-mortality lines is an indication of the variation in response of
the organism, with a steep slope indicating a homogeneous population, and a flat line resulting
from a heterogeneous population (Kelly 1988). Slope values ranged from 1.41 to 5.75. These
responses may indicate that BAYS population of B. germanica are homogeneous to the selection

pressure provided by the five commercial toxicants. The response of B. germanica to DDVP was

7s

the steepest slope (5.75) while response to fipronil was the flattest (1.41) as shown in Figure 23.
This shows that response of B. germanica from the current population is more homogeneous to
DDVP but less homogeneous to fipronil. This reveals that current B. germanica population has
possible chance of the presence of resistance gene and artificially selected due to continued use of
chemicals belonging to organophosphate group; thus, decreasing genetic variation. However, the
current study cannot detect if the developing resistance gene is dominant, incompletely dominant
(or incompletely recessive), or recessive. Yu (2008) explained that when resistance gene is
recessive, the F2 progeny of the R x S (resistant and susceptible) cross will result to 25% resistant
population while 75% is susceptible population. However, if resistance gene is dominant, the F2
progeny of the R x S (resistant and susceptible) cross will result to 75% resistant population while
25% is susceptible population. The continuous selection pressure might result to difficulty in
cockroach control when all resistant individuals are present in the population. In practical
application, the PCOs and individual urban pesticide applicator can use these data for effective
German cockroach control by minimizing the use of DDVP or other related insecticide group. The
use of fipronil (which shows large variability in response) instead is recommended to slow down
the rate of insecticide resistance.

BAYS collection site is a sari-sari store located in the town of Bay (Table 7). No hired
PCO or in-house individual servicing the said establishment. The area is suitable harborage for the
German cockroaches due to availability of food sources (e.g.. damaged chicken eggs, rotten
smoked fish). To control the German cockroaches, the owner is dependent on the use of
commercial insecticides available in hardware or supermarket (personal communication). The

establishment currently use an attractant containing azamethiphos 0.005% as observed during

76

collection trip. The attractant is a cockroach killing bait in powder formulation and packed in
sachet form. The bait can be bought from the public market or online shopping platform. Although,
some testimonials said that it is more effective than products in aerosol spray formulation, it is not
registered with Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The FDA even warned the public against
buying this unregistered product. Azamethiphos which is its active ingredient belongs to
organophosphates group of insecticide. Organophosphates were discovered in the early 1930s and
are still one of the largest families of insecticides. Even though their use is declining due to
regulatory action, organophosphates are still widely used because of their broad-spectrum activity.
flexibility in use and good residual characteristics (BASF 2013). The mode of action of
organophosphates is the inhibition of acetylcholinesterase (AChE) responsible for breaking down
the acetylcholine (ACh). This allows the ACh to continue stimulating the postsynaptic neuron
resulting to overstimulation of nervous system and eventual death of the targeted insect (IRAC
2019). In the current study, DDVP from the organophosphate class showed the least efficacy
against German cockroach from BAYS population. The tolerance of the German cockroach to
DDVP may be explained due to selection pressure from the currently used azamethiphos of same
mode of action. Qian et al. (2010), reported in their study that six-week-old nymphs German
cockroach were tolerant to dichlorvos. Other findings supported those insecticides belonging to
organophosphate family were not effective enough in the control of cockroaches (Kaakeh et

al.1997; Nasirian 2010).

BAYK population (Site 9). Table 16 shows the toxicity of five commercial insecticides

against six-week-old nymphs of Blattella germanica from BAYK population at 24 hours after

7

treatment. The decreasing trend is fipronil = thiamethoxam= propoxur > a-cypermethrin > DDVP.
Based on LCso values, fipronil was the most toxic (LCso= 28.45 ppm) but did not significantly
differ from thiamethoxam, and propoxur. On the contrary, DDVP was the least toxic
(LCso=2,501.44 ppm) against German cockroaches from BAYK population. Moreover, the
toxicity of fipronil, propoxur, and thiamethoxam against B. germanica were not significantly
different from each other based on confidence interval overlap test. Thus, response of B. germanica
coming from BAYK population were the same to three insecticides (fipronil, propoxur, a-
cypermethrin, and thiamethoxam) but significantly different to DDVP and a-cypermethrin.

For homogeneity response, slopes ranged from 0.95-5.79. Only slope value of fipronil
(0.95) was less than | indicating high heterogeneity response of B. germanica to this insecticide.
On the other hand, all four insecticides (DDVP, a-cypermethrin, thiamethoxam and propoxur)
showed variable homogeneous response of B. germanica, with DDVP having the steepest slope
(5.79) as presented in Figure 24. This implies that in genotypic level, resistance gene is present
that might be artificially selected through time and eliminating susceptible individual resulting to

the decrease in genetic variation particularly in DDVP. Consequently, large variance observed on

the response of German cockroach when tested to fipronil indicates the mixture of susceptible,
moderately resistant, and resistant individual present in the population. Having a wide range of
susceptibility is advantageous to select out more resistant individuals (Cochran 1995). With this
information, PCOs and other individual pesticide applicator can be informed to alternate their

choice of chemicals from organophosphate group to phenyl pyrazole which can help in slowing

down the rate of insecticide resistance in DDVP.

8

BAYK collection site is a food stall kitchen and does not avail the PCO servicing (Table
7). To manage the insect pests, sanitation and in-house control are utilized by spraying the
commercial insecticides which can be bought from the nearest hardware or supermarket. The food
stall presently utilizing aerosol spray containing mixture of 0.015% cyfluthrin and 0.05%
imiprothrin to control the German cockroaches. However, during the interview, the owner
volunteered that the insecticides they are currently using are becoming less effective. The results
of the bioassay tests confirm this observation. Insecticides containing fipronil and thiamethoxam
were never used by the said establishment. This could be the reason why German cockroaches
from this population were sensitive when exposed to fipronil and thiamethoxam producing lower
LCso values (26.422 ppm and 71.06 ppm respectively) compared to a-cypermethrin and DDVP.
Application of insecticidal baits is one of the effective strategies for controlling German
cockroach, Baits have become popular and effective formulation against urban insect pest
(Nasirian 2010). However, some are still using conventional pesticide due to the cheaper price like

this food stall kitchen (personal interview).

sreasaiuy aouap\yuoo Furddejsano ayi jo asnesag wasayyip ueaytuais 1ou ase uuunoo aures ay Uw Jana] aus ay YIM SanyRA ,

P (09"60'7 — p9'S98"1) 69846" OrrOFREL —-LLOEZ- XERE'L = K dAaa

9 (E1P 0b - 95960) 1oue9e PSV OFLSZ 685°9 - XELS'7 = & ursypouadko-n

4 (s9E'S1 - zsb'sb) L816 800F9E | 999°7 - xBSe1 = 4 anxodoig

4 (98'S - ZEZ'6b) Zr0'L8 980'0F6t'| 1687 -X06P' 1 =A WexoyrUeNYLL
®(pS8'7C- ZhL'L) Liraat $50°0#96'0 080'I - X196'0 = & twuoads

(ieasayuy aouapyuos %56) wdd 637 as Fadojg — uonenby uorssasdoy apianoasuy

Poyjau Ausse Jel ssepH duisn UONeindod WAVE Wor DauDusAs g Isulede Saplonoasul aAly Jo AUOIXOL pl AGEL

6s

or J]. baym_fipronil
7 ——> 2. baym_thiamethoxam
3 bavm propoxur
hed 4° baym_alpha
“ ‘ ~-—~ B baym_ddvp
6
"
ae ss
zoo y
eS eee eee ae 6a
7. es
Le Jas
» |
4
© |

Figure 22. Concentration-mortality lines of five insecticides against B. germanica from BAYM population

a

‘SyeAsatuy 2auapyjuos au Jo SuiddeysoA0 ayt Jo asnesaq was9yyIp AjiueDIpIUMIS OU ase ULURjOD >UeS ay) UL 49ND] DUES ay YRTA San|EA ,

smou jtuoidyy pur anxodoud aftueyox:

2 (B69'67E'7 — 9EN1Z8'1) 186'607 OPEOFSL'S GROG - XBPL'S = K daad
4P (ELE'Sbz- BP'IST) 98°61 Ipc OF8I'Y 955°6 - x0BI'b = & uyrauuaddo-n
Ge (6b9°9L1 - 9£7'6£) 188°68 780'0F 1b SL7 > X60P | = & jwuoud),
® (GL7'87Z -EEE'0S) LSet ys0'OFEr I 726°C - XLTP'L = A anxodosd
®(SZZ'16- 8E6'SE) 80L'09 £01'0#99"1 6567 > XOS9'1 = & wexoyrowery
_ (1easaquy agu9pyuos %S6) widd 057 as Fadojg — uoyenby worssas3ay apronsasuy

poysow Aesse sel ssvj Burs uonvindod ¢Ayq Wosy HoUMUAae -g IsuLEe sopionoasut aAty JO A

HOLL “SE AIGRL

82

oy
1+ bavs thiamethoxam
7 ____. 9 bays_propoxur
3 bays. Apron
[3 4 bays aloha
0 ---- 5 bays_dévp
6
3°
Gn 55
H
Ho 4
B50 / 7 5 3
$0 i &
Bo \ 45
a, \
} 4
10 4 ‘
fd
| |
0 100 1000 vo000

Figure 23. Concentration-mortality lines of five insecticides against B. germanica from BAYS population

8

sjeaiaiu! aouapyuos Sulddeysano ayp jo asnesaq iuasayytp Ajiursyt

5 10U a7e UUINoD SUES 24) UY 19119] WES ay yIEM SaNyeA

(9 TIT LS6ZLI'Z) Zpb'Losz 9S10F 61'S L99°61 ~ XL8L'S = daa
4 (Zol'szs -966°01¢) YOL'60b SLVOFIO'E paB'L-xOLO'E = —— uyrouuaddo-p
P(LEPLII- 1b6'1L) 10€'26 160°0789'1 167'E - XSL9'1 = & anxodosd
® (Zh'06 -LSE'PS) 1901L OOMOFELT Lore XLzL1 = 4 wexoysoureny |,
® (86°65 -109°6) zzey'9z 50'0F56'0 bre'l- xsp6'0 =
(jeasayur aauapyuos %s6) uid 5577 as Fadog —_ uonenby uorssasdoy

Se

‘poyrow Kesse sef ssej Fuisn uoneindod YA VE Woy) Mr!UMULA gq ISUIERE SapIotoasu! aALy JO AUDINOL “91 7192L

Eo

Response percentage

Probits
aon

36

100

1000

1000

bayk_fipronil
bayk_thiamethoxam
bavk propoxur
bayk_alpha
bayk_ddvp

Figure 24. Concentration-mortality lines of five insecticides against B. germanica from BAYK population

dd ou VN

anxodoud
VN aaaa uuyouuad-p — wexoyjaueiy = (Luddy, AVE keg
1yseuadéo-n=inxodoud
VN VN dAGG = = Wexoyawery = [ruosdy SAVE
dAGG —_unypeuuadéo-n —_anxodoad = wexopaweny [uosdy WAVE
anxodoid = —
VN uyyeuuadss-0 —— wexoyowerp = j1uosdyy DW equeje>
daa anxodoud = wexoyrawery) uoadig zwivo
anxodosd
VN daa uyyauuadso-p = wexoyowery) = [1uosdy, WwIv
dAGQ —uuounaddo-n anxodoad wexoyrauery—juordy Ag
dAGG —uuypoussadKo-0 anxodosd = jtuosdyy wexoyroun wat
sourg
AAG __uLyeunadso-n —_anxodoud =wexoyowenp [wordy a1 soy
aus

pur

Yon221105

uMoL

enuey zueY Tyuey
_o————— ee

“Bune7 Jo SUMO} da1y) WON) HoUPULaS “g yULeBe Sapronoasul AL Jo Fulyues AUDIXOL “Z1 a1QRL

se

86

The ranking of the five insecticides against Blattella germanica based on LCso
values and confidence intervals is presented in Table 17. Among five insecticides tested from nine
populations where German cockroaches were collected, it was observed that fipronil was the most
effective and ranked {* from eight populations (except LBM). This result is expected since fipronil
from the phenyl pyrazole class of insecticide has not been used in the collection sites, being a new
addition to the chemical arsenal for cockroach control. Some studies have reported the highest
efficacy of fipronil against B. germanica compared to other commercial insecticides. Valles et al.
(1997) discussed that fipronil is sufficient to kill pre-resistant population even in nano-gram
quantity. Fipronil belongs to phenyl pyrazole family and discovered by Rhone-Poulenc in 1987.
Its mode of action is inhibition of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) gated chloride channel
leading to overstimulation and convulsion on affected insects (IRAC 2019). Fipronil has proven
to offer low dose, highly effective insect control against a broad range of pests. In household pest
control, there are various bait formulation containing fipronil as the main active ingredient.

According to Miller et al. (2005), baits have been claimed to be more consumer and environment-
friendly than insecticide sprays since they can be placed in precise location where cockroaches
habituate but inaccessible to people and pets.

Thiamethoxam was observed to be highly effective to B. germanica from six collection
sites, and as toxic as fipronil in five collection sites, viz., LBM, LBV, CALM1, CALC, BAYS,
and BAYK population. Thiamethoxam is also a relatively new compound and has not been used
in the nine collection sites. Low usage of thiamethoxam has increased its significance in
controlling urban pest effectively. Thiamethoxam belongs to neonicotinoids family of insecticide

and acts as agonists of acetyl choline receptors. Its mode of action is to mimic the action of

87

neurotransmitter acetylcholine (ACh) resulting to continuous firing of impulse and overstimulation
of target insect pests (IRAC 2019). Similar to fipronil, insecticides containing thiamethoxam are
normally packed into bait formulation while others are in suspension concentrate formulation. In
the study of Fardisi et al. (2019), they reported that among the fourteen (14) active ingredients
(Als) of insecticide against field-collected German cockroach, thiamethoxam is one of the
compounds with lowest resistance level from Danville and Indianapolis. Moreover, in vial
bioassay test (Fardisi et al. 2017), less than 5% survivorship was achieved when laboratory strain
of Blattella germanica was exposed to any of the four Als such as abamectin, thiamethoxam,
lambda cyhalothrin and boric acid. Thiamethoxam is non-repellent and can be transferred from
exposed to unexposed insects that exhibit social behavior, such as ants and termites.

Propoxur, a carbamate insecticide, demonstrated toxicity against four collection sites
namely: CALMI, CALC, BAYS, and BAYK similar to fiproni! and thiamethoxam but was not as
effective as the first two compounds for the rest of the sites. Propoxur is not a new compound. It
was first introduced in the year 1959 with a fast knockdown and long residual effect against turf,
forestry, and household pests and fleas. However, US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
has been reluctant to approve indoor use due to its potential toxicity to children after chronic
exposure. Vandekar et al. (1968) published the results of their studies carried out on spray
operators and local inhabitants in Iran when exposed to propoxur as part of WHO control program
It was reported that they suffered mild temporary cholinergic signs of poisoning such as headaches
and nausea due to heavy contamination of propoxur on the skin. In 1990s, propoxur was withdrawn
from indoor use and no longer available in the market in the US (Extension Toxicity Network

1996). In the current study, propoxur was still effective against the field-collected populations of

88

German cockroach. Lack of use and selection pressure may be the reason for the susceptibility of

these field-collected populations to this insecticide. The mode of action of carbamate insecticide

is inactivation of acetyl cholinesterase inhibiting this enzyme which is responsible for breaking

down acetylcholine (ACh) after it has carried its message across the synapse (IRAC 2019).

Siegfied and Scott (1991) reported that B. germanica exhibited high level of resistance to propoxur
via topical application compared to susceptible strain. They also indicated that resistance was due
to increased level of metabolism together with decreased rates of penetration. Gecheva (1991) first
reported the propoxur-resistant strain of German cockroach in Bulgaria. Meanwhile, propoxur’s
toxicity against B. germanica in this study is greater than a-cypermethrin.

The insecticide containing a-cypermethrin was second to the least effective insecticide
against B. germanica from eight populations but as toxic as fipronil, thiamethoxam and propoxur
in BAYS population. The reason may be due to frequent use of synthetic pyrethroids in almost all
collection areas either in aerosol form or suspension concentrate administered by in-house pest
control or just by do-it-yourself method in the contro! of German cockroach. Thus, increasing the
selection pressure to target organisms and resulting to possible tolerance exhibited by the insects.
Synthetic pyrethroids are sodium channel modulator. They are neurotoxins that act on action
potential sodium channel. Synthetic pyrethroids slow the closing and inactivation of the channel
causing it to remain open than normal. Thus, when action potential is not promptly terminated it
leads to repetitive firing in the insect’s nervous system (IRAC 2019). Various researchers have

reported the presence of high-level resistance in insects against pyrethroids and highlighted its

control failure incidence (Zhai and Robinson 1996; Lee et al. 1997; Lee 1998; Lee and Lee 2000).

Lee and Lee (2004) discussed that pyrethroids exhibit low to moderate level of resistance. Similar

89

conclusion has been made by Ahmad et al. (2009) and Nasirian et al. (2009) who reported that
resistance against pyrethroid have been developed in certain cockroach species. Consequently,
‘Choo et al. (2000) and Chai and Lee (2010) reported heavy resistance for pyrethroids (deltamethrin
and cypermethrin) against both German and American cockroaches.

The result of the present study revealed that DDVP was the least effective insecticide
against B. germanica from nine collection sites. This observation can infer that German cockroach
already produced tolerance and possible resistance to DDVP or to organophosphates class where
DDVP belongs. Organophosphates’ mode of action is the inactivation of acetyl cholinesterase
responsible for breaking down of acetylcholine (ACh) resulting to continuous stimulation of
postsynaptic neuron leading to overstimulation of the nervous system and eventual death of the
affected insect (IRAC 2019). According to Kaakeh et al. (1997) and Syed et al. (2014),
organophosphates are not effective enough to combat susceptible and resistant population of
cockroaches. Organophosphate acted as neurotoxic agent against cockroaches, however in this
study, this compound did not come up with satisfactory result. This class is less favored by pest
control industries nowadays due to its strong odor than pyrethroids, but good residual efficacy
DDVP was already used by urban pest control operators against German cockroaches since 1980s
until now. Even after four decades, some PCOs prefer the use of DDVP due to its cheaper price
(personal communication). This may be the reason why DDVP was the least effective among the
five insecticides tested. Although DDVP has same mode of action as propoxur
(acetylcholinesterase inhibitors), the current study reveals differential responses of the nine
populations to the two compounds. The reduced toxicity of DDVP against nine populations of

German cockroach compared to highly toxic propoxur for 50% of the populations was observed

90

in this study. This can be explained due to the prolonged rate of binding of organophosphate
compound to acetylcholinesterase (AChE) which may take days or even weeks compared to
propoxur. Thus, insecticides belonging to organophosphates group are generally regarded as
imeversible inhibitors of acetylcholinesterase. On the other hand, intoxication of carbamate
insecticides is subject to its instantaneous unbinding to acetylcholinesterase (AChE), typically in
minutes, and therefore regarded as reversible acetylcholinesterase inhibitors. The same result was
observed by Wu and Appel (2017) and reported that field-collected strains of B. germanica were
resistant to organophosphate (chlorpyrifos) while nearly no resistance to carbamate (propoxur)
when resistance ratio was compared to susceptible strain.

The prolonged selection pressure exhibited by organophosphate may have induced tolerant
genes in the German cockroach from each collection site, thus less effectivity to target organism.
The long residual life of a chemical can prolong the selection pressure in the particular area thus,

resulting to insecticide resistance (Georgiou 1980). Studies on insecticide resistance as follow up

to the current susceptibility study are highly desirable for better understanding of the insecticide
resistance of the German cockroach.

For studies of insecticide resistance, a susceptible strain of the German cockroach is
necessary. At first, LBV and CALC populations were inferred to be possible sources of this
susceptible strain due to no record of chemical control applied based on initial interview. However,
bioassay results showed consistently high LCs values for DDVP. moderate LCs» values for a-

cypermethrin in most populations and low LCs» values for fipronil or thiamethoxam in some

populations. Thus, it can be inferred that there is no susceptible strain in the nine test populations.

91

Results obtained from the conducted bioassays can be used in considering an appropriate
insecticide for PCOs as well as in household use. Fipronil and thiamethoxam — the two most
effective insecticides against German cockroach in most collection sites can be a replacement to

older classes of insecticides and most especially to DDVP. With the application of these new

findings, together with evidence-based decisions may ensure that effective insecticides are selected

and used for an effective German cockroach control.

SUMMARY, CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION

The contact toxicity and insecticidal potency of five commercial insecticides were
evaluated against Blattella germanica collected from the town of Los Baftos, Calamba and Bay,
Laguna. From each town, three collection sites were used for a total of nine collection sites of
gravid female B. germanica, The field-collected B. germanica were maintained in the laboratory,
reared the F: nymphs until they reached six-week-old and conducted the bioassay tests using the
WHO jar test method with some modifications. All primary data were obtained after the 24hr

observation of each bioassay test.

Fipronil solely ranked as the most toxic against German cockroach collected from three
populations (viz. LBK, CALM2, BAYM), while thiamethoxam was the most toxic in LBM. Both
insecticides shared same toxicity against B. germanica from LBV population. This is because both
are relatively newer compounds and were not used for German cockroach control either in gel bait
formulation or sprayable in the nine collection sites. Fipronil and thiamethoxan are examples of
active ingredients packed in minimal amount in some gel baits. Propoxur was not as toxic
compared to abovementioned compounds from five collection sites but demonstrated same toxicity
with fipronil and thiamethoxam to four German cockroach populations (viz. CALMI, CALC,
BAYS, and BAYK). Except in the case of BAYM population, propoxur exhibited more potency
to a-cypermethrin. The reduced toxicity of a-cypermethrin was evident in the study. The reason
might be due to frequent use of almost all collection areas of synthetic pyrethroids either in aerosol
spray or in concentrate formulation in controlling the German cockroach. DDVP was the least

toxic commercial insecticide against B. germanica from nine collection sites. DDVP from

93

organophosphate group of insecticide was long used by those in pest control industry. This shows
that the older classes (organophosphates) which have been used through time have reduced
efficacy against German cockroach compared to the newer compounds.

It is recommended that owners and staff of the selected establishments should practice
cleanliness and modification of environment by eliminating water, food and shelter needed by
German cockroaches before doing chemical application. With this, frequent application of
insecticides would be reduced, lessening the selection pressure. It is also recommended to staff
and owners of establishments to refrain from using DDVP or compounds belonging to
organophosphate class of insecticide due to their being less effective against nine populations of
German cockroach based on the current study. The continual use of older class of insecticides

(DDVP) although cheaper, can result to ineffective control of B. germanica, thus higher cost and

labor intensive. On the contrary, the use of more expensive yet more effective insecticides mean
less maintenance work visits for assigned PCOs in an establishment. Considering the fixed rate for
their service based on the agreed contract, this may reduce their operational cost and add up to
their profit as described in Appendix 2. The FDA website is a helpful tool in choosing newer
compounds available in the market which are more efficacious even at lower dose.

For the market administrator, monitoring and regulation of the pesticides used by the in-
house PCOs as well as their pest control performance must be done. Prior to the purchase of

pesticides, the local government unit (LGU) must require the updated certificate of product

registration (CPR) issued by FDA from agrochemical suppliers to ensure the safe and effective

pesticides against German cockroach. Currently, private owners of commercial establishments

such as fast-food chains, restaurants, hotels, and factories require first the CPR and material safety

94

data sheet (MSDS) from the hired pest control operators as part of their initial agreement and used
upon their contract renewal.

For the pesticide applicator (professional or non-professional), knowledge on the active
ingredient will be a good guide in understanding the mode of action (MoA) of a toxicant against
the target organism. The Insecticide Resistance Action Commitiee’s (IRAC) MoA classification
scheme is another helpful tool in knowing the up-to-date information of the MoA of new and
established insecticides and acaricide control. To delay the insecticide resistance build-up of B.
germanica, one must employ the rotation of chemical use from one class or family to another with
different mode of action.

The set of baseline data on the current susceptibility status of Blattella germanica on five

commercially available insecticide can improve on decision makit

in urban pest control industry.
This can be a good guide in selecting most potent chemicals for effective control measures of the
Blattella germanica, Moreover, Integrated Pest Management (IPM) or the holistic and coordinated
approach in tackling the problem on German cockroach can also reduce selection pressure and is

a must for every pest control operator.

LITERATURE CITED

ABBOTT WS. 1925. A method of computing the effectiveness of an insecticide. J Econ Entomol;
18:265-267.

AHMAD 1, SRIWAHJUNINGSIH SA, PUTRA RE, PERMANA AD. 2009. Monitoring
pyrethroid resistance in field collected Blattella germanica Linn. (Dictyoptera:
Blattellidae) in Indonesia. Entomol. Res. 39: 114-118.

AMEEN A, KAAKEH W, BENNETT G. 2000. Integration of chlorfenapyr into a management
program for the German cockroach (Dictyoptera: Blattellidae). Journal of Agricultural and
Urban Entomology 17(3):135-142

AMEEN A, WANG C, KAAKEH W, BENNETT G. 2005. residual activity and population effects
of noviflumuron for German cockroach (Dictyoptera: Blattellidae) Control. Journal of
Economic Entomology. 98(3)899-905.

AULICKY R, STEJSKAL V, KOCOUREK V. 2010. Validation of insecticide aerosol generated
by smoke-generator for German cockroach control. International Pest Control 52(2):84-
86.

BALLARD JD, GOLD RE. 1984. Laboratory and filed evaluations of German cockroach
(Orthoptera: Blattellidae) traps. Journal of Economic Entomology, 77(3):661-665.

BARCAY SJ, BENNETT GW. 1991. influence of starvation and lighting on the movement
behavior of the German cockroach (Blattodea: Blattellidae). Journal of Economic
Entomology Volume 84, Issue 5, pages 1520-1524.

BASF.2013. insecticide mode of action technical training manual. BASF corporation. Accessed
17 May 2019, from
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/275959530_BASF_Insecticide_Mode_of' Acti
on_Technical_Training_Manual


96

BILAGI C, YEWARE K. PRASAD E.2021.Pest control market by type (chemical, mechanical,
biological, and others). pest type (insects, termites, rodents, and others), and application
(commercial, residential, agriculture. industrial, and others): Global opportunity analysis
and industry forecast, 2019-2027. Accessed 30 August 2021, from
https://www.alliedmarketresearch.com/pest-control-market

BRENNER RJ. 1995. Economics and medical importance of German cockroaches. pp. 77-92. In
understanding and controlling the German cockroach (Rust MK, Owens JM & Reierson
DA, eds.). Oxford University Press, New York.

BROOKS GT. 1976. Penetration and distribution of insecticides, in: Insecticide Biochemistry, C.
F Wilkinson, ed., pp.3-60. Plenum Publ. Corp., New York.

BROWN AWA, PAL K 1971. The nature and characterization of resistance. In AWA Brown, K
Pal, Insecticide resistance in arthropods, Monograph Series 38, World Health
Organization, Geneva, p. 9-44.

CAPINERA JL.2004. Encyclopedia of entomology. Kluwer Academic Publishers: London
pp:564-572.

CARIASO BL. 2003. An introduction to urban pest management. University of the Philippines
Los Bajios, College, Laguna. pp. 54-56.

CATAN GO JR, CATAN NR. 1980,Urban pests and their control. How to have a pest-free
‘community. National Bookstore pp. 155-157.

CHAI RY, LEE CY. 2010.Insecticide resistance profiles and synergism in field populations of the
German cockroach (Dictyoptera: Blattellidae) from Singapore. J. Econ. Entomology. 103:
460-471.

CHOO LE, TANG CS, PANG FY, HO SH.2000.Comparison of two bioassay methods for
determining deltamethrin resistance in German cockroaches (Blattodea: Blattellidae). J
Econ Entomol. 93: 905-910.

97

COCHRAN DG. 1995. Insecticide resistance, pp. 171-192. Jn Rust, M.K., Owens, J.M., Reierson,
D.A. (eds.), Understanding and controlling the German cockroach. Oxford University
Press, New York.

COCHRAN DG. 2003. Cockroaches. In. Encyclopedia of Insects (eds.) V.H. Resh and R.T Carde.
Elsevier Science Academic press:USA pp.123-127.

COOK ISLANDS BIODIVERSITY DATABASE. 2016. Tapinoma minutum, tiny ghost-ant. The
Cook Islands Natural Heritage. Accessed | June 2021 from —http://
cookislands.bishopmuseum.org/species.asp?id=9329.

DHANG P. 2012. Future in urban pest control market in Philippines. Accessed I August 2021
from hutp://news.agropages.com/News/NewsDetail---8163.htm

EXTENSION TOXICITY NETWORK 1996. Extoxnet PIP-propoxur. Accessed 11 August 2021
from hitp://extoxnet. orst.edu/pips/propoxur.htm.

FARDISI M, GONDHALEKAR A, SCHARF M. 2017. development of diagnostic insecticide
concentrations and assessment of insecticide susceptibility in German cockroach
(Dictyoptera: Blattellidae) field strains collected from public housing. Journal of Economic
Entomology, 110(3), 1210-1217. doi: 10.1093/jee/tox076

FARDISI M, GONDHALEKAR A, ASHBROOK A, SCHARF M. 2019. Rapid evolutionary
responses to insecticide resistance management interventions by the German cockroach
(Blattella germanica L.) Nature Scientific reports 9:8292 https://doi.org/10.1038/s4 1598-
019-44296-

FASULO TR, KERN WH, KOEHLER PG, SHORT DE. 2005. Pests in and around the home.
University of Florida, United States, pp. 124-126.

FAYLONA MG. 1998. Practicum in Rhone-Poulenc: Analysis of cockroach control system of
local pest control operators (PCO) in the Philippines. Undergraduate thesis, University of
the Philippines Los Bafios.

98

[FDA] FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION. 2018. Household urban hazardous notification.
Accessed 16 May 2019, from https://ww2.fda.gov.phy.

FFRECH-CONSTANT, ROUSH RH. 1991. Resistance detection and documentation: the relative
roles of pesticidal and biochemical assays, pp. 4-38. Jn R. T. Roush & B. E. Tabashnik
[eds.], Pesticide resistance in arthropods. Chapman & Hall, New York.

FINNEY DJ. 1972. Probit Analysis. Cambridge, England, Cambridge University Press.

GADD CA, RAUBENHEIMER D. 2000. Nutrient specific learning in an omnivorous insect: the
American cockroach Periplaneta americana L. leams to associate dietary protein with the
odors citral and carvone. J Insect Behav. 13:85 1-864.

GECHEVA G.1991. Resistance of German cockroach (Blattella germanica) to DDT and Propoxur
in some parts of Bulgaria. Wiad Parazytol ;37(3):367-73. PMID: 1822052

GEORGHIOU GP. 1986. The Magnitude of the resistance problem, in Pesticide Resistance:
Strategies and Tactics for Management, National Academy Press, Washington, DC. Pp 14-
4B.

GEORGHIOU GP, TAYLOR CE. 1977. Genetic and biological influences in the evolution of
insecticide resistance. J Econ Entomol; 70(30):319-23.

GEORGHIOU GP. 1980. Insecticide resistance and prospects for its management. Residue
Rev.,76,131.

GONZALEZ JC JR.1981. Urban pest control in the Philippines. Philippine Entomologist ISSN:
0048-3753.

GOOGLE MY MAPS 2020. = Accessed += 20S May.-~—-2020-—Sfrom
https://www.google.com/maps/d/u/0/viewer?ie=UTF8&oe=UTF8&showlabs= &msa=0


99

&mid=! WI9A_pNZ I glED682rV5mn 1 bGSZw&ll=14.17930602270463 1%2C 121.20236
249999999&2=13

HAMMOCK BD, SODERLUND DM. 1986. Chemical strategies for resistance management, in
in Pesticide Resistance: Strategies and Tactics for Management, National Academy Press,
Washington, DC. pp 111-129.

HEONG K.L, TAN KH, GARCIA CPF, LIU Z, LU Z. 2013. Research methods in toxicology
and insecticide resistance monitoring of rice plant hoppers. 2" Edition. Los Bafios
(Philippines): International Rice Research Institute pp 30-31.

HILL DS. 2002. Pests of Stored Foodstuffs and their control., Netherlands: Kluwer Academic
Publidhers 145-146.

HOLBROOK GL, ROEBUCK J, MOORE CB, SCHAL C. 1999. Prevalence and magnitude of
insecticide resistance in the German cockroach (Dictyoptera: Blattellidae), pp. 141- 145.
In W. Robinson H, Rettlich L, Rambo GW (eds.), Proceedings of the 3rd International
Conference on Urban Pests, 19-22 July 1999, Prague, Czech Republic.

HOSKINS WM, GORDON HT. 2003. Arthropod Resistance to Chemicals. Annual Review of
Entomology 1(1):89-122.

IRAC [INSECTICIDE RESISTANCE ACTION COMMITTEE]. 2019. IRAC mode of action
classification scheme version 9.3. Accessed 2 August 2020, from www.irac-online.org.

JACOBS S.2013. German cockroaches. Pennsylvania State Extension. Pennsylvania State
University. Accessed | June 2021.

JARILLA CM. 2010. Responses of the male and female German cockroaches, Blattella
germanica L. (Blattodea: Blattellidae) to a commercial bait formulation. Unpublished
Undergraduate Thesis. College of Agriculture, University of the Philippines Los Bafios. 49
leaves.

100

KAAKEH W, BENNETT G. 1997. Evaluation of trapping and vacuuming compared with low-
impact insecticide tactics for managing German cockroaches in residences. Journal of
Economic Entomology 90(4):976-982.

KAAKEH W, REID BL, BENNETT GW.1997. Toxicity of fipronil to German and American
cockroaches. Entomol Exp Appl. 84: 229-237

KELLER J C, CLARK PH, LOFGREN CS. 1956. Susceptibility of insecticide-resistant
cockroaches to pyrethrins. Pest Control 24(11): 14--15, 30.

KELLY SE. 1988. Metabolism and penetration of permethrin in resistant and susceptible strains
of tobacco budworm, Heliothis virescens (F.) Unpublished Master's Thesis University of
Arizona. Accessed 28 August 2021.

KOEHLER PG, PATTERSON RS. 1988. Suppression of German cockroach (Orthoptera:
Blattellidae) populations with cypermethrin and two chlorpyrifos formulations. Journal of
Economic Entomology 81: 845-849

KOEHLER PG, STRONG CA, PATTERSON RS, VALLES SM. 1993. Differential susceptibility
‘of German cockroach (Dictyoptera: Blattellidae) sexes and nymphal age classes to
insecticides. J Econ. Entomol. 86(3): 785-792.

LADONNI H. 2001. Evaluation of three methods for detecting permethrin resistance in adult and
nymphal Blattella germanica (Dictyoptera: Blattellidae). J Econ, Entomol. 94: 694-697

LEE CY, YAP HH, CHONG NL, LEE RS.1996. Insecticide resistance and synergism in field-
collected German cockroaches (Dictyoptera: Blattellidae) in Peninsular Malaysia. Bull
Entomol Res. 86: 675-682.

LEE CY, YAP HH, CHONG NL.1997. Elevated esterase detection in insecticide resistant German
cockroaches (Dictyoptera: Blattellidae) using modified Pasteur- Georghiou's filter filter-
paper method. Trap Biomed. 14: 81-86.

LEE CY.1998. Control of insecticide-resistant German cockroaches, Blattella germanica

101

(L.) (Dictyoptera: Blattellidae) in food-outlets with hydramethylnon- based bait stations.
Trop Biomed. 15: 45-51

LEE CY, LEE LC. 2000. Influence of sanitary condition on the field performance of chlorpyrifos
based baits against American cockroaches, Periplaneta americana (L.) (Dictyoptera:
Blattidae). J Vect Ecol. 25: 218-221.

LEE LC. LEE CY. 2004. Insecticide resistance profiles and possible underlying mechanisms in
German cockroaches, Blattella germanica (Linnaeus) (Dictyoptera: Blattellidae) from
Peninsular Malaysia. Med. Entomol. Zool., 55: 77-93.

LEE CY, ROBINSON W. 2001. Handbook of Malaysian Household and Structural Pests. Pest
Control Association of Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, pp. 96-108.

LEE KM, LEE CY. 2002. Prevalence of insecticide resistance in field-collected populations of the
German cockroach, Blattella germanica L. (Dictyoptera: Blattellidae) in Peninsular
Malaysia. Med. Entomol. Zool. 53: 219-225.

MCKNIGHT TL, HESS D.2000. Climate Zones and Types. Physical Geography: A Landscape
Appreciation. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. ISBN 978-0-| 3-020263-5.

MENDOZA IC.1976. Chemical control of the German cockroach, Blattella germanica L.
(Blattidae: Orthoptera) with notes on its biology. Unpublished Undergraduate Thesis.
University of the Philippines Los Bafios, College, Laguna, 1-41.

MOHEBBI NODEZ S, RAFATPANAH A, KHOSRAVANI M, HAKAK FS, PAKSA A. 2018
Susceptibility status of German cockroaches, Blattella germanica (L.) to carbamate and
pyrethroid insecticides within surface contact method in Shiraz city, Iran. Journal of
Entomology and Zoology Studies; 6(2): 1043-1046

MILLER DM, MCCOY T, LEE C, ROBINSON WH .2005. Comparison of commercial bait
formulations for efficacy against bait averse German cockroaches (Blattella germanica)
(Dictyoptera: Blattellidae). Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Urban
Pests Chow-Yang Lee and William H. Robinson (editors).

NASIRIAN H.2010. An Overview of German Cockroach, Blattella germanica, Studies Conducted
in Iran. Pakistan Journal of Biological Sciences 13(22) 1077-1084

102

[NPMA] NATIONAL PEST MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION 2019. Pest management
guidelines for retail food handling facilities and restaurants. Accessed June 20, 2021, from
hups://npmapestworld.org/defaulvassets/File/Resource%20Center/Model%20
Contracts%20and%20Standards/GuidelinesforF oodHandling%20(002).pdf

[NSO] NATIONAL STATISTICS OFFICE. 2006. CPH, Report No. 4, urban population.
Manila: National Statistics Office. Accessed June 20, 2021, from http://nscb.gov.ph/
activestats/psgc/ municipality.asp?munco de=04341 1000&regcode=04&proveode=3

OGG B, OGG C, FERRARO D. 2006. Cockroach Control Manual. University of Nebraska
Lincoln Extension. Accessed 30 June 2021, from https://lancaster.unl.edu/pest/roach/
cockroach%20manual.pdf

Ol FM, WEEKS J, JONOVICH J, MILLER D. 2017. Assessment-based pest management of
German Cockroaches. University of Florida IFAS Extension. Accessed 2 June 2021 from
https://edis.ifas.ufl.edu/pdf/IN/IN1 19000.pdf

PAI HH, WU SC, HSU EL. 2005. Insecticide resistance in German cockroaches Blattella
germanica) from hospitals and households in Taiwan. Int. J Environ. Health Res. 15: 33-
40. Econ. Entomol. 94: 694-697.

PECHAL JL, AUSTIN J, GOLD R, TOMBERLIN JK. 2007. Epidemiology and Spatial
Relationships of Bacteria Associated with Periplaneta americana (L.) (Blattodea:
Blattidae) in Central Texas. J Agric Urban Entomol. 24(4): 205-216.

PRIDGEON JW, APPLE AG, MOAR WJ, LIU N. 2002. Variability of resistance mechanism in
pyrethroid resistant German cockroaches ( Dictyoptera:Blattellidae),. Pestic. Biochem.
Physiol., 73:149-156.

[PSA] PHILIPPINES STATISTICS AUTHORITY .2020. Census of Population. Region IV-A
(Calabarzon). Total Population by Province. City, Municipality and Barangay. Accessed
10 July 2021.

QUESADA-MORAGA E, SANTOS-QUIROS R, VALVERDE-GARCIA P, SANTIAGO-
ALVAREZ C. 2004. Virulence, horizontal transmission, and sublethal reproductive effects

103

of Metarhizium anisopliae (Anamorphic fungi) on the German cockroach (Blattodea:
Blattellidae). Journal of Invertebrate Pathology, 87(1):51-58.

QIAN K, WEI XQ, ZENG XP, LIU T, GAO XW. 2010. Stage-dependence tolerance of the
German cockroach, Blattella germanica, for dichlorovos and propoxur. J Insect Sci 2010;
10: 201-210.

RAHAYU R, MADONA WR, BESTARI W. DAHELMI, JANNATAN R.2016. Resistance
monitoring of some commercial insecticides to German cockroach Blattella germanica L.
in Indonesia. Journal of Entomology and Zoology Studies; 4(6):709-712.

REN XH, JIO MQ, ZHANG Y 2005. Study on histopathology of Blattella germanica infected by
Metarhizium anisopliae. Chinese Journal of Vector Biology and Control, 16(3):171-173.

ROBIN PEST CONTROL. 2021, May 5. Personal Communication [ Phone interview].

ROSENHEINL, J. A. & M. A. HOY. 1986. Intraspecific variation in levels of pesticide resistance
in field populations of a parasitoid, Aphytis fllélinus (Hymenoptera: Aphelinidae): the role
of past selection pressures. J. Econ. Entomol. 79: 1161-1173.

ROSS MH, MULLIN DE.1995. Biology, pp.21-32. In Rust MK, J.M. Owens, and D.A., Reiersosn
[eds.], Understanding and controlling the German cockroach. Oxford Universit Press: New
York.

RUST, MK. 2001. Insecticides and their use in urban structural pest control. /n “Handbook of
Pesticide Toxicology” (R. I. Krieger, ed.), 2nd ed., pp. 243-250. Academic Press, San
Diego.

SARINHO ED, SCHOR MA, RIZZO JA. 2004. There are more asthmatics in homes with high
cockroach infestation. Braz J Biol Res. 37: 503-510.

SCHARF ME, BENNETT GW, REID BL, QUI CH. 1995. Comparisons of three insecticide
resistance detection methods for the German cockroach (Dictyoptera Blattellidae). J Econ.
Entomol.; 88:536-542

104

SCHARF M. ROLLINS ©. 2020. German Cockroaches: More Difficult to Control. Annual
Cockroach Control Issue. Pest Control Technology Magazine. Accessed 25 June 2021 from
https://www.petonline.com/article/cockroaches-more-difficult-to-control/

SCHULTS G, COATS JR, PETERSON C. 2006. Natural Insect Repellents: Activity against
Mosquitoes and Cockroaches. ACS Symposium Series 927:168

SCOTT J, ALEFANTIS T, KAUFMAN P, RUTZ D. 2000. Insecticide resistance in houseflies
from caged-layer poultry facilities. Pest Management Science 56:147-153.

SHAHRAKI G, HAFIDZI MN, KHADRI MS, RAFINEJAD J, IBRAHIM YB.2011WHO. Cost
effectiveness of integrates pest management compared with insecticidal spraying against
the German cockroach in apartment buildings, Neotropical Entomology 40(5)607-612.

SIA SU GL, CARILLON, PERA D, SISON S, TANALGO B, SIA SU MLL, MISTIKA M.
2016. Parasitic infestation in cockroaches (Periplaneta americana) obtained in selected
areas of Metro Manila. International Journal of Tropical Disease & Health 13(4): 1-4,
Article no. IJTDH.23820 ISSN: 2278-1005, NLM ID: 101632866

SIEGFRIED BD, SCOTT JG. 1991. Mechanisms responsible for propoxur resistance in the
German cockroach, Blattella germanica (L.). Pesticide Science, 33(2), 133-146.

SILVERMAN J, BIEMAN DN. 1993. Glucose aversion in the German cockroach, Blattella
germanica. Journal of Insect Physiology, 39, 925-933.

SILVERMAN J, ROSS MH. 1994. Behavioral resistance of field-collected German cockroaches
(Blattodea: Blattellidae) to baits containing glucose. Environmental Entomology, 23,
425-430.

STOCKWELL CA, HENDRY AP, KINNISON MT 2003. Contemporary evolution meets
conservation biology. Trends Ecol Evol /8: 94-101

SUITER DR 1997. Biological suppression of synanthropic cockroaches. In: Journal of
Agricultural Entomology. 14(3) (ed. by Hinkle, N. C.\Oi, F. M.]. 259-270.

105

SYED R, MANZOOR F, ADALAT R, ABDU-SATTAR A, SYED A. 2014. Laboratory
Evaluation of toxicity of insecticide formulation from different classes against American
cockroach (Dictyoptera:Blattidae). J Arthropod-Borne Dis, 8(1) ;21-34.

TABARU Y, MOCHIZUKI K. 2005. Repellency of ethanol extracts of herbs to the German
cockroach, Blattella germanica (Blattaria: Blattellidae), observed by feces distribution in
the extract treated harborages. Medical Entomology and Zoology 56(2)139-143,147.

TANAKA I, MOTOKI M.1993.Release and recapture of German cockroaches Blattella
germanica (L) in a vacant house. In: KB Wildey and WH Robinson (Eds) Proc. Ist Int.
Conf. on Insects Pests in the Urban Env., Cambridge, UK, 281-283

VALLES S. 1996. Featured creatures: Blattella germanica. Gainesville, USA: University of
Florida. Accessed 1 June 202 from _http://entnemdept.ufl.edu/creatures/
urban/roaches/german.htm#top.

VALLES SM, YU SJ, AND KOEHLER PG. 1994.Detoxifying enzymes in adults and nymphs of
the German cockroach: Evidence for different microsomal monooxygenase systems.
Pesticide Biochemistry and Physiology 49: 183-190.

VALLES SM, KOEHLER PG, BRENNER RJ .1997. Antagonism of fipronil toxicity by piperonyl
butoxide and S, S, S,-tributy! phosphorotrithioate in the German cockroach (Dictyoptera:
Blattellidae). J Econ Entomol. 90: 1254-1258

VANDEKAR M, HEDAYAT E, PLESTINA R, AHMADY G. 1968. A study of the safety of o-
isopropoxyphenyl methylcarbamate in an operational field-trial in fran. Bull. Wid Hith
Org. 38: 609-623

VERDEPRADO HN. 2008. Responses of the German Cockroach, Blattella germanica L.. to
commercial bait formulation. Unpublished Undergraduate Thesis. College of Agriculture,
University of the Philippines Los Baftos. 41 leaves.

WATANABE H, KOBAYASHI Y, SAKURA M, MATSUMOTO Y, MIZUNAMI M. 2003.
Classical olfactory conditioning in the cockroach Periplaneta americana. Zool Sci, 20:
1447-1454

106

WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION. 1970.Tentative instructions for determining the
susceptibility or resistance of cockroaches to insecticides. Tech Rep Ser 1970; 443,
Geneva: WHO, Annex 12. p. 130-133.

[WHO] WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION. 2006. Pesticides and their application for the
control of vectors and pests of public health importance. sixth edition. World Health
Organization.

WU X, APPEL A. 2017. Insecticide Resistance of several field-collected German cockroach
(Dictyoptera: Blattellidae) strains. Journal of Economic Entomology: Vol.10. Issue 3 pp.
1203-1209, https://doi.org/10.1093/jee/tox072

YUAN PAN X, ZHANG F. 2020. Advances in biological control of the German cockroach,

Blattella germanica (L.), Biological Control Vol. 142.104104, ISSN 1049-9644.

YU SJ. 2008. The Toxicology ad Biochemistry of Insecticides. Taylor & Francis Group, LL. New
York, US: pp.207-214.

ZHAI J, ROBINSON WH .1996. Instability of cypermethrin resistance in a field population
of the German cockroach (Orthoptera: Blattellidae). J Econ Entomol. 89: 332-336.

where:
C= Initial concentration
Vie Initial volume

pve
Active ingredient: 25% or 250,000 ppm.
C1 VI=C2v2

(250,000 ppm) (x) = 10,000 ppm (10 mL)

V1 = (40,000ppz2)(10 mL)
250,000

Vi=04 mL

Propoxur
Active ingredient: 18.7% or 187,000 ppm
Cl Vi=C2v2
(187,000 ppm) (x) = 10,000 ppm (10 mL)
V1 = (0,000ppm9y(10 mL.

187,000

VI=0535 mL

Alpha cypermethrin
‘Active ingredient: 1.5% or 15,000ppm
Cl Vi=C2v2

415,000 ppm) (x) = 10,000 ppm (10 mL)

V1 = 40,000ppa%5(10 mL)
ao ace Pr

Vi= 6.67 mb

Note: 1% - 10,000 ppm

APPENDIX 1. Stock Solutions Computation

CVizG.V2

Final concentration
V2= Final volume

Fipronil
Active ingredient: 2.6% or 26,000 ppm

Cl VI=C2v2
(26,000 ppm) (x) = 10,000 ppm (10 ml)
Vi =A, 10m)

26,000
V1=3.85 mL
‘Thiamethoxam
Active ingredient: 21.6% or 216,000 ppm
C1 vI=C2v2
(216,000 ppm) (x) = 10,000 ppm (10 mL)
Vi= co, OmL)

216,000

463 mL.

107

‘y>e034209
uewiay isulede sjea1way> any Jo Area4j9 ayy uo luawadxa 1uaJaN> ay WO4y pauiergo erep ay sem UoreDi{dde jo Aauanbauy jo siseq ay) ley BUNS ,,
{aadoys pue epezey) wiojiejd j1e139 auijyo wos) 3244 ,

oo'9e't dug yam B 39UQ, ore dug aayem JOU] |: ooze Iw 9¢7 wexoyIrWery |
oo'o9s'z dua 49am @ 9900, oor0r9 dua Jorem 07 1M OL 007 Ww osz I
00°000'¢ dud POM B XE 00'0sz dud 4veM JWT | WOT 00s'z = 1 000'L unyrauuadéo-0
00 08r dyq Pam EXE oo or dua Joeman | WZ 000'1 1w osz anxodosd
00'000'¢ dug POM BS o0'0s1 dud Jovem OUT | I SZ oot 1 000" daca
qiuour TF OT 405 poow)
sad uoneaydde toneoyddy —saXeads worssasdwos douequos
apionsad joysoy jo Asuanbasy —s/uoneayddejoysoy ——areyuonnG sad ao4g—BurBeyIeG 1398]

1D1DUUWOD DAY) JO SISK]eUE SOD °z XIPuaddy

“vase ,W Q0| ul pouuad uoNPay|dde yuoW auO 405 sapIonisast

gor

wll

, ;
STEIEIS ISIE EIBIBIEIS|ele| Slay

APPENDIX 3A. Raw Data Recording Sheet

109

A B é D E F
Contact/Residual Application Method Data Sheet
Date:
Chemical:
Population/Location:
Trial No. :
Insect: Blattella germanica
Age:
Actual Count of Dead Insects
Concentration (ppm) _[Rep1 _[Rep2__[Rep3 [Rep 4 __[Total


110

APPENDIX 3B. Excel Worksheet for quantal response data.

Totalinsects [#Dead _[% Mortality

Column A. Concentration of the insecticide in ppm
Column B. Total number of insects treated in all replications.
Column C. Total Number of dead insects observed.

Column D. % Mortality = total number of insects /100

1a

APPENDIX 4A. Probit Analysis of five insecticides against B. germanica from LBK population
using PoloPlus software version 2.0

Number of preparations: 5
Number of dose groups: 25

Model: Probit

Watural Response Parameter: yes
Convert doses to logarithms: yes
tps: 50

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 1) DDVP
Estimating natural response

parameter standard error ratio

Dove 716.795 0.999 16.819
NATURAL (0.010 0.007 1.426
SLOPE 4.926 0.292 16.873
Variance-Covariance matrix

Dove NATURAL SLOPE
oove 0.997121 __~0, 106650E~02 -0.291193
NATURAL —-0.1066508-02 0.448513E-04 0.2901898-03
SLOPE 0.291193, 0.290189E-03 0.852272E-01

chi-squared goodness of fit test

prep dose a expected residual probab std resid
Dove 100.000 199. 24.26.54, $35 0.133 -0.529
19001000 200. «53.53.33 -0.325 -0.052
2500.000 198. 102 95.44 6.561. 0.933,
800.000 200.148. «149.70 -1.658 0.277
4§00.000 199. 178.176.311.311. 01293
NATURAL 199. 2 1:90 0.0850. 0.072
chi-square: 1.320 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity:

Effective Doses

Limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
lower 2476.231 248.673 2424. 283
upper 2662.915 2681.57 2718.720

uD50 pve

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 2) PROPOKUR
Estimating natural response

Parameter standard error t ratio

PROPOKUR 300 0.211, -15.606
NATURAL 0006 0.006 1003
SLOPE 1.701, 0.104 16.355,

Variance-Covariance matrix
PROPOXUR NATURAL SLOPE

Variance-Covariance matrix

IPRONIL, NATURAL SLOPE
FIPRONIL 0. 110646E-01 -0.$33803E-03 -0.532509E-02
NATURAL -0.533803E-03 0.120327E-03 0.2091125-03
SLOPE -0.5325095-02 0.2091126-03 0.346883E-02

chi-squared goodness of fit test

prep dose a expected residual probab std resid
FIPRONIL 0.000 200. 25. 21.65 3.384 0.108 0.763
$1000 200. $3. $4.86 1.561 0.273 -0.248
25.000 199. 101. «105.15 4.149 0.528 -0.589
190.000 200. 164. «164.12 --0.115 0.821 -0.021
1000:000 200. «192.190.271.729 0.951 0.568
NATURAL 197. a 4143-01429 0.022 -0.206
chi-square: 1.357 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 0.452
Effective Doses
dose limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
DSO FIPRONIL 22.594 lower 16.271 17.517 16.105

upper 27.721 28.817 31.083

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 5) METHOKAM
Estimating natural response

parameter standard error ¢ ratio

METHOKAM = -2.437 0.173 14.065
NATURAL 0.005 0.005 1,002
SLOPE 11456 0.100 1alsss
Variance-Covariance matrix
‘METHOXAN, NATURAL SLOPE
METHOKAM —_0.300178E-01 -0.157081E-03 -0.167554E-01
NATURAL -0.157081E-03 0.297842E-04 0.650228£-04
SLOPE -0,167554E-01 0.650228E-04 0.100041E-01
chi-squared goodness of fit test
prep dose A expected residual probab std resid
METHOXAM 10.000 200. 34.33.60 +403 0.168 0.076
20.000 200. «73.89.54 [asa 0.298 2081
50.000 200. 92,103.51 [S06 0.518 -1.628
100.000 199. 112. 136.23 t231 01608-3697
200.000 200. a4. 164.13 19.872 0.821 «3.663
NATURAL 197. L 108 -0.078 0.005 -0.075
chi-square: 34.074 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 11.358

HYPOTHESIS OF EQUALITY (equal slopes, equal intercepts): REJECTED (P<O.05})
(chi-square: 0.135E+04, degrees of freedom: 8, tail probability: 0.000)

Parameters

16.61289 Dove 2.000598 EIPRONTL
2.783619 PROPOXUR =21408110 METHOKAM
4.061758 A-c 11438597 SLOPE

112

113

Hessian
Dove PROPOKUR ac ELPRONIL
Dove -0.9392645-23 0.00000 ‘9.00000 ..00000
PROPOKUR 0.00000 513.503 9.00000 0.00000
ac 0-000 0.00000 541.090 0.00000
FIPRONIL 0.00000 000000 9.06000 291.833,
METROXAN 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000
‘SLOPE -0.3416698-22 1014.47 1525.74 456.642
Hessian (continued)
METHOXAN. SLOPE
ove 0.00000 -0.3416698-22
PROPOKUR 0.00000 ioia.47
ac 0.00000 1525.74
FIPRONIL 0.00000 456.642
METHOXAM, «= 534.540 289.503
SLOPE 889.503 8907.04

Hessian is singular. This is an abnormal situation that needs the
attention of a statistician or programmer.

Lethal dose ratios (LD50)

ratio Limits 0.98
PROPOXUR 29. 465, lower 25.787
upper 33.667
ae 3.866 lower 3.510
upper 4.259
EIPRONIL 113.670 lower 87.995
upper 146.636
METHOXAN «54.486 lower 47.058

upper 63.088

114

APPENDIX 4B. Probit Analysis of five insecticides against B. germanica from LBM population
using PoloPlus software version 2.0

Number of preparations: 5
Number of dose groups: 26

Model: Probit

Natural Response Parameter: yes
Convert doses to logarithms: yes
Ls: 50

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 1) DDVP
Estimating natural response

parameter standard error t_ratio

opve 11.802 0.773 718.277
NATURAL 0.012, 0.007 1.423
SLOPE 31548 0.230 15.436
Variance-Covariance matrix
Dove NATURAL SLOPE
pove 0.596825 -0.121379E-02 -0.177251
NATURAL —-0.121379E-02 0.560570E-04 0.334943E-03
SLOPE 01177281 0.334943E-03 0.528313E-01

chi-squared goodness of fit test

prep dose a FE expected residual probab std resid
Dove 1000.000 200. 27.26.85 0.450 0.133 0.094
1800:000 200. 71.60.88 10.122 0.304—1.5886
2500.000 200. + 93.-—=«120.88 © -27.885 0.604 4.032
30001000 199. «143.140.648.361 0.707 1.302
480.000 200.176. 168.47 7.531 «0.842146
NATURAL 199. 2 2:12 -0.120 0.011 —-0.083
chi-square: 22.526 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 7.5085
Effective Doses
dose limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
50 Dove 2120.388 lower 168.434 1490.027

upper 2594.21 2836.572

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation 1s ( 2) PROPOXUR
Estimating natural response

Parameter standard error t ratio

PROPOXUR —-2.524 0.173 14.607
NATURAL 0.015 0.008 11759
SLOPE 1.268 0.079 16.244

Variance-Covariance matrix
PROPOXUR NATURAL SLOPE

PROPOKUR 0. 298542E-01 -0.380277E-03 -0.131733E-01
NATURAL 0. 380277E-03 0.696577E-04 0.130795E-03
SLOPE -0.1317338-01 0.130795E-03 0.629130E-02

chi-squared goodness of fit test

prep dose a expected residual probab std resid
PROPOXUR 10.000 200. 23.24.29 1.285 0.121 -0.278
50.000 200. = 72.,= 75.63 3.628 0.378 = -0.529
100.000 200. 115.108.639.365 0.528 1.327
500.000 199. 156. 165.64 -9.639 0.832 -1.829
600.000 200. «177.171.315.687 0.857 1.147
NATURAL 197. 3 2189 0.108 «0.018 (0.064
chi-square: 6.7829 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 2.2610

Effective Doses
dose Limits 0.90 0.95

LDSO PROPOXUR 90.959 lower 65.240 56.385
upper 122-948 136.855

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 3) A-C
Estimating natural response

Parameter standard error ratio

a-c “9.899 0.556 -17.791
NATURAL 0.005, 0.005 1.004
SLOPE 3.779, 0.210 17.980
Variance-covariance matrix
ac NATURAL SLOPE

ac 0.309581 _-0.3103218-03 -0.116501
NATURAL —-0.310321E-03 0.2374418-04 0.102722E-03
SLOPE 701116501 0,1027228-03 0.4416416-01

chi-squared goodness of fit test

prep dose a E expected residual probab std resid
ac 215.000 187, 26.26.75 0.747 0.143 -0.156
300000 198. 56. 59.09 3.086 0.298 -0.479
400-000 200.102, «95.19 6.815 0.476 0.965,
800.000 199. 166. 170.85 4.847 «0.853 -0.906
950.000 197, 182.178.732.268 «0.912087
NATURAL 200. 1 0:98 -0.022--0.008 0,022
chi-square: 2.484 degrees of freedor heterogeneity: 0.828

Eefective Dos

dose limits 0.90 0.55 0.99
so A-c 416.631 lower 396.963 393.230 385.940
upper 436.965 440.981 449.975,

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 4) FIPRONIL
Estimating natural response

Parameter standard error t ratio
FIPRONIL 768 0.445, 10.727
NATURAL 0.073, 0.015, 4.844
SLOPE 2.154 0.188 1144s.

115

Variance-Covariance matrix

FIPRONTL NATURAL ‘SLOPE
FIPRONIL 0.197644 0, 3628598-02 -0.63027:
NATURAL -0.362659E-02 0.220013E-03 0.141202!
SLOPE -0:830279E-01 0.1412026-02 0.354355E-01

chi-squared goodness of fit test

prep dose a F expected residual probab std resid
EEPRONIL 10.000 200. 27.15.48 © «1.518 -0.077-—«3.047
50.000 198. 47.39.06 7.837 0.197 1417
100.000 200. 62.74.48 «12.479 0.372, 1.825,
200.000 200.105. «-121.19 16.190 0.606 -2.343
250.000 200. 155. 135.95 19.045 0.680 2.886
9007000 200. 190. 189.76 0.242 0.943 0.078
NATURAL 198. 3.14181 -11:508 0.073. -3.138

chi-square: 38.303 degrees of fre

heterogeneity: 9.5758

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 5) METHOXAM
Estimating natural. response

Parameter standard error t ratio

METHOXAM —-2.393 0.154 715.567
NATURAL 0.020 0.010 2.045
SLOPE 1.510 087 amai7
Variance-covariance matrix
METHOKAN, NATURAL SLOPE
METHOKAM 0. 236264E-01 -0.544049E-03 -0.125174-01
NATURAL -0.544049E-03 0.9193408-04 0.226675E-03
SLOPE 701125174E-01 0.22667SE-03 0.751405E-02
chi-squared goodness of fit test
prep dose a expected residual probab std resid
METHOXAM $.000 197, 21. 21-34 0.345 0.108 0.079
10:000 200. «41.40.90 0.101 0.204.018
80.000 200. 107. «115.36 -8.360. 0.577 1197
100.000 200.160. 147-95 12.050 0.740.
500.000 199. 187. «189.97 2.968 0.955 1.011
NATURAL 200. a 3:92 01078 + 0.020«0 040
chi-square: 6.2323 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 2.0774
Effective Doses
dose Limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
UDO METHOKAM 38.455 lower 28.040 25.790 16.631

upper 50.826 55.767 79.370

RYPOTHESIS OF EQUALITY (equal slopes, equal intercepts): REJECTED (P<0.05)
(chi-squai

0.128E+04, degrees Of freedom: 8, tail probability: 0.000)

HYPOTHESIS OF PARALLELISM (equal slopes)
(chi-square: 221., degrees of freedor

REJECTED (P<0.05)
4, tail probability: 0.000)

116

117

APPENDIX 4C. Probit Analysis of five insecticides against B. germanica from LBV population
using PoloPlus software version 2.0

Number of preparations: 5
Number of dose groups: 26

Model: Probit

Natural Response Parameter: yes
Convert doses to logarithms: yes
Ube: 50

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 1) DDVP
Estimating natural response

parameter standard error t ratio

pove 713.106 0.776 16.895
NATURAL 0.015 0.009, 1.753
SLOPE 41066 0.238 avai?
Variance-Covariance matrix

pbve NATURAL SLOPE
Dove 0.601798 _—-0, 141636E~02 -0.183927
NATURAL —-0.141636E-02 0.771039E-04 0.397055E-03
SLOPE 01183927 0.39708SE-03 0.564370E-01

chi-squared goodness of fit test

prep ‘dose A expected residual probab std resid
Dove 900.000 199. 29.95 1.054 0.150 0.209,
1300:000 200. 67:80 -2.802 0.339 -0.418
1700:000 200. 103191 4.090 0.520 0.579
3000.000 199. 169.46 © -9.463 0.852 -1.887
300.000 200. 18112 6.878 «0.906 1.663,
NATURAL, 198. 3105-01048 © 01015 -0.028
chi-square: 6.8824 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 2.2941
Effective Doses
dose limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
LS0 DOVP —1671.195 lower 1$03.014 1440933 1211.511

upper 1844.298 1910.803 2170.270

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 2) PROPOXUR
Estimating natural response

Parameter standard error t ratio

PROPOXUR —*=3.032 0.187 16.247
NATURAL. 0-010 0.007 1.426
SLOPE 1462 0.085 171302

Variance-Covariance matrix
‘PROPOKUR NATURAL SLOPE

PROPOXUR _0.348387E-01 -0.2490916-03 -0.1525936-01
NATURAL —-0.249091E-03 0.455533E-04 0.821565E-04
SLOPE -01152593E-01 0.821565E-04 0.7141358-02

chi-squared goodness of fit test

prep a expected residual probab std resid
PROPOXUR 199. 24, 27.38 3.378 0.138 -0..695,
200. 64. «$9.71 4.292 0.299 0.663
200. 105. «101.56 3.440 0.508 0.487
500.000 200. «155. 164.26 -9.264 0.821 1.710
00.000 199. 182.««176.79 «= «$.214. 0.888 = 1.174
NATURAL 199. 2. 1192 0.085 0.010 0.062
chi-square: 5.4650 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 1.8217
Effective Doses
dose limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
LDSO PROPOKUR 118.579 lower 92.618 64.256 58.755

upper 150.293 163.745 221.865

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 3) A-C
Estimating natural response

parameter standard error t ratio

acc 710.212 0.594 -17.178
NATURAL 0.005 0.005 1.005
SLOPE 31916 0.227 171287
Variance-Covariance matrix
ac NATURAL SLOPE
acc 0.353371 -0.407282£-03 -0.134226
NATURAL —-0.407282E-03 0.252244E-04 0.1389886-03
SLOPE 0.134226 0:138986E-03 0.51306eE-01
Chi~squared goodness of fit test
prep dose A expected residual probab std resid
ac 200.000 199. 25.23.74 = 1.260 0.119 0.276
300,000 199. $3. 61.28 © 8.279 0.308 ~1.271
400.000 200. +108. «= 98.72 «6.281 0894
600.000 199. 153.149.033.969 0.749 0.649
1000:000 200. «185. «187.60 -2.603 0.938 © -0.763,
NATURAL 197, a 0:99 0.005 0.005 0,005.
chi-square: 3.4847 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 1.1616
Effective Doses
dose Limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
L050 Ac 405.326 Lower 377.364 367.574 335.099

upper 434.991 446.252 487.401.

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 4) FIPRONIL
Estimating natural response

Parameter standard error t ratio
FIPRONIL = =1.317 0.108 -12.152
NATURAL, 0.017 0.010 1.745
SLOPE 0188s 0.087 15.408

118

Variance-covariance matrix

PIPRONTL NATURAL SLOPE.
FIPRONIL —0.117440E-01 -0.488950E-03 -0.554051
NATURAL -0.488950E-03 0.998641E-04 0.192208E-03
SLOPE -0:5540S8E-02 0.192208E-03 0.3299128-02
chi-squared goodness of fit test
prep dose a E expected residual probab std resid
FIPRONTL 0.000 199. 27. 21.84 = S.461 0.110.171
$1000 199. 49.50.88 «1.878 0.256 © -0.305,
50.000 200. 105.-«116.27  ~11.272 0.581 1.616.
200.000 200.146. «183.62 =7.615 0.768 -1.276
300.000 199. 176. «161.69 14.310 0.813 2.599,
NATURAL 200. 3 3149 -0.488 © 0.017 -0.264
chi-square: 12.526 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 4.1752
Effective Dos
dose Limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
L050 FIPRONIL 30.783 lower 15.050 10.830
upper 57.259 72.298
Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 5) METHOKAM
Estimating natural response
parameter standard error t ratio
METHOXAM = ~1..613 0.122 13.252
NATURAL 0.026 0.011 2.268
SLOPE 0.984 0.063 15.537
Variance-Covariance matrix
‘METHOXAM NATURAL ‘SLOPE
METHOXAM —0.148179E-01 -0.480648E-03 -0.719440E-02
NATURAL — -0.480648E-03 0.130573E-03 0.163721E-03,
SLOPE ~017194408-02 0.1637216-03 0.401130E-02
chi-squared goodness of fit test
prep dose a £ expected residual probab std resid
METHOXAM 5.000 199. 35.39.54. =4.543 0,199 -0,807
10.000 200. += 70.-—=S 56.74 13.263 0.284 ©2080
50.000 200. 101.-—=«107-15~6-146 0-536 © -0.871
75.000 200. «117,120.46 © -3.456 0.602 0.499
230.000 200. 144.—=«153152 -91516 0.768 =1.593
600.000 199.183. «173.86 = 91439-0872 2.008
NATURAL, 198. 5. 5113-01132 01026 © -0.059

chi-square: 12.546 degrees of freedom: 4

Effective Doses

dose Limits 0.90
150 METHOKAM 43.590 lower 28.239
upper 64.400

heterogeneity: 3.1364

0.95 0.99
24.201 13.741
72.641 106.039

HYPOTHESIS OF EQUALITY (equal slopes, equal intercepts): REJECTED (P<0.05)
quare: 0.1116+04,

(chi-s

degrees of freedom: 8,

tail probability: 0.000)

119

Hessian

ove
PROPOKUR
ac
FIPRONIL,
METHOKAM
SLOPE

-13.14460 ove
2.147879 PROPOXUR
21692549 a-c

Hessian (continued)

ppve
PROPOKUR
ac
PIPRONIL,
METHOKAM
SLOPE

pove PROPOXUR

-0.286684E-14 0.00000,
0.00000 524.305
0.00000 0.00000
000000 0.00000
9.00000 0.00000

-0.100831E-13 1110.36
METHOXAM SLOPE
0.00000 ~0.1008316~13
0.00000 1110.36
0.00000 1556.63
0.00000 707.904
388.981 1020.70
1020.70 1010.5

Hessian is singular.

attention of a statistician or programmer.

120

1.571692 FIPRONIL
711717297 METHOKAM
11044259 SLOPE

acc
9.00000
0.00000
393.048,
9.06000
0.00000
1556.83

PIPRONIL
9.00000)
‘0.00000
9.00000
430.918
9.00000
707.904

‘This is an abnormal situation that needs the

Lethal dose ratios (L050)

PROPOXUR

ae

FIPRONTL

METHOXAM

ratio
14,094

4.223

54.289

38.339

Limits
lower
upper
lower
upper
lower
upper
lower
upper

0.95
12.010
16.538

3.810

4.461
41.475
71.062
30.804
a7.ne

121

APPENDIX 4D. Probit Analysis of five insecticides against B. germanica from CALMI

population using PoloPlus software version 2.0.

Number of preparations: 5
Number of dose groups: 27

Model: Probit

Natural Response Parameter: yes
Convert doses to logarithms: yes
Los: $0

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 1) DOVE
Estimating natural response

parameter standard error t ratio

Dove =20.495 1.192 -17.190
NATURAL 0.005 9.005 1.003
SLOPE 6.020 0.349 171257
Variance-Covariance matrix
Dove NATURAL SLOPE
pove 1.42018 ~0.625839E-03 -0.415426
NATURAL —-0.625839E-03 0.243085E-04 0.171954E-0:
SLOPE 0.415426 0:171854E-03 0.121700

chi-squared goodness of fit test

prep dose a expected residual probab std resid
Dove 1700-000 200. «24.30.83 6.827 0.154 =1.337
2000:000 200, «69.54.79 «14.212 0.274 2.253
2600.000 200. 104. «106.38 © -2.378 0.532, 0.337
380.000 198. 142. «189.13 17,131 0.804 -3.065
4050.000 200. «190. 178.35 «11.651 0.892 2.652
NATURAL, 197. 1 0:97 0.025 0.005 (0.026
chi-square: 23.404 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 7.8015
Effective Doses
dose Limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
LpS0 DOVP —2527.281 lower 2219.184 208.529,

upper 2853-821 3009218

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is
Estimating natural response

(2) PROPOXUR

parameter standard error t ratio

PROPOXUR — ~3.228, 0.203 15.883,
NATURAL 0.010 0.007 11423
SLOPE 1434 0.083 171286

Variance-Covariance matrix
PROPOXUR NATURAL SLOPE

122

PROPOKUR 0.413064E-01 -0.190150E-03 -0.164975E-01
NATURAL —-0.190150E-03 0.449262E-04 0.546943E-04
SLOPE -0,16497SE-01 0.546943E-04 0. 688095E-02

chi-squared goodness of fit test

prep dose n E expected residual probab std resid
PROPOXUR 50.000 199. 36. 44.12 122 "0.222 =1.386
100.000 199.73. 72.73. «0.273 (0.365 0.040
150.000 197. 108. 91.07 13.928 0.462——«1.990
500.000 200. 149.148.410.586 0.742 0.095
1000:000 200.161. «171.98 10.976 0.860 2.236
13001000 200.184. «178.60 5.398 0.893 1.235
NATURAL iss. fs 1189 01111 0.020 0.082
chi-square: 12.423 degrees of freedom: 4 heterogeneity: 3.1058
Effective Dos
dose limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
DSO PROPOKUR 178.318 lower 133.878 121.015 4.616

upper 229.705 247.774 310.615,

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 3) A-C
Estimating natural response

standard error t ratio

ac 0.457 “17.076
NATURAL 0.007 11000
SLOPE 0.171 17.487
Variance-Covariance matrix

aoc NATURAL SLOPE,
acc 0.209091 -0.994452£-03 -0.777505€-01
NATURAL —-0.994452E-03 0.516255E-04 0,339767E-03
SLOPE -0.777505E-01 0.339767E-03 0.291743E-01

chi-squared goodness of fit test

prep dose a E expected residual probab std resid
ac 150.000 200. 29.20.37 633 0.102 2.019
250.000 199. 55. $2.63 «2.371 0.264 «0.382
400.000 200. «86.97.84 -11.843 0.489 -1.675,
$50,000 199. 106. «129.22 -23.225 0.6493.
800.000 200. «172.-—«161.46 —10.S4d._ 0.807.
10001000 199. 184.«174.38 «9.618 0.8762
NATURAL, 197. tis 1142-01415 0.007 -0.350
chi-square: 26.915 degrees of freedom: 4 heterogeneity: 6.7287
Effective Doses
dose Limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
Uso acc 411.353 lower 332.676 306.393 210.626

upper 495.582 526.490 654.739

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 4) FIPRONIL
Estimating natural response

parameter standard error ratio
FIPRONIL — =2.676 0.177 15.138
NATURAL 0.007 0.007 1001,

SLOPE 1.207 0.073 16.
Variance-Covariance matrix
FIPRONIL NATURAL

FIPRONIL —0.312657E-01 ~0.348663E-03 -0.
NATURAL -0.348663E-03 0.450944E-04 0.
SLOPE 01124173E-01 0.115062E-03 0.

chi-squared goodness of fit test

prep dose A r expect

FIPRONIL 15.000 199. 32, ad.

1001000 200. 56. a.
180.000 199. 103.96.
1000-000 200. 159.165.
1500.000 199. 186.174
NATURAL 198. Fi 1

chi-square: 25.953 degrees of freedom: 3

Effective Dos

dose
FIPRONIL 164.899

Limits 0.90
lower 77.027
upper 314.055,

1050

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparal
Estimating natural response

parameter standard error tr:

METHOKAM 1.805, 0.122 ou.

NATURAL 9.010 0.007 1

SLOPE 11107 0.067 16.

Variance-Covariance matrix
METHOXAM NATURAL

METHOXAM _0.149809E-01 -0.191395E-03 -0.

NATURAL —-0.191395E-03 0.474350E-04 0.

SLOPE -0,7564546-02 0.678902E-04 0.
Chi-squared goodness of fit test

prep dose A expect

METHOXAM 5.000 198. 31

10.000 200. 30

60.000 200. 107.113,

1501000 200. 150.145

500.000 200. 176. ~—«176.

NATURAL 200: 2 1

chi-square: 3.0820 degrees of freedom: 3

Effective Doses

dose Limits 0.90
EDSO METHOKAM 42.686 lower 32.665
upper 55.344

123

559
SLOPE
1241738-01
115062E-03
'5313046-02
ted residual probab std resid
98 «10.018 «0.110 2.266
i130 -241129 01401 ~3.482
26 6.7440 0.957
6 -6.757 oo 711268
ise 11.4230 2.468
1330 -0:331 0 0.288
heterogeneity: 8.6511

0.95 0.99
50.641
414.265,

tion is ( 5) METHOXAM

atio
748

424

570

SLOPE

7564545-02

678902E-04

446504E-02

ted residual probab std resid
389 --4.590 0.160 0.891

$01 7.990 0.250 1.305

"a6 6.858 «0.569 0.979

19741027. 0.7300. 6a

136-0563 0.883 0.124

196 0.039 0.000.028

heterogeneity: 1.2940

0.95 0.99
29.546 20.498
60.768 84.019

MYPOTHESIS OF EQUALITY (equal slopes, equal

(chi

square: 0.115E+04, degrees of freed

intercepts) : REJECTED (P<0.05
Jor tail probability: 0.000)


124

Parameters
21.9038 oDve ~3.032531 FIPRONIL
3.056086 PROPOKUR 21231593 METHOXAM
31522886 A-c 11361917 sLoPE
Hessian
Dove PROPOKUR acc PIPRONTL
pove -0.3372596-57 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000
PROPOKUR 0.00000, 605.740 0.00000 0.00000
asc 0.00000 9.00000 686.024 9.00000
FIPRONIL 0.00000, 9.00000 9.00000 453.131
METHOXAM 0.00000 9.00000 0.00000 9.00000
SLOPE -0.1213168-56 1447.20 1806.56 1044.30
ian (continued)
METHOXAM SLOPE
ove 0.00000 -0.121316E-56
PROPOKUR 0.00000, 1447.20
asc ‘0.00000 1906.56
FIPRONIL 0.00000, 1044.30
METHOXAM = 450.240 757.157
SLOPE 757.157 12470.9

Hessian is singular. This is an abnormal situation that needs the
attention of a statistician or progranner.

Lethal dose ratios (LDS)

ratio limits 0.95
PROPOXUR 14.173 lower 12.267
upper 16.374
ac 6.144 lower 5.689
upper 6.635
FIPRONTL 18.326 lower 12.710
upper 18.481
METHOKAM 59.206, lower 48.593,

upper 72.136

125

APPENDIX 4E. Probit Analysis of five insecticides against B. germanica from CALM2

population using PoloPlus software version 2.0

Number of preparations
Number of dose groups
Model: Probit
Natural Response Parameter: yes
Convert doses to logarithms: yes
Los: 50

25

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained.
Estimating natural response

Preparation is (

1) Dove

parameter standard error t ratio
pove 712.213 0.742 716.468
NATURAL 0.012 0.008 1laza
SLOPE 31646 0.218 16.694
Variance-Covariance matrix
ove NATURAL SLOPE
pove 0.550017 _~0.171715E-02 -0.161617
NATURAL —-0.171715E-02 0.670832E-04 0.472170E-03
SLOPE 0.161617 0.472170E-03 0.476956E-02

chi-squared goodness of fit test

prep dose A expected residual probab std resid
Dove 1000.00 200. 28.22.30 «$.699 0.112 1.280
1500.00 200. 50.54.34 4.343 0.272 0.690
250.000 199. 107.124.337.327 0.575 =1.080
350.000 199. 152.181.890.112 0.763 0.018
480.000 200. «182. «177.86 «4.443 «0.888 (0.995
NATURAL 199 2. 2:32 -0.321 0.012 -0.212
chi-square: 4.2549 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 1.4183
Effective Doses
dose limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
L050 ove 2238323, lower 2042.825 1972.454 1728.721

upper 2439.919

2515.612 279.916

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 2) PROPOKUR
Estimating natural response

Parameter standard error t ratio
PROPOXUR — =2.653, 0.168 15.787
NATURAL 9.006 0.006 1.005
SLOPE 11340 0.078 171175
Variance-Covariance matrix
PROPOKUR, NATURAL ‘SLOPE

PROPOXUR 0. 282357E-01 -0.254988E-03 -0.125822E-01

NATURAL -0.254988E-03 0.353734E-04 0.926340-04
SLOPE -01125822E-01 0.9263408-04 0.6090998-02
Chi-squared goodness of fit test
prep dose a E expected residual probab std resid
PROPOXUR 10.000 199. 26.19.93 6.074 «0.100 1.434
50.000 200. $1.-—«71.52~20-516 0.358 3.027
85.000 200.109. 95.34 13.664 0.477195,
500.000 199. «155. 165.92 -10.919 0.834 2.079
700.000 200.186. «175.58 10.416 «0.878 = 2.250
NATURAL, 198. 1 1118-01184 0.006 ~~. 169
chi-square: 24.375 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 6.1248
Effective Doses
dose limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
DSO PROPOXUR 95.269 lower 0.432 36.518

upper 167.483 212.950

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 3) A=C
Estimating natural response

parameter standard error t ratio

acc 14.712 0.948 717.347
NATURAL 0.005 9.005 1.008
SLOPE 5.876 01337 17.442
Variance-covariance matrix
aac NATURAL SLOPE
acc 0.719232 ~0.616142B-03 ~0.285260
NATURAL — -0.616142E-03 0.259218£-04 0.227066E-03
SLOPE 0.285260 0:227066E-03 0.113494
Chi-squared goodness of fit test
prep ‘dose A E expected residual probab
ac 200.000 199. 26.24.14 1.864 «0.122
250.000 200. = S1. $4218 -3.184 0.271,
380.000 200. 114. «119-13 ~5.134 0.596
400.000 199.151. 143.21 © 7.789 0.720
600,000 200. 188. «189.36 1.364 0.947
NATURAL, 200. ae 1102-01023 0.005,
chi-square: 2.659 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 0.006
Effective Doses
dose limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
ps0 ac 318.985 lower 309.247 307.380 303.716

upper 328.097 330.839 34.689,

Estimating natural response

parameter standard error ratio
FIPRONTL = -0.931 0.076 12.313
NATURAL 0.009, 0.007 aaa
‘SLOPE Loge 0.064 16.399

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 4) FIPRONIL

126

variance-covariance matrix

FIPRONIL. NATURAL store
FIPRONIL _0.571308E-02 -0,108967E-03 -0. 383020E-02
NATURAL -0.108967E-03 0.439641E-04 0.447627E-04

SLOPE =0.383020E-02 0.447627E-04 0. 407244E-02

chi-squared goodness of fit test

prep dose a r expected residual probab std resid
PIPRONIL 0.000 198. 31.36.39 $391 0.184 ~0.989
31000 200, 59.67.88 01339-11326
51000 200. 107, «SS 85.30 0.427 3.102
30.000 200. 152. 160.69 01803-11547
1001000 200.178. = 175.72 0.879 0.493
NATURAL 199, 2: 1.88 0.009 0.089
chi-square: 15.002 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 5.0008
Effective Doses
dose limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
DSO FIPRONIL 7.750 lower 4.353 3.385

upper 13.430 16.800,

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 5) METHOXAM
Estimating natural response

parameter standard error ratio

METHOXAM =" ~2.792 0.177 15.760
NATURAL 0.011, 0.008 11428
SLOPE 11528 0.089 371173

Variance-Covariance matrix
METHOXAM NATURAL SLOPE,

METHOKAM _0.313920E-01 -0.428534E-03 -0.151447E-01

NATURAL — -0.428534E-03 0.624982E-04 0.166657E-03

std resid

‘SLOPE -01151447E-01 0.166657E-03 0.7915488-02
chi-squared goodness of fit test
prep dose n Fr expected residual probab
METHOXAM 10.000 197. 28. 22.29 8.710013
30.000 200. += 50.60.82 -10.815 0.304 -1.
70.000 197.106. «101-68 «= 4.318 0.5160.
250.000 200. 159. «162.07 -3.073 0.8100.
$00,000 199. 184. 180.99 «3.015 0.909.
NATURAL 200. 2. 2:26 © -0.257 0.011 -0.
chi-square: 5.6839 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 1.8946
Effective Doses
dose limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
DSO METHOXAM 67.245, lower 52.128 47.216 32.095

upper 85.493 93.176 126.122

284
662
616
354
743
1m

HYPOTHESIS OF EQUALITY (equal slopes, equal intercepts): REJECTED (P<0.05)
(chi-square: 0.1456+04, degrees of freedom: 8, tail probability: 0.0

100)

127

Parameters

oove
PROPOKUR
a-c
EIPRONTL
METHOXAM,
SLOPE

-11,58724 pove
=2.498658 PROPOXUR
714.3972 a-c

Hessian (continued)

Dove
PROPOXUR
ac
FIPRONIL
METHOXAM
SLOPE

pove PROPOXUR acc
~0.205307E-08 0.00000 0.00000
0.00000 481.210 0.00000
9.00000 0.00000 -0. 3289998-20
9.00000 900000 0.00000
9.00000 9.00000 0.00000
-0.7479326-05 979.100 0. 9084318-20
METHOKAM SLOPE
0.00000 -0.7479326-05
0.00000 379.100
9.00000 -0.908431£-20
9.00000 424.556
487.115 910.508
910.508 4636.14

Hessian is singular.
attention of a statistician or progranner.

Lethal dose ratios (L050)

PROPOXUR

ac

FIPRONTL

MerHOXAM

ratio

23.495,

7.017

208.805

33.206

Limits 0.95,
lower 19.705
upper 28.013
lower 6.525,
upper 7.546
lower 233.613
upper 357.036
lower 28.296
upper 39.156

1.131144 PTPRONTE,
21300144 MerHoxaM
11264794 SLOPE

FIPRONIL
0.00000
0.00000
0.00000
464.045,
‘9.00000
424.556

This is an abnormal situation that needs the

128

129

APPENDIX 4F. Probit Analysis of five insecticides against B. germanica from CALC population

using PoloPlus software version 2.0

Number of preparations: $
Number of dose groups: 25
Model: Probit

Natural Response Parameter: yes
Convert doses to logarithms: y
Ips: 50

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 1) DDVP
Estimating natural response

parameter standard error t ratio

opve 716.927 1,003 16.880
NATURAL 0.010 0.007 1.428
SLOPE alan 0.292 16.930
Variance-Covariance matrix

Dove NATURAL SLOPE
ove 1.00553 -0.1219298-02 -0.292316
NATURAL — -0.121929E-02 0.464979E-04 0.331054E-03
‘SLOPE 0.292316 0:3318548-03 0.8517108-01

chi-squared goodness of fit test

prep dose a expected residual probab std resid
Bove 3500.000 199. 23.23.32 0.325 0.1170.
20001000 200. «= $1. $5.14 4.241 0276-0.
2600.000 200.102. «96.70 $303. 0.483.
3800.000 200. «147.144.602.399 0.723.
$000:000 199. «179. «181-83 -2-527 0.912 -0.
NATURAL, 199. 2. 1194 0.061 «0.0100
chi-square: 1.544 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 0.515

Effective Doses
dose Limits 0.90 0.95 0.99

EDS0 DDVP —2666.456 lower 2570.000 2551.619 2515.635
upper 2765.784 2785-387 2624-418

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 2) PROPOKUR
Estimating natural response

parameter standard error t ratio

PROPOXUR —°=4.772 0.262 18.229
NATURAL, 0.005 0.005
SLOPE, 2.012 0.107

Variance-Covariance matrix
‘PROPOKUR NATURAL SLOPE

072
655
750
379
633
04a

130

PROPOXUR 0. 695403E-01 -0.190599E-03 -0.274109E-01
NATURAL — -0.180599E-03 0.218246E-04 0.587587E-04
SLOPE -012741098-01 0.587587E-04 0.113645E-01

Chi-squared goodness of fit test

prep dose A 5 cted residual probab std resid
PROPOXUR 30.000 200, 17, 18.45 1.448 0.092 0.354
150,000 197. 54.68.97 =14.971 0.350 -2.236
200.000 198. 110. «88.35 21.654 0.446 © 3.096
1000:000 -200..««173.-««179.50=6.499 0.897 -1-515
1300,000 200. «189.186.552.454 0.933 0.693
NATURAL, 198. fe 0:93 0.068 += 0.008 0.071
chi-square: 17.489 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 5.6298
Effective Doses
dose limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
DSO PROPOKUR 235.261 lower 166.367 143.441

upper 326.573 371.855

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 3) A-C
Estimating natural response

parameter standard error t ratio

ac 8.219 0.467 17.582
NATURAL, 90.010 0.007 11429
SLOPE 31097 0.173 171922
Variance-Covariance matrix
aoc NATURAL SLOPE
acc 0.218499 _—~0,61615SE-03 -0.8033248-01
NATURAL — -0.616155E-03 0.467662E-04 0.1996986-03
SLOPE -0.803324E-01 0.199698E-03 0.298532E-01,

chi-squared goodness of fit test

prep do: a £ expected residual probab std resid
aoc 180.000 200. 23.23.42 0.419 0.117 -0.092
3001000 200. «55.59.74 4.739 0.299 -0.732
450.000 199. 109.100.248.759 0.504 1.282
1000:000 200.166. «171.86 © -5.856 0.859 -1.191
1100:000 200. 180.«177.18 «= 2.825 0.886 = 0.628
NATURAL, 199. 2 1194 0.056 0.010 0.040
chi-square: 3.9010 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 1.3003
Effective Doses
dose limits 0.90 0.95 __ 0.99
p50 AC 450.984 lower 407.966 392.906 342.995

upper 496.607 513.915 577.105

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 4) FIPRONIL
Estimating natural response

Parameter standard error t ratio
FIPRONIL = =1.659 0.108 715.356
NATURAL 0.010 0.007 12425,
SLOPE 0.799 0.045 17.602

131

Variance-Covariance matrix
PIPRONIL NATURAL SLOPE

FIPRONIL _0..116762E-01 -0.187540E-03 -0.440318E-02

NATURAL -0.187540E-03 0.462167E-04 0.503370E-04

SLOPE ~01440318E-02 0.503370E-04 0.206174E-02

chi-squared goodness of fit test

prep dose a expected residual probab std resid
FIPRONTL 5.000 199. 24. 28-63 -4.634 0.144 0.936
101000 200. «45.40.53 «4.466 (0.203 (0.786
130,000 200. «107.103.363.643 0.517 0.516,
1000:000 199. 149. «183.65 4.647 0.772— 0.785,
3600.000 200. «178. «176.55 «1.450 «0.883 0.319
NATURAL 199. Es 1:93 0.073 0-010 0.053
chi-square: 2.480 degrees of freedom: 3 _ heterogeneity: 0.827
Effective Doses
dose Limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
$0 FIPRONIL 119.157 lower 94.820 90.688 83.034

upper 149.380 156.025 169.972

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 5) METHOKAM
Estimating natural response

Parameter standard error t ratio

METHOKAM = ~3.882 0.241 15.079
NATURAL 0.006 0.006 1,008
SLOPE, 1.932 0.117 16.516
Variance-Covariance matrix
METHOKAM, NATURAL SLOPE
METHOXAM —_0.562935E-01 -0.427042E-03 -0.276962E-01
NATURAL — -0.427042E-03 0.397647E-08 0.172816E-03
SLOPE -01276862E-01 0.172616E-03 0.136857E-01
chi-squared goodness of fit test
prep dose a r expected residual probab std resid
METHOXAM 20.000 200. «25.18.28 6.723 «0.091 «1.650
50.000 200. 50.55.80 -5.800 0.279 -0.914
100.000 199. 89.98.72 9.716 0.496 1.378
180.000 199. 140.136.263.741 0.685 0.571
500.000 200. 185. «181.85 3.152 0.909 0.776
NATURAL 200. 1 1127-01267 0.006 -0.238
chi-square: 6.4400 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 2.1467
Effective Doses
dose Limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
L050 METHOKAM 102.160 lower 03.443 77.231 57.088

upper 124.715 134.398 178.623

HYPOTHESIS OF EQUALITY (equal slopes, equal intercepts): REJECTED (P<0.05)
(chi-square: 0.122E+04, degrees of freedom: 8, tail probability: 0.000)


132

Parameters
~18.52788 vove -2.794998 FIPRONIL
=3.118040 PROPOXUR 21674332 METHOXAM
~3.478857 A-c 1.326381 SLOPE

Hessian

pove PROPOXUR acc FIPRONIL
pove -0.428115E-24 0.00000 0.00000 ‘0.00000
PROPOKUR 0.00000, 500.936 9.00000 0.00000
ac 0.00000 0.00000 363.315 0.00000
FIPRONIL 0.00000, ‘0.00000 0.00000 324.984
METHOXAM 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 9.09000
SLOPE -0.1578136-23 1212.48 1508.17 741.028

sian (continued)

MBTHOXAM SLOPE
opve 0.00000 -0.1578138-23
PROPOXUR 0.00000, 1212.48
ac 9:00000 1508.17
FIPRONTL 0.00000 741.028
METHOXAM © 527.690 1051.28
SLOPE 1051.28 1277.6

Hessian is singular. This is an abnormal situation that needs the
attention of a statistician or progranner.

Lethal dose ratios (LD50)

ratio Limits 0.95
PROPOXUR 11.334 lower 10.037
upper 12.799
ac 5.913 lower = 5.431
upper 6.437
FIPRONIL 22.378 lower 16.935,
upper 29.569
METHOXAM 26.101, lower 23.095,

upper 29.497

133

APPENDIX 4G. Probit Analysis of five insecticides against B. germanica from BAYM

population using PoloPlus software version 2.0

Number of preparations: 5
Number of dose groups: 27

Model: probit

Natural Response Parameter: yes
Convert doses to logarithms: yes
Ls: 50

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 1) DDVP
Estimating natural response

parameter standard error t ratio

ove 23.977 1.475 16.253

NATURAL 0.004 0.004 11003

SLOPE 71383, 0.449, 16,451,

Variance-covariance matrix

Dove NATURAL SLOPE

Dove 2.17636 _—-~0.226814£-03 -0.661708

NATURAL — -0.226814E-03 0.198247E-04 0.6207116-04

SLOPE -0661708 0.6207116-04 0.201406

Chi-squared goodness of fit test

prep dose a expected residual probab atd resid

oove 1500.000 197. 33.59.50 =26.498 0.302 4.112
1700.00 200.104 90:44 13.557 014521926,
2000.000 200. «158. 131.01 26.987 0.655 4.015
3000.000 200.182. «191.03 -9.031 0.985 -3.086
3100,000 198. «190. -—«:190.92 -0.919 0.964 -0.352

NATURAL 197, i 0:88 © 0.120 0.004 = 0.129

chi-square: 46.395 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 15.465

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 2) PROPOXUR
Estimating natural response

parameter standard error t ratio

PROPOXUR  ~2.666 0.195 713.663
NATURAL 9.012 9.009 11423
SLOPE 1.388 0.084 16.095
Variance-Covariance matrix
‘PROPOXUR NATURAL SLOPE
PROPOXUR 0. 380728E-01 -0.568431E-03 -0.1591316-01
NATURAL -0.568431E-03 0.722690E-04 0.204597E-03
SLOPE -O.159131E-01 0.204597E-03 0. 711964E-02

Chi-squared goodness of fit test

134

prep dose a £ expected residual probab std resid
‘BROPOXUR 10.000 195. 26. 20-74 5.257 0.106 1.221
100.000 193. 91. «101.47 -10.468 ©0526-1509
150.000 199. 123. =«123.07-0.067 0.618 © -0.010
650.000 200. «170.-«175.45-$.448- 01877-1174
1000:000 200. «193. 184.28 = 8.721-«0.921 2.291
NATURAL 198. 2 2140-01395 01012, ~0.257
chi-square: 10.462 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 3.4874
Effective Doses
dose limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
L050 PROPOKUR 91.874 lower 6.866 45.452 12.247

upper 134.175 152.365 237.668

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 3) A-C
Estimating natural response

parameter standard error t ratio
ac 76.509 0.410 -16.072
NATURAL 0.008 9.005 1,003
SLOPE 21573 01184 16.676
Variance-Covariance matrix
asc NATURAL SLOPE
a-c 0.168072 _-0.295309E-03 -0.6284208-01
NATURAL —-0.295309E-03 0.205250E-04 0.9570716-04
SLOPE. -0.628420E-01 0.957071E-04 0.238062B-01,
chi-squared goodness of fit test
prep dose a expected residual probab std resid
Ae 150.000 199. 38. 32.96 += $.044 0.166 0.962
300.000 200. «77.83.58 © -6.577 0.418 0.943
500.000 199. 122.-«127:52-5.522 0.641 -0.816
800.000 200.168. 162-35 $1647 0-812 1.021
1500,000 200. 189.188.720.279 «0.944 0.086
NATURAL 200. 1s 1107-01072. 01005-0069,
chi-square: 3.5357 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 1.1786
Effective Doses
dose Limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
150 A-c 363.761 lower 323.849 309.656 261.860

upper 405.039 420.413 475.211

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 4) FIPRONIL
Estimating natural response

Parameter standard error t ratio

FIPRONIL —=1.080, 0.074 714.601
NATURAL 9.005 0.005 1,004
SLOPE 0.961 0.085 17.848
Variance-Covariance matrix
PIPRONIL. NATURAL. SLOPE
FIPRONIL —0.547134E-02 -0.8021866-04 -0.336363E-02
NATURAL -0.802186E-04 0.260473E-04 0.330945E-04

SLOPE -0.336363E-02 0.330945E-04 0.300018E-02

Chi-squared goodness of fit test

prep dose n £ expected residual probab std resid
FIPRONIL 0.000 200, 29, + -28.89 0.106 0.144 0.022
31000 200. «= 49. «$4.18 $1182 0.271 0.824
51000 200. 80.68.99 11.013 0.345 1.638
20-000 200. «108. «113.98 © =5.980 0.570 0.854
100.000 200. 148. «160.24 12.243 0-801 ~2.169
150.000 199. 180. «168.14 11.860 0.845 2.323
NATURAL 197, 1 1:01 =0.009 0.005 0.009
chi-square: 14.194 degrees of freedom: 4 heterogeneity: 3.5484
Effective Doses
dose Limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
LDSO EIPRONIL 13.294 loner 6.848 7.742 4.972

upper 19.988 22.854 35.684

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 5) METHOKAM
Estimating natural response

parameter standard error t ratio

METHOXAM = -2.891. 0.170 16.981
NATURAL 0.010 9.007 1440
SLOPE 11490 0.086 17.324

METHOXAM NATORAL stort

METHOXAM 0. 289851E-01 ~0.316083E-03 -0.141488E-01

NATURAL — -0.316083E-03 0.470S26E-04 0.120793E-03

SLOPE -0.141488E-01 0.120793E-03 0.740115E-02

Chi-squared goodness of fit test

prep dose a r expected residual probab std resid

METHOXAM 10.000 198. = 21.17.77 «3.229 0.090 0.803
30,000 200. «36. «50.54 ~14.844 0.253 -2.367
$0,000 200. 64.73.24 «= =9.237 0.366 -1.356
100.000 200. «114. =«108.07 5.926 0.540 0.841
150.000 198. 153. 126.97 26.031 «0.641.—3.857
10001000 200. «180. 188.71 8.707 0.944 ~2.667

NATURAL iss. 2 1:96 0.044 0.010 0.032

chi-square: 30.781 degrees of freedom: 4 heterogeneity: 7.6953

Effective Doses

dose Limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
LDSO METHOXAM 87.042 lower 57.190 49.232

upper 134.754 158.864

HYPOTHESIS OF EQUALITY (equal slopes, equal intercepts): REJECTED (P<0.05)
(chi-square: 0.1076+04, degrees of freedom: 8, tail probability: 0.000)

Parameters

-23.14118 Dove 1.451639 EIPRONIL
2.534955 PROPOKUR 2.529115 METHOXAM

135

136

~3.219359 A-c 1.298001 SLOPE
Hessian
pove PROPOXUR acc FIPRONIL
pove ~0.334978E-69 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000
PROPOXUR 0.00000 441.157 9.00000 0.00000
aoc 0.00000 0.00000 351.761 0.00000
FIPRONIL 0.00000 0.00000 ‘0.00000 550.916
METHOXAM 0.00000 90,00000 9.00000 2.00000
SLOPE -0.116724E-68 962.385 1463.56 608.859
Hessian (continued)
METHOXAM. SLOPE
ppve 0.00000 0. 116724E-68
PROPOXUR (0.00000 962.385,
aoc ‘9.00000 1463.56
FIPRONIL 0.00000 608.859,
METHOXAM = 530.225 1110.30
SLOPE 1110.30 9405.23,

Hessian is singular. This is an abnormal situation that needs the
attention of a statistician or programmer.

Lethal dose ratios (L050)

ratio Limits 0.95
PROPOXUR 19.247 lower 15.927
upper 23.259
ac 4.061 lower 4.433
upper 5.332
FIPRONIL 133.012 lower 108.886
upper 162.484
METHOXAM — 20.315 lower 17.663,

upper 23.366

137

APPENDIX 4H. Probit Analysis of five insecticides against B. germanica from BAYS population
using PoloPlus software version 2.0

Number of preparation:
Number of dose groups: 25
Model: Probit

Natural Response Parameter: yes
Convert doses to logarithms: yes

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 1) DOVE
Estimating natural response

parameter standard error t ratio

pove 719.089 1.155 716.526
NATURAL 0.005 0.005 11003
SLOPE 5.748 01346 16.595
Variance-Covariance matrix
pve NATURAL SLOPE
pove 1.33426 -0.387135E-03 -0.399774
NATURAL —-0.387135E-03 0.219012E-04 0.106512E-03
SLOPE 0.399774 0:106512E-03 0.119965
chi-squared goodness of fit test
prep dose A expected residual probab std resid
Bove 1500.000 199. 31.40.98 9.975 0.206 -1.749
1750.000 200. «69.65.97 3.035 0.330 0.456
2000.000 200. «106. 91.29 «14.708 0.456 = 2.088
3000.000 199.155. 162.35 -7.349 01816-1344
3800.000 200. «181. ~=«:180.08 ©0922-0900 0.28
NATURAL ise: re 0:93 0.070 0.008-—0.073
chi-square: 9.4047 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 3.1616
Effective Doses
dose Limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
E050 Dove —2094.981 Lower 1933.03 1871.136 1616.073

upper 262.572 23291698 2626-863

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 2) PROPOKUR
Estimating natural response

parameter standard error t ratio

PROPOXUR ~2.922, 0.103 -19.997
NATURAL 0.010 0.007 1laza
SLOPE 1.427 0.084 16.983

Variance-Covariance matrix
PROPOXUR, NATURAL SLOPE

138

PROPOXUR _0.333636E-01 -0.197800B-03 -0.1482618-01

NATURAL -0.197800E-03 0.4506765-04 0.612972E-04
SLOPE =01148281E-01 0.612972E-04 0. 705624E-02
Chi-squared goodness of fit test
prep dose a £ expected residual probab std resid
PROPOKUR 28.000 199. 30.36.74 6.743 0.185 ~1.232
30.000 196. 64 61.88 2-116 0.316 0.325
100.000 199.110. 95.04 14.960 0.478 2.123,
500.000 200. 147. 165.01 18.011 0.825 ~3..352
1000000 200. «191. +=«182.71 8.289 0.914 2,086.
NATURAL 198. 2 1189 0.108 0.010 0.079
chi-square: 21.724 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 7.2412

Effective Doses

dose limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
LDSO PROPOKUR 111.757 lower 65.152 50.333
upper 184.273 228.279

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 3) A-C
Estimating natural response

parameter standard error t ratio

ac =9.556 0.555, -17.228
NATURAL 0.005, 0.005 11005
SLOPE 4180 0.241 171334
Variance-Covariance matrix
ac NATURAL SLOPE
ac 0.307691 __-0.380563E-03 -0.133226
NATURAL 0. 380563E-03 0,250990E-04 0.146575E-03
SLOPE 0.133226 0.146575E-03 0.581375E-01
chi-squared goodness of fit test
prep dose a £ expected residual probab std resid
ac 100.000 200. 27. 24.02 -2.983 0.1200. 649
150.000 199. $2. 64.83 12.827 0.326 © -1.940
2001000 198. 104. -~—«-104.29--0.294 0.527 ~0.042.
300.000 200.-«174.—=«187.67 16.329 0.7882.
600.000 200: «191. 196.03 5.034 0.9802.
NATURAL 199. 1 1:00 -0.002 0.008 -0.
chi-square: 18.696 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 6.2322
Effective Dos
dose Limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
E050. A-c 193.386 lower 163.161 151.480

upper 228.505 245.333

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 4) FIPRONIL
Estimating natural response

parameter standard error t ratio
FIPRONIL "2.752 0.176 715.675
NATURAL 90.004 0.004 12003
‘SLOPE 11408 0.082 17.096

Variance-covariance matrix

PIPRONIL NATURAL
FIPRONIL  0.308351E-01 -0.726754E-04 -0.
NATURAL -0.726754E-04 0.198611E-04 0.
SLOPE -01139610E-01 0:219814E-04 0.

chi-squared goodness of fit test

prep dose A r expect

FIPRONIL 20.000 200. 26. 36.

55.000 199. 76. 76.
100-000 200.130, 105
500.000 200. 159. 170.
10001000 200. 187.186.
NATURAL ise. i

chi-square: 21.260 degrees of freedom: 3
Effective Doses

dose
89.881

Limits 0.90
lower 51.628
upper 145.458

DSO FIPRONIL

0.

139

SLOPE
1396108-01

2195148-04

679077E-02

ted residual probab std resid
52 -10.519 0.183 =1.925
188 -0.547 0.385 -0.080
Tes 2413720528 3.452
[76 -11:761 0.854 -2.354
102 0.982 0.930 0.272
a9 0111500040122

heterogeneity: 7.0866
0.95 0.99
39.236
176.649

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparai

Estimating natural respons.

parameter standard error 4:
METHOKAM —=2.959 0.204 “4.
NATURAL 0.006 0.006 1
SLOPE 1.659 0.103, 16.
Variance-Covariance matrix

METHOXAM NATURAL

METHOXAM —_0.417780E-01 -0.305436E-03 -0.
NATURAL -0.305436E-03 0.356506E-04 0.
SLOPE -0:204861E-01 0.128090E-03 0.

Chi-squared goodness of fit test

prep dose a expect

METHOXAM 10.000 200. 26. 20.

351000 199. 76. ot
100.000 200.130. 128.
150.000 200. 189.148.
500.000 200. 187. ~—«187
NATURAL 198 1 1

chi-square: 11.344 degrees of freedom: 3

Effective Doses

dose Limits 0.90
DSO METHOXAM 60.708 lower 42.353,
upper 82.005,

tion is ( 5) METHOXAM

atio
478

003

107

store

204861E-01

1280906-03,

106145E-01

ted residual probab std resid
245, $51 0.102 1.296
48 404 01475-2624
152 1477 0.643 0.218
86 10.137 0.744.643
122 0121701936 = -0.063
[19 01186 © 0.006 = -0.171

heterogeneity: 3.7815

0.95 0.99
35.938 13.710
91.225 137.770

HYPOTHESIS OF EQUALITY (equal slopes, equal

degrees of freed

(chi-square: 0.126E+04

intercepts) : REJECTED (P<0.05!
iom: 8, tail probability: 0.000)


140

Parameters
-19.28893 ppve -3.257504 FTPRONTL
3.399761 PROPOXUR +2,952687 METHOXAM
3.741612 a-c 11656035 SLOPE
Hessian
pove PROPOKUR acc FIPRONTL,
pov =0.192309E-33 0.00000 9.00000 0.00000
PROPOKUR 0.00000 449.085 9:00000 0.00000
asc 000000 0.00000 356.374 0.00000
FIPRONIL 0.00000 0.00000 9.06000 448.499
METHOXAM 0.00000 0.00000 9.00000 0.00000
SLOPE -0.6793526-33 932.401 1292.03 913.167
Hessian (continued)
METHOXAM SLOPE,
pov 0.00000 -0.679352E-33
PROPOKUR 0.00000 932.401
ac 9.00000 1292.03
FIPRONIL 0.00000 913.167
METHOXAM 467.600 992.776
SLOPE 892.776 8890.70

Hessian is singular. This is an abnormal situation that needs the
attention of a statistician or programmer.

Lethal dose ratios (L050)

ratio Limits 0.95
PROPOXUR 18.746 lower 16.030
upper 21.922
ac 10.833 lower 10.151
upper 11.562
FIPRONIL 23.308 lower 19.908
upper 27.290
METHOKAM 34.509 lower 29.923

upper 39.798

141

APPENDIX 4I. Probit Analysis of five insecticides against B. germanica from BAYK population

using PoloPlus software version 2.0

Number of preparations: 5
Number of dose groups: 26

Model: Probit

Natural Response Parameter: yes
Convert doses to logarithns: yes
Lbs: 50

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 1) DDVP
Estimating natural response

parameter standard error t ratio

opve 719.667 0.535, 36.753,
NATURAL 0.003 9.002 11415
SLOPE 5.787 02156 37.104
Variance-Covariance matrix
Dove NATURAL SLOPE
pove 0.206342 ~0.154977E-03 -0.83405.
NATURAL —-0.154977E-03 0.335095E-05 0.434941
SLOPE -0.8340S46-01 0.434948E-04 0.243301
Chi-squared goodness of fit test
prep dose a rE expected
opve 100.000 995. 139. 101.15,
2300.000 1000. 343. «417.94
2700:000 999.577. «$76.65
3800:000 996. 778. +~—-798.05
400.000 997. 922. «878.64
NATURAL 990. 2. 2.56
chi-square: 59.535 degrees of freedom: 3

Effective Doses
dose limits 0.90 0.

42 lower 226.629 2172.9:

upper 2725.397 2612.6

ps0 ppve 2502

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation
Estimating natural response

parameter standard error ratio

PROPOXUR §—~3.291 0.189, 17.381
NATURAL 0.005 0.005 L004
SLOPE 11675 0.091 10.427

Variance-Covariance matrix
‘PROPOXUR NATURAL store

4E-01
E-04
)0E-01,

residual
37.849
-741944
0.355
20.050
43.357
0.564

heterogenei:
95 0.99

87 1711.588
00 3199.789

probab std resid
0.102 3.972
01418 = ~4.805
0.577 9.023
01801-1592
o.ge1 = 4.245,
0.003 © -0.353
ty: 19.845

(2) PROPOXUR

142

PROPOKUR 0, 358539E-01 -0.159950E-03 -0.166199E-01
NATURAL -0.159950E-03 0.270035E-04 0.560921E-04
SLOPE -01166199E-01 0.560921E-04 0.825929E-02

chi-squared goodness of fit test

prep dose n © expected residual probab std resid
PROPOXUR 20.000 200. «31. 27.51 3.493 0.138 0.717
50.000 200. «57.66.27 9.272 0.331. -1.393
100.000 199.111. «104.62 G.381 0.526 0.806
500.000 200. 176. «178.20 =2.200 0.891 -0.499
10001000 200. «193. «191.73 «1.267 0.989 (0.450
NATURAL 200. 1 lod 0.044 0.008 -0.043
chi-square: 3.7287 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 1.2429
Effective Doses
dose Limits 0.90 _ 0.95 _0.99
LDSO PROPOKUR 92.301 lower 76.952 71.941 56.694

upper 110.215 117.437 145.694

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 3) A-C
Estimating natural response

parameter standard error t ratio

ac 7.864 0.466 716.876
NATURAL 0.011, 0.008 11433
SLOPE 31010 01175 171229
Variance-covariance matrix
a-c NATURAL store
a-c 0.217139 -0.965184E~03 ~0.809376E-01
NATURAL  -0,965184E-03 0.615344E-08 0.322360E-03
SLOPE -0:809376E-01 0.322360E-03 0. 305248E-01
Chi-squared goodness of fit test
prep dose A expected residual probab std resid
ac 150.000 199. 26.20.83 5.170 0.105 1.197
300.000 200. 52.69.85 -17.850 0.349 2.648
400.000 197. 106. 9712782804931. 258
800.000 200. 168. 162126 = 5.740 0.811 1.037
1500:000 200, 189. «191.12 -2.123 0.956 -0.729
NATURAL 199. 2. 2:24 © 0.236 «0.011 -0.159
chi-square: 11.657 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 3.9058
Effective Doses
dose Limits 0.90 0.95 _0.99
150 a-c 409.704 lower 337.388 310.996 207.390

upper 490-574 525.102 697.983

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 4) FIPRONIL
Estimating natural respons

parameter standard error ratio
FIPRONIL =" =1.344 0.100 13.447
NATURAL 0.018, 0.010 1.757
SLOPE 0.945 0.054 17,603

143

Parameters
-2.119501 FIPRONIL
=2.807379 PROPOXUR -2:631368 METHOXAM
-3.707301 A-c 1.434129 SLOPE
Hessian
pove PROPOXUR asc EIPRONIL

pove ~0.127799E-38 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000

PROPOKUR 0.00000 460.482 9.00000 0.00000

asc ‘0.00000 9.00000 341.278 0.00000

FIPRONIL 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 303.725

METHOXAM 0.00000 9.00000 0.00000 0.00000

‘SLOPE ~0.458495E-38 930.843 1431.84 650.356
Hessian (continued)

METHOXAM SLOPE

pove 0.00000 -=0.458495E-38

PROPOXUR 000000 930.843

a-c 0.00000 143i.a4

FIPRONIL 0.00000 650.356

METHOXAM 518.364 1004.64

SLOPE 1004.64 9156.24

Wessian is singular. This is an abnormal situation that needs the
attention of a statistician or programmer.

Lethal dose ratios (LD50)

ratio limits 0.95
PROPOXUR 27.101 lower 23.642
upper 31.066
ac 6.105 lower 5.639
upper 6.610
FIPRONIL 94.671 lower 74.647
upper 120.067
METHOXAM = 35.201 lower 31.037

upper 39.924

144

Variance-covariance matrix

FIPRONIL NATURAL SLOPE
EIPRONIL  0.999237E-02 -0.499983E-03 -0.472995E-02
NATURAL -0.499953E-03 0.109869E-03 0.194118E-03
SLOPE -01472998E-02 0.194118E-03 0.28818SE-02
chi-squared goodness of fit test
prep do: a r expected residual probab std resid
EIPRONIL 0.000 199. 26. 21.14 4.864 ©0106 1.119
$1000 200. $6. $2.20 «3.795 0.261 0 611
15.000 200 «80. «83.80 --3.800 0.419 -0.545
100-000-197. 115. 140.46 ~25.460 0.713 4.010
200.000 200.-««172.-=«160-18 11.850 0.801 2.098
1000000 200.193. 186-67 6.327 (0.9331. 794
NATURAL 200. 3 3:68 © -0.684 0.018 = -0.360
chi-square: 25.751 degrees of freedom: 4 heterogeneity: 6.4376
Effective Doses
dose limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
LDSO FIPRONIL 26.422 lower 12.754 9.601 2.677
upper 49.270 $9,985 117.888

Intercepts and slopes unconstrained. Preparation is ( 5) METHOKAM
Estimating natural response

parameter standard error t ratio
MeTHOXAM = -3..197 0.216 14.794
NATURAL 0.006 0.006 11003,
SLOPE 11727 0.109, 151885
Variance-covariance matrix

METHOKAM NATURAL SLOPE

METHOXAM 0. 466959E-01 -0.182758E-03 -0.229969E-01
NATURAL  -0.182758E-03 0.304065E-04 0. 706254E-04
SLOPE -0.229969E-01 0.706254E-04 0.118582E-01
Chi-squared goodness of fit test
prep dose a E expected residual probab std resid
METHOXAM 20.000 198. 42.34.75 7.285 0.175 1.355,
50.000 199. 70.79.48 © --9.479 0.399 ~1.372
100:000 200.119. 120.66 1.659 0.603 ~0.240
190,000 199. 150. 150.92 -0.924 0.758 -0.153
500.000 200. «189. «185.73 «3.268 © 0.929 0.898
NATURAL ise. 1 1109-01095 0.006 -0.091
chi-square: 4.6150 degrees of freedom: 3 heterogeneity: 1.5383
Effective Doses
dose limits 0.90 0.95 0.99
LOSO METHOXAM 71.061 lower 58.618 54.357 40.420
upper 84.933 90.452 112.300

HYPOTHESIS OF EQUALITY (equal slopes, equal intercepts): REJECTED (P<0.0S)
(chi-square: 0.288£+04, degrees of freedom: 8, tail probability: 0.000)
Calculations suspended due to heterogeneity factor exceeding 100


