Be te me

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS

Master of Science in Horticulture

JEFF M. OPENA

ROOTING AND MORPHO-ANATOMY IN HARD-TO-ROOT EXCELSA
COFFEE (Coffea excelsa A. Chev.) STEM CUTTINGS

CALIXTO M. PROTACIO, Ph.D.

Adviser

Date: Meas Ld , 2G

| This thesis can be made available to the general public YES

This thesis can be accessed only after consultation with the author
and thesis adviser NO

This thesis can be accessed only by those bound by confidentiality
agreement NO

JEFF ENA

a Ae
CALIXTO M. PROTACIO, Ph.D.

0 0 0
STI-18-1546

ROOTING AND MORPHO-ANATOMY IN HARD-TO-ROOT EXCELSA
COFFEE (Coffea excelsa A. Chev.) STEM CUTTINGS

JEFF M. OPENA

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF THE GRADUATE SCHOOL
UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE
DEGREE OF

MASTER OF SCIENCE
(Horticulture)

JUNE 2019

The thesis attached hereto, entitled “ROOTING AND MORPHO-ANATOMY IN
HARD-TO-ROOT EXCELSA COFFEE (Coffea excelsa A. Chev.) STEM
CUTTINGS ”, prepared and submitted by JEFF M. OPENA in partial fulfillment of the

requirements for the degree of MASTER OF SCIENCE (HORTICULTURE) is hereby

accepted.
i
RACHEL C. SOTTO DOMINGG E. ANGELES
Member, Advisory Committee Member, Advisory Committee
24, 20194 PR wy
Date Signed te Signed

Léa
CALIXTO M. PROTACIO
Chair, Advisory Committee

“ies AG, 25/9
Date Signed

Accepted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of MASTER OF

os San

Director, Institute of Crop Science - College of Agriculture and Food Science

SCIENCE (HORTICULTURE)

Date Signed

Dean, Graduate School
University of the Philippines Los Bafios
4, MF
Date Sign:

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

The author was born on the 29" day of December of the year 1994 in Dipantan,
Nagtipunan, Quirino Province. He is the first child of Mr. Edgar O. Opefia and Mrs.
Aniceta M. Opejia of Brgy. Nalasin, Balaoan, La Union. The author finished his primary
education at Balaoan Central School in the year 2007 and his secondary education at Castor
Z. Concepcion Memorial National High School in the year 2011.

The author took his Bachelor of Science in Agriculture major in Crop Science
specialized in Horticulture at Don Mariano Marcos Memorial State University-North La
Union Campus, Bacnotan, La Union where he was a CHED One Town One Scholar
(CHED-OTOS). He finished his undergraduate degree in 2015 and passed the PRC
Licensure Examination for Agriculturist on the same year. After one year of teaching
experience, he took up his Master’s Degree in Horticulture specialized in Plant Propagation
and Nursery Management minor in Botany at the University of the Philippines Los Bafios,
College Laguna wherein he was a DOST-ASTHRDP scholar.

In 2015, he became an Instructor I at the Institute of Agriculture (now College of
Agriculture) of the Don Mariano Marcos Memorial State University-South La Union
Campus, Rosario, La Union for two Semesters. In 2018, he also worked as a part-time
Instructor at Laguna State Polytechnic University, Siniloan Campus for one Semester.
Currently, he is now an Instructor I at the Don Mariano Marcos Memorial State University-

North La Union Campus, Bacnotan, La Union.

JEFF M. OPENA

iti

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

Do not be discouraged if you failed at the start instead make it a motivation to
improve and succeed. The author wants to convey his heartfelt gratitude to the following
for their contributions and guidance in conducting this research:

To the Omnipotent God Father, for making this everything possible. With His
guidance, and spiritual help, this study became a success and bears a fruitful result. Thank
you for listening to all of my prayers and eagerness desires to fulfil my dreams in life. To
his optimistic and very supporting thesis adviser, Dr. Calixto M. Protacio and other very
supporting Guidance Committee Members, Dr. Rachel C. Sotto, Prof. Bong M. Salazar,
and Dr. Domingo E. Angeles, for their knowledge and expertise in the field of study,
encouragements, guidance, patience and heart-warming pieces of advice. This manuscript
became possible because of them. To his parents, Mr. Edgar O. Opefia and Mrs. Aniceta
M. Opeiia; his sisters Mrs. Joy O. Galang and Queen Stevia Rebaudiana M. Cabanban
and his niece Athena Coleen O. Galang, for serving as his inspirations to pursue more in
his studies and finish this Manuscript to achieve success.

To the Department of Science and Technology-Science Education Institute-
Accelerated Science and Technology Human Resource Development Program (DOST-
SEI-ASTHRDP) for considering him as one of the lucky scholars and for the financial
assistance and thesis grant. Without the help of the Agency with the leadership of Director
Josette T. Biyo, this study will not become possible and will achieve success. To the
Department of Science and Technology-Philippine Council for Agriculture, Aquatic
and Natural Resources Research and Development (DOST-PCAARRD) headed by the
Acting Executive Director Dr. Reynaldo V. Ebora, for granting the author a Master’s
thesis grant which is a big help in the success of this Manuscript.

The author also convey his gratitude to the following who have contributed help in
the conduct of the experiments: ICROPS-Coffee and Cacao Project staffs, especially Kuya
Fred, Kuya Danny, Kuya Jet, and Kuya Fely for helping the author in conducting his
rooting experiments, Mr. Julius Caesar M. Amoyen, for helping and assisting him in
setting-up his rooting experiments, Ms. Susan P. del Rio, for helping him in data
gathering, ICROPS-Makapuno Tissue Culture laboratory staffs and ICROPS-Plant Tissue
Culture Facility staffs, for assisting and providing him the apparatus and equipments
needed for treatment preparation, [WEP-Plant Health Clinic, for disease diagnosis of the
coffee stem cuttings, Ate Wella B. Absullo, for providing him his auxin treatment; Ms.
Karen A. Ballada and Ate Rose D. Poliquit for helping him in interpretation of the
morpho-anatomical structures of his coffee stem slides, Mt. Zion Scientific Inc.
Laboratory, for preparing and making his coffee stem slides; IBS-Plant Biology Division-
Phycology Laboratory especially Sir Owen Narcoda, Tita Mercy and Mam Goss, for
providing the microscope for dissecting and capturing the coffee stem structures, and to all
the UPLB Graduate School staffs especially Tita Ana and Tita Karen, headed by the
Dean, Dr. Jose V. Camacho, Jr., for all the help in processing all the documents needed to
fulfill the needs this study from the Admission to financial support and assistance through
DOST until the final draft of this manuscript, thank you very much!

CHAPTER

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Title Page

Approval Page
Biographical Sketch
Acknowledgement
Table of Contents
List of Tables

List of Figures

List of Appendices
List of Abbreviations
Abstract
INTRODUCTION
REVIEW OF LITERATURE

Taxonomy, Origin, Distribution, Nature & Importance of
Coffee

Propagation of Coffee

Physiological Basis of Rooting

Rooting Hormones

Co-factors and Endogenous Inhibitors
Indole-3-acetic acid oxidase in auxin breakdown

Methods of Determination of IAA

PAGE

xv
xvi

XVii

20
21

26

CHAPTER
Conditions during rooting
Nutritional and Anti-microbial requirements in rooting
3 MATERIALS AND METHODS

Time and Place of the Study

The propagation beds

Preparation and Dilution of the Chemical Treatments
Chemicals and materials used in propagation

Study 1. Rooting of Excelsa coffee stem cuttings

Experiment 1: Response of Single-node Orthotropic Excelsa
Coffee Stem Cuttings to Auxin Oxidase Inhibitors and
Honey treatment under ‘Kulob’

Experiment 2: Rooting Response of Single-Node Orthotropic
and three-node Plagiotropic Excelsa Coffee stem cuttings to
different Auxin Oxidase Inhibitors under Mist
Research Design
Preparation of the source of the planting materials
Preparation of the stem cuttings
Treatment application and rooting of the stem cuttings
Rooting conditions during the propagation

Care and management of the stem cuttings

Experiment: Rooting Response to Photosynthate-Accumulating

Techniques in Robusta Coffee Single-Node Orthotropic Stem

Cuttings

Research Design

vi

PAGE
27
28
32
32
33
34
35
36

36

38

38

39

39

41

43

44

44

CHAPTER

Preparation of the source of the planting materials
Preparation of the stem cuttings
Treatment application and rooting of the stem cuttings
Rooting conditions during the propagation
Care and management of the stem cuttings
Experiment 3: Rooting Response of Single-Node Orthotropic
Young Watersprouts of Excelsa Coffee with Basal Incisions to
auxin and trans-ferulic acid treatment under Mist
Research Design
Preparation of the source of the planting materials
Preparation of the stem cuttings
Treatment application and rooting of the stem cuttings
Rooting conditions during the propagation
Care and management of the stem cuttings
Parameters Gathered
Data Analysis
Study 2: Differences in the Morphological and Anatomical
Structure of Coffea excelsa A. Chev. and Coffea robusta
Linden. Stem Cuttings
Preparation of the coffee stem cuttings

RESULTS

Initial observation on the Response of coffee stem cuttings
to propagation

Study 1. Rooting of Excelsa coffee stem cuttings

vii

PAGE
44
44
47
47
47

48

48
48
48
49
49
51
51
57

58

58
60

60

61

CHAPTER PAGE

Experiment 1: Response of Single-node Orthotropic Excelsa 61
Coffee Stem Cuttings to Auxin Oxidase Inhibitors and Honey
treatment under ‘Kulob’

Experiment 2: Rooting Response of Single-Node Orthotropic and 63
three-node Plagiotropic Excelsa Coffee stem cuttings to
different Auxin Oxidase Inhibitors under Mist

Survival rate of single-node stem cuttings 63
Survival rate of three-node stem cuttings 65
Root growth in single-node stem cuttings 66
Root growth in three-node stem cuttings 71
Callus formation in single-node stem cuttings 72
Shoot emergence in single-node stem cuttings 74
Experiment: Rooting Response to Photosynthate-Accumulating 77

Techniques in Robusta Coffee Single-Node Orthotropic
Stem Cuttings

Survival rate of the stem cuttings 77
Root growth in the stem cuttings 78
Callus formation in the stem cuttings 82
Shoot emergence in the stem cuttings 83

Experiment 3: Rooting Response of Single-Node Orthotropic 85
Young Watersprouts of Excelsa Coffee with Basal Incisions
to auxin and trans-ferulic acid treatment under Mist
Root growth in the stem cuttings 85

Callus formation in the stem cuttings 86

Survival rate of the stem cuttings 90

viii

CHAPTER PAGE
Shoot emergence in the stem cuttings 90
Study 2: Differences in the Morphological and Anatomical 91
Structure of Coffea excelsa A. Chev. and Coffea robusta
Linden. Stem Cuttings

Morphological differences of Excelsa and Robusta 91
coffee watersprouts

Anatomical structures of Excelsa and Robusta coffee 92
stems from watersprouts

Anatomical differences between Excelsa and Robusta 94
coffee stems

Cross and longitudinal sections of freshly-harvested and 4 94
months-old Excelsa and Robusta coffee stems

Adventitious rooting in 7 months-old coffee stem cuttings 103

5 DISCUSSION 109
6 SUMMARY, CONCLUSION, RECOMMENDATIONS 120
Summary and Conclusion 120
Recommendations 125

LITERATURE CITED 127

APPENDICES 138

TABLE

i]

12

LIST OF TABLES

Criteria for root intensity rating in coffee stem cuttings
Criteria for callus intensity rating in coffee stem cuttings

Monthly survival data of single node orthotropic Excelsa coffee
stem cuttings propagated under mist

Monthly survival data of three-node plagiotropic Excelsa coffee
stem cuttings treated with auxin and trans-ferulic acid after 4
months under mist

Rooting in single-node orthotropic Excelsa coffee stem cuttings
after 7 months under mist

Callus formation in single node orthotropic Excelsa coffee stem
cuttings after 7 months under mist

Growth of basal end in single node orthotropic Excelsa coffee
stem cuttings after 7 months under mist

Shoot emergence in single node orthotropic Excelsa coffee stem
cuttings after 7 months under mist

Rooting in single-node orthotropic Excelsa coffee stem cuttings
with basal incisions treated with auxin and trans-ferulic acid
after 6 months under mist

Callus formation in single-node orthotropic Excelsa coffee stem
cuttings with basal incisions treated with auxin and trans-ferulic
acid after 6 months under mist

Growth of basal end in single-node orthotropic Excelsa coffee
stem cuttings with basal incisions treated with auxin and trans-
ferulic acid after 6 months under mist

Shoot emergence and percentage survival of single-node
orthotropic Excelsa coffee stem cuttings with basal incisions
treated with auxin and trans-ferulic acid after 6 months under
mist

PAGE
53
56

63

66

67

73

74

76

86

88

89

90

TABLE PAGE

13 Stem structure thickness of freshly-harvested and 4 months-old 94
Excelsa and Robusta coffee stem cuttings

xi

FIGURE
1
2
3
4a

4b

10

11

12

Sa

15b

LIST OF FIGURES

Coffee suitability map of different regions in the Philippines

Factors that promote adventitious rooting in stem cuttings

Chemical structure of the different treatments used

Google earth/map view of the ASH Building of the UPLB Campus
Closer view and 3D view of the Experimental area using google map
The propagation beds

‘Kulob’ system of propagation

Preparation of the three-node plagiotropic Excelsa coffee stem
cuttings

Preparation and treating the stem cuttings with phenolic treatments
Robusta coffee mother trees with watersprouts

Photosynthate-accumulating techniques in Robusta coffee stem
cuttings

Preparation and gathering of young orthotropic watersprouts of
Excelsa coffee

Root intensity evaluation

Viewing the coffee stem slides using a microscope with built-in
camera

Deterioration of Excelsa coffee stem cuttings propagated under mist
Dead coffee stem cuttings propagated under ‘Kulob’

Dead Excelsa coffee stem cutting showing pathogenic infection

PAGE

23

33

34

37

40

42

45

46

50

54

59

61

62

62

FIGURE

16

17

18

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

Appearance of coffee stem cuttings propagated under mist until 7
months of observation

Newly emerged roots from an Excelsa coffee stem cutting treated
with trans-ferulic acid

Rooted orthotropic Excelsa coffee stem cuttings propagated under
mist

Rooted and non-rooted Excelsa and Robusta coffee stem cuttings
propagated under mist

Successfully rooted Robusta and Excelsa coffee stem cuttings after
7 months under mist

Plagiotropic stem cuttings of Excelsa coffee propagated under mist

Early root emergence in plagiotropic stem cuttings of Excelsa
coffee after 19 weeks under mist

Excelsa coffee stem cuttings where shoots have emerged from the
nodes after one month in rooting beds

Survival, root initiation, callus formation, and shoot emergence of
single-node orthotropic Robusta coffee stem cuttings after 100
days under mist

Root production of single-node orthotropic Robusta coffee stem
cuttings after 100 days under mist

Root length (mm) of single-node orthotropic Robusta coffee stem
cuttings after 100 days under mist

Root and callus intensity rating of single-node orthotropic Robusta
coffee stem cuttings after 100 days under mist

Rooted orthotropic Robusta coffee stem cuttings after 100 days of
rooting observation under mist

Length of the rooting zone (mm) of single-node orthotropic
Robusta coffee stem cuttings after 100 days under mist

xili

PAGE

64

67

68

69

70

71

72

75

78

79

719

80

81

83

FIGURE

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

4la

41b

42

Shoot emergence of single-node orthotropic Robusta coffee stem
cuttings after 100 days under mist

Single-node orthotropic Excelsa coffee watersprout cuttings with
basal incisions in combination with auxin and ferulic acid

treatments rooted after 6 months of observation under mist

Single-node orthotropic watersprouts of Excelsa coffee with basal
incisions planted in plastic cups

Morphological comparison of stem of Excelsa and Robusta coffee
species

A portion of a cross section of freshly-harvested Excelsa and
Robusta coffee stems from watersprouts

A portion of a cross section of 4 months-old Excelsa and Robusta
coffee stem cuttings

Longitudinal section of freshly-harvested Excelsa and Robusta
coffee stem from watersprouts

Longitudinal section of 4 months-old Excelsa coffee stem cutting

A portion of a longitudinal section of a 4 months-old Robusta
coffee stem cutting

A part of a cross section of 7 months-old Excelsa and Robusta
coffee stem cutting

Preformed adventitious root primordia in Robusta coffee stem
cutting

The initiation and development of adventitious root primordial in a
stem cutting of Excelsa coffee

The protrusion of a developed adventitious root in a stem cutting
of Excelsa coffee

The formation of a new layer of sclerenchymatic band in 7
months-old Robusta coffee stem cutting

xiv

PAGE

84

87

89

92

97

98

99

100

101

102

105

106

107

108

FIGURE PAGE

43 Basal incisions in hard-to-root Excelsa coffee stem cuttings 118
promote more roots

XV

APPENDIX

A

om 9 AQ DW

Le 9)

=z a

LIST OF APPENDICES

Plant Pathogen Diagnostic Report

Histological Procedure

List of Activities

Chemical Calculations

Statistical Analysis Result in Root length (mm)

Statistical Analysis Result in Root intensity

Statistical Analysis Result in Number of roots

Statistical Analysis Result in Percentage Rooting Success (%)
Statistical Analysis Result in Callus intensity

Statistical Analysis Result in Percentage Callus Formation (%)
Statistical Analysis Result in Length of the Rooting Zone (mm)
Statistical Analysis Result in Number of Shoots

Statistical Analysis Result in Percentage Shoot Formation (%)

Statistical Analysis Result in Percentage Survival (%)

xvi

PAGE
138
139
142
146
147
148
149
150
151
152
153
156
157

158

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

IBA - Indole-3-butyric acid
NAA - a-naphthalene acetic acid
PBZ - Paclobutrazol (Mangrow 15% WP)
FA - trans-ferulic acid

PBA - 4-hydroxybenzoic acid
CA - p-coumaric acid

etal - and others

ppm - parts per million

uM - micromolar (s)

pm - micrometer (s)

mm - millimeter (s)

cm - centimeter (s)

mg - milligram (s)

8 : gram (s)

oz - ounce

HSD - Tukey’s Honest Significant Difference
STAR - Statistical Tool for Agricultural Research v2.0.1, 2013
1 - lenticel

per - periderm

ert = cortex

sb - sclerenchymatic band

pl - phloem

spl - secondary phloem

ve - vascular cambium

xy - xylem

sxy - secondary xylem

pxy - primary xylem

ry - ray

vs - vessels

tr - tracheids

pi - pith

XVii

ABSTRACT

JEFF M. OPENA. University of the Philippines Los Bafios, June 2019.
Rooting and morpho-anatomy in hard-to-root Excelsa coffee (Coffea excelsa A. Chev.)

stem cuttings

Major Professor: CALIXTO M. PROTACIO, Ph.D.

Excelsa coffee (Coffea excelsa A.Chev.) species is known to be hard-to-root when
propagated through stem cuttings. This study sought to initiate rooting in Excelsa coffee
through the use of a variety of auxin synergists and energy accumulation strategies for the
stem cuttings. Furthermore, the morpho-anatomical differences between Excelsa and
Robusta coffee stem cuttings were examined to identify any physical hindrances to rooting.

The coffee stem cuttings from watersprouts were stimulated to root in three
propagation experiments lasting up to 4-7 months. The single-node orthotropic and three-
node plagiotropic Excelsa coffee stem cuttings were treated with auxin combined with
different phenolic compounds previously identified as auxin oxidase inhibitors. When the
Excelsa coffee stem cuttings were propagated under mist, only the application of trans-
ferulic acid promoted rooting. The application of 250 uM trans-ferulic acid plus auxin (500
ppm indole butyric acid + 100 ppm a-napthalene acetic acid) promoted rooting in single-
node orthotropic stem cuttings after 7 months of rooting observation and in single-node
orthotropic cuttings with incisions made in the rooting zone after 6 months of observation.
In three-node plagiotropic stem cuttings, high survival was evident. Ferulic acid promoted
survival and adventitious rooting possibly due to its antimicrobial effect.

Morpho-anatomical examinations revealed that Excelsa has thicker stem structures
as compared to Robusta except for vascular cambium which is thicker in freshly-harvested
Robusta. However, the most probable anatomical difference why Excelsa is harder to root
when compared to Robusta coffee possibly due to its compact and clustered nearly-
continuous layer of sclerenchymatic band as opposed to the discontinuous layer in Robusta
or delayed development of root initials. Cuts or incisions in the rooting zone of the stem
cutting of Excelsa coffee aimed at breaking the layer of sclerenchymatic band promoted
more roots. Formation of adventitious roots could be associated with dedifferentiation of
the parenchyma cells and is believed to originate in the secondary xylem-vascular cambium
region.

Keywords: adventitious rooting, Excelsa coffee, single-node orthotropic watersprouts,
trans-ferulic acid, sclerenchymatic band, secondary xylem-vascular cambium

xviii

CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION

The Coffee Production Situation in the Philippines

As of 2015, there are about 275,681 coffee farms in the Philippines which are planted
with almost 77.44 million bearing coffee trees (Bureau of Plant Industry-Department of
Agriculture, 2017). The Philippine Statistics Authority has reported that in 2016, about
75.28%, 16.43%, 7.20%, and 1.09% of the country’s total coffee plantations were planted
with Robusta, Arabica, Excelsa, and Liberica coffee species, respectively. In the same
year, from the country’s total production of coffee berries, about 69.14%, 23.89%, 6.26%,
and 0.71% were produced from Robusta, Arabica, Excelsa, and Liberica coffee species,
respectively (Sarai, 2017). Moreover, the Philippine Statistics Authority (2018a)
confirmed a declining trend on the volume of coffee production yearly. In terms of the
coffee species berry yield per hectare, Arabica and Robusta can produce >500-1000 kgs
and 1,200 kgs of dry beans per hectare, respectively while Excelsa and Liberica can both
produce >500 kgs of dry beans per hectare (Department of Agriculture, 2009).

Liberica and Excelsa According to the Philippine Statistics Authority (2016), coffee
was produced in the provinces of Sultan Kudarat (Robusta and Arabica), Bukidnon,
Kalinga, Cavite, and Maguindanao (Robusta), Davao del Sur (Arabica, Liberica, &
Excelsa), South Cotabato (Arabica), Sulu (Liberica & Excelsa), Iloilo (Arabica &

Liberica), Davao Oriental and Quezon (Liberica), North Cotabato, Davao City, and

Batangas (Excelsa). In terms of coffee species distribution in the country, for about
35.63% of the country’s total coffee production was contributed by the
SOCCSKSARGEN region while 17.46%, 16.43%, 9.17%, and 3.40% of the total coffee
production were produced in Davao region, ARMM, Northern Mindanao, and
CALABARZON region, respectively (Philippine Statistics Authority, 2018a).

Domestic production is consumed mostly by big food product corporations like the
Nestle Philippines (Nescafe), Universal Robina Corporation (Great Taste, Blend 45),
Commonwealth Foods (Cafe Puro), Century Pacific Group (Kaffe de Oro), and Regent
Foods Corporation (Koffie) (DA-HVCDP, 2015). These companies are engaged in
purchasing green Robusta coffee beans which they bought majority of the country’s entire
coffee produce. Some of the Philippine-based coffee processors include Bote Central
Century Pacific Group (Snow Mountain Dairy Corporation), Commonwealth Foods, Inc.,
Goldshine Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Regent Foods Corp., Universal Robina Corp., Nor-Ref
Food Products, Our Tribe Food Products, Magallaya Mountain, Specialty Coffee,
Balawag MPC, Gawidan Farmers, Dengon’s Coffee Marketing, Mananig MPC, Café
Amadeo Development Cooperative, Gourmet Café, Silka, Merlo Agricultural Corp., Anca
Trading, Courage, Ivory, Nestle Philippines, Monk’s Blend, Balay Mindanao, Coffee for
Peace, Davao Best, Sultan Coffee, Green Tropics, North Valley, Browncup Kulaman,
Tricom, etc. (Bureau of Plant Industry-Department of Agriculture, 2017).

The country is presently importing coffee (green beans and soluble instant coffee and
coffee extracts) from Vietnam and Indonesia (Coffee division of ED and F Man, 2014).

Importation in coffee is categorized into roasted or decaffeinated or both. The total

importation of green coffee beans, decaffeinated coffee, roasted coffee, and roasted or
decaffeinated coffee in the country was 44,884 metric tons, 135.88 metric tons, 2,152 met
ric tons, and 62.62 metric tons, respectively (Philippine Statistics Authority, 2015). In
addition, statistical report stated that there is an increasing importation of roasted coffee
in the country yearly (Philippine Statistics Authority, 2018b). Nestle Philippines imports
75% of the 100,000 ton requirements from Vietnam (Pablo, 2016). The importation was
due to the fact that the domestic consumption is almost double of the local production.

Philippines consumption-production gap in Robusta and Arabica coffee is about 108,000

tons (Pablo, 2016).
- VARIETY
ES Arabica
Robusta,
Liberica,
Excelsa
¢
Source: a*
Bureau of Agricultural Research
Figure 1. Coffee suitability map of different Regions of the Philippines

(Source: Philippine Statistics Authority, 2016)

The situation on importation of coffee beans is correlated to declining production.
According to the Philippine Statistics Authority (2016), the production of Liberica and
Excelsa has been decreasing through the years which can possibly due to reduced area for
planting and the majority of the bearing and old trees of Liberica and Excelsa varieties
were cut down and never been replaced because of the continuous industrialization in
CALABARZON where most of the said coffee species were planted or grown. In
addition, the declined production of coffee bean can also be attributed to shifting of crops,
mining, and damages of the typhoons (Sarai, 2017).

Coffee is still one of the high value crops of the country and ranks as one of the top
ten agricultural crops in terms of value (Philippine Statistics Authority, 2017). While
production remains slight, the country has established itself a vigorous coffee market
around the world. With the fact that there is coffee importation in Vietnam and Indonesia,
the country has still exporting coffee in other countries. In 2015, the country has exported
200 metric tons of coffee beans in many parts of the world (Bureau of Plant Industry-
Department of Agriculture, 2017) where Robusta coffee was mostly the coffee species
being exported (Philippine Statistics Authority, 2018b). Presently, raw specialty coffee
beans primarily Excelsa and Liberica are being exported to Japan, Singapore, West
Germany, Netherlands, Malaysia, Oman, United Arab Emirates, Pakistan, and United
States of America and accounts for 97% of the total country coffee export (Mixph-
EntrePinoys, 2013) while for Japan and Korea, green specialty coffee beans were
exported (Campos, 2014). The Philippine-based business enterprises that exports coffee

in many countries abroad include RVR Ventures and Consultancy, O&R Enterprises,

Agromar Enterprise, Limex Trading, Redemptorist Seminary, Massimo Philko Inc.,
Arrigon Inc., Sto. Nino Farm, 319 Gen. Merchandise, Gcore Group, Peralta Limited, KJB
Enterprise export coffee beans (Global Suppliers Online, 2017). The exportation was due
to the increased total production of dried coffee berries due to increased number of
bearing trees (Philippine Statistics Authority, 2016). As of 2015, about 10.35 million
bearing trees were planted in CALABARZON, 13.61 million bearing trees in Davao
Region, 19.11 million bearing trees in SOCCSKSARGEN, and 9.32 million bearing trees
were planted in ARMM (Bureau of Plant Industry-Department of Agriculture, 2017).

As can be seen on the above statistics, Excelsa and Liberica coffee comprises only
7 % of the local coffee production and Excelsa has only about 4,725 metric tons
production which is very low. It is a need to increase the production of Excelsa coffee
since it was a popular blending coffee in coffee industry. Excelsa coffee beans are usually
used as blends along with lower-caffeine Robusta and Arabica coffee due of its
distinctive flavour profile that adds complexity and character to the coffee blend
(kalavara.com, 2019). With the importance of Excelsa coffee in the coffee industry, its
local production must be increased and since local specialty coffee is gaining recognition

and exports are increasing, the need for more planting materials is a pressing concern.

Propagation of Excelsa Coffee

Coffee is usually propagated through seeds because of its practicality as planting
material to use hence more economical and readily available (Namuco and Protacio,

2010). Propagation through the seeds has certain limitations including the non-production

of true-to-type plants due to biparental origin. In addition, the presence of hard seed coat
(exocarp) reduces, limits or delays germination which makes the seedling to come out for
about 1-3 months after sowing. On the other hand, asexual propagation such as the use of
nodal or stem cuttings would ensure true-to-type plants and early maturity or production.
Excelsa coffee is mostly propagated through seeds because if propagated asexually
through stem cuttings, it is hard or difficult-to-root. Excelsa coffee is known to be self-
sterile, highly cross pollinated, and outcrossed (Wriggley, 1988; Parrefio, 2003; Willson,
2012). The vegetative propagation of coffee can be enhanced through the use of rooting
hormones such as auxins (i.e. IBA, NAA, IAA) and other non-auxin substances like
phenolic compounds or auxin synergists and photosynthate/carbohydrate source that can
serve as co-factors. Morpho-anatomical hindrances present in the stem are also

considered a factor that can affect rooting in stem cuttings (Fig. 2).

Auxin
Morpho- _, 7
anatomical >| Adventitious Rooting }€- Stored food reserves

hindrances

Auxin oxidase inhibitors |

Figure 2. Factors that affect adventitious rooting in stem cuttings

Several studies have claimed that auxin enhances or initiates rooting of several crops
through adventitious root formation. Such experiments/researches about asexual
propagation of coffee species such as Arabica and Robusta revealed that the application
of Indole-3-butyric acid or a-naphthalene acetic acid promotes rooting or have increased
and enhanced the percentage of rooting. To date, several studies (Parrefio, 2003; Ramos,
2015) have attempted to propagate Excelsa coffee through stem cuttings with the use of
rooting hormones (IBA) and commercial organic rooting/ potting mix. Meanwhile, the
application of phenolic compounds such as trans-ferulic acid and auxin (IBA+NAA) can
somehow able to promote better rooting or enhance the rooting, lengthen propagation
life of the stem cuttings and increase cutting survival rate of hard or difficult-to-root
Excelsa coffee species. Thus, if this species was successfully propagated through nodal or
stem cuttings with increased rooting success, we could be able to produce true-to-type

plants that have the desired characteristics of the mother plant from selection.

HYPOTHESES OF THE STUDY

The hypotheses of this study are the following:

1. Interactive or synergistic effect of exogenously applied auxin and phenolic
compouds (auxin synergists) could promote better rooting success in the hard-to-
root species of coffee.

2. Photosynthate-accumulating techniques can somehow increase or improve the

rooting of coffee.

OBJECTIVES OF THE STUDY

The main aim of this study is to successfully propagate Excelsa coffee through nodal
cuttings. Specifically, this study aims to:

1. Determine the best rooting treatment/s that could initiate or promote adventitious

root formation and that gives the highest rooting success;

2. Examine the morphological and anatomical differences between Excelsa and

Robusta to elucidate why Excelsa coffee is hard to root.

CHAPTER 2

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

Taxonomy, Origin, Distribution, Nature and Importance of Coffee

Coffee belongs to the Family Rubiaceae of the Genus Coffea. This family forms part
of the major groups of dicotyledonous Sympetales, wherein the petals of the flowers are
fused together and has a fragrant anise-like scent (Jurgen Pohlan and Janssens, 2015),
with almost 500 genera and more than 6,500 species (Lokker, 2014; Patay et al., 2016).
The genus includes more than 80 species but only 4 species are commercially cultivated
in the Philippines namely Coffea arabica Linn (Arabica), Coffea robusta Linden or
Coffea canephora Pierre ex Froehner (Robusta), Coffea liberica Bull ex Hiern (Liberica),
and Coffea excelsa Chev (Excelsa) (McMahon et al, 2011; PNS/BAFPS, 2012; Patay et
al, 2016) Excelsa is also known as Coffea liberica var. dewevrei (Rutherford et al, 2009;
Len’s Coffee, 2017) or Coffea dewevrei (Clifford & Willson, 1985; KAU Agri-Infotech,
2013)

There are over 125 countries that consume coffee and only half of them produce
coffee. Coffee is known to be native to Northeast Africa around Ethiopia. It can be seen
that coffee is produced in many parts of the world specifically in Africa, Asia, Caribbean
Islands, Central America, North America, Oceania, and South America (Wellman, 1961).
The coffee-producing zones are in the tropical and subtropical regions of Angola, Brazil,

Columbia, Indonesia, Continental French, the Ivory Coast, Dominican Republic,

Ethiopia, Mexico, Guatemala, Haiti, Costa Rica, India, El Salvador, Kenya, Uganda,
Ecuador, Nicaragua, Tanganyika, Honduras, Venezuela and the Philippines (Wellman,
1961; Menendez- Yuffa & de Garcia, 1996).

According to Willson (1999), there are probably 90 exact numbers of species within
the genus Coffea of the family Rubiaceae which are found in the center of Africa, from
the Congo basin to the highlands of Ethopia. Coffea excelsa was grown in drier
conditions on the Northern fringe of the West African rain forest in which the species
produces poorer coffee than Coffea liberica but Coffea excelsa is grown and used locally
to a limited extent in West Africa where the environment is suitable.

Based on Philippine history, the first coffee tree was introduced in Brgy. Pinagtung-
ulan, Lipa in Batangas province in 1740 by a Spanish Franciscan monk (Philippine
Coffee Board, n.d). The plant has spread in the municipalities of Ibaan, Lemery, San Jose,
Taal, and Tanauan. By the year 1960’s, Batangas was exporting coffee to America
through San Francisco, and as well as in Europe. With the success of coffee production in
Batangas, the province of Cavite followed their path by growing the first coffee seedlings
in Amadeo in 1876. Lipa, Batangas became the center of coffee production in the
Philippines and Batangas ‘barako’ coffee (Liberica coffee) was five times more expensive
than the other Asian coffee (Philippine Coffee Board, n.d.).

Coffee has four widely cultivated species namely Arabica, Liberica, Robusta, and
Excelsa. The climatic and soil conditions in the country- from the lowland to upland
regions are suitable for the crop. Arabica coffee can be planted in elevations of 900 to

1,800 meters above sea level while the three other species can be planted from elevations

up to 900 meters above the sea level (pinoybisnes.com, 2009). Coffee has a low light
saturation level for photosynthesis thus the trees grow adequately in the shade (McMahon
et al, 2011) making it a shade-loving plant.

Arabica coffee (mountain coffee) has an excellent flavour and aroma make it
considered the best quality coffee. It is adapted in high elevations (at least 900 meters
above sea level) and is considered self-pollinated coffee species. The coffee species has
approximately 1.5% caffeine content, has medium-sized berries that are earliest to mature
as compared to the other species. Liberica coffee (“kapeng barako”) produces bigger
berries that have thick pulp with a woody, darker-colored parchment among the
commercial groups. In natural condition, the species grows into a big tree with thicker
leaves as compared to Excelsa and twice as long as Arabica and leathery in texture. It is a
drought tolerant species that bear fruits at 4-5 years from transplanting. About 80% of all
coffee grown in the country was Robusta coffee. Robusta coffee grows like an umbrella-
shaped tree with crinkly and thinner leaves as compared to Excelsa coffee and the edge is
scalloped. Robusta has tightly clustered small fruits in the node and considered a highly
cross pollinated species (Namuco and Protacio, 2010). McMahon et al. (2011) and
Lokker (2014) stated that Robusta is a robust plant that is resistant to Hemileia vastatrix
or coffee leaf rust disease.

On the other hand, Excelsa coffee is an arid type species, a medium-sized tree that
grows about 4-5 meters tall. This species is similar to Liberica except for its smoother,
thinner and more rounded leaves with smooth edge. It has ovoid berries and a little

compressed having a flat form and the fruits are next in size only to Liberica

12

(pinoybisnes.com, 2009; Namuco and Protacio, 2010) that grows in all parts of the
branches (FAO, n.d.) and ripen at different times (Mufioz-Sanchez and Hernandez-
Sotomayor, 2008). Excelsa coffee is used as a blending coffee because of its distinctive
tart, fruity, dark, and mysterious taste. The coffee species is grown mainly in the
Southeast Asia (Len’s Coffee, 2017). The coffee species is drought resistant (Kape Umali,
2012; DA-HVCDP, 2013) that can tolerate 21-30 days of mild drought (FAO-Ecocrop,
2007). It is also believed to be resistant against many diseases (Engrano, n.d; Kape
Umali, 2012) and more tolerant to a plant-parasitic nematode Pratylenchus coffeae as
compared to other coffee species (Bally and Reydon, 1931 as cited by Wiryadiputra &
Tran, 2008).

Excelsa and Liberica coffee species have higher caffeine content than Arabica and
Robusta coffee species. Liberica and Excelsa coffee both have 2.0-3.0% caffeine content
while Arabica coffee and Robusta coffee has 0.8-1.5% and 2.0-2.5% caffeine,
respectively (Salazar, n.d.). People’s preferences and acceptability in coffee differs in
terms of flavour, aroma and palatability. These depend if the person is a back-palate and
front-palate. Back-palate people need deeper and heavier coffee to hit the taste buds in
the back of their mouth while front-palate people need brightness and more aromatic
coffee because they taste it with the front of their tongues and noses. The first mentioned
people find Arabica coffee as thin or sour while the other mentioned people, prefer
Arabica coffee’s aroma and flavour. Back-palate people prefer Robusta coffee’s flavour
and also more likely to enjoy Liberica coffee while the front-palate people find Robusta

coffee flat and more likely to enjoy Excelsa coffee. Most coffee drinkers find a better

13

blend through adding or mixing multiple species together to satisfy their preferences.
Liberica and Excelsa coffee species are both good blending coffees (Len’s Coffee, 2017).

Coffee has been a part of the diet or daily meal of many people in the world since it
is also used in making desserts (cakes, bread, sweets), drinks or beverages, flavourings,
etc. It has several uses in the economy and industry where coffee beans are used as
ingredient in several products such as beauty products (soap, lotion, facial wash,
shampoo) and medicines. Coffee has also a lot of health and medicinal benefits and some
of it includes anti-oxidant, anti-aging, fat burning or favours weight loss, lowering the
risk of diabetes (Riverapauline, n.d.), decreases blood sugar level, reduces the risk of
cancer in the kidney, liver, premenopausal breast & colon, reduces disorders in the gall
bladder, can provoke allergic reactions, reduces tiredness, and it has antibacterial
properties (Patay et al, 2016). With these, it is very important that the coffee industry

would still be sustainable, productive and continue its worldwide production.
Propagation of Coffee

Coffee is usually propagated both sexually and asexually (vegetative). Sexual
propagation through seeds gives a hybrid plant which actually develops heterosis or
hybrid vigor. It involves the exchange of genetic material between the parents to produce
a new generation (Reddy and Rao, 2010). Propagation through seeds is the most common
method of propagation that is widely used in many crop species. Willson (2012) disclosed
that Coffea arabica is self-pollinated usually propagated through seeds and the offspring

from the seed is a good variety making it very uniform. Meanwhile, Coffea canephora,

Coffea excelsa, and Coffea liberica were largely self-sterile and are cross pollinated
species where the offsprings are very variable, thus, these species produce hybrids which
must be propagated vegetatively.

On the other hand, asexual propagation such as the use of stem cuttings from the
mother plant will produce clones that ensure true to type plants. Earlier maturity and high
yield is actually achieved from clonally-propagated plants. Nodal or stem cutting is the
most commonly used propagation technique in a large scale coffee plantation since a
faster production can be achieved with this type of propagation technique. It is one of the
most common practice in vegetative propagation of coffee aside from the advance
technology such as the micropropagation through tissue culture or somatic
embryogenesis. To date, vegetative propagation is now commercially practiced in
Robusta coffee (Jurgen Pohlan and Janssens, 2015). According to Protacio (personal
communication), coffee watersprouts are usually used as the planting material for stem
cuttings and the lower 1/3 portion of the coffee trunk retains the juvenile characters of the
tree.

Reddy and Rao (2010) stated that cutting is done just below a node on the bottom of
the stem cutting which causes the plant to develop calli and eventually roots. Rooting
takes place at the nodes and in order for successful and effective rooting, one or more
nodes must be buried in the moist soil media (Dagoon, 2000). Two-node cuttings are used
for hard-to-root species (FAO, n.d). The length of the stem cuttings depends upon the
length of the internode (Prasad and Kumar, 2010). Asexual propagation through stem

cuttings uses softwood or green tip, semi-hardwood, and hardwood stems (Reddy and

15

Rao, 2010). Rezende and co-workers (2010) found that for Arabica coffee the semi-
woody stem cuttings produced longer roots as compared to hardwood and green stem
cuttings. Meanwhile, easy-to-root coffee plants grown from stem cuttings will produce
roots and shoots within 45 days and bear berries 18 months after transplanting, much
earlier than those grown from seeds (DA-RFU10, 2013).

Moreover, Wrigley (1988) has reported that sexual propagation in Robusta, Liberica,
and Excelsa has been practiced since these coffee species are highly cross pollinated.
Vegetative propagation of coffee was only done on species which are self-sterile and
outcrossed. In asexual propagation of coffee, it was reported that the stem cuttings of
Coffea liberica and Coffea excelsa are hard-to-root (Wriggley, 1988; Parrefio, 2003;
Willson, 2012).

Meanwhile, coffee stem cuttings are grown depending on what kind of growth habit
or growth behaviour that the grower/propagator wants. Young orthotropic stem cuttings
are usually used in vegetative propagation of coffee (Willson, 2012). Orthotropic stem is
a vegetative part of the tree structure that forms the trunk and central axis (Wellman,
1961). These grow into a well-shaped, erect, or vertical coffee plants. On the other hand,
plagiotropic stem cuttings are those that grow horizontally into coffee bushes. They are
horizontal secondary stems growing-off from orthotropic stems. Typically, these stems
are the site of flower growth (Jurgen Pohlan and Janssens, 2015) and eventually where
fruits/berries arise (Wellman, 1961). Furthermore, plagiotropic graft is extremely dwarf
with spreading shoots or spreading growth while orthotropic grafts/cuttings has an

upright growth (Namuco & Protacio, 2010; Willson, 2012). Stem cuttings gathered from

lateral branches (plagiotropic) have undesirable horizontal growth habit after rooting
while cuttings taken from primary axes (orthotropic) have upright growth (Hartmann et
al., 2002).

Physiological Basis of Rooting

In stem cuttings, the young leaves produce auxin that are transported basipetally. The
accumulated auxin at the base of the stem cutting stimulates callus formation and
ultimately, root initiation and growth. The roots produce cytokinin and is transported
acropetally. Cytokinin accumulates at the growing buds and nodes to stimulate shoot
formation. Generally, a high auxin/low cytokinin ratio promotes adventitious rooting
(Bouza et al., 1994).

Both roots and shoots typically show a great deal of polarity with respect to their
formation. Stem cuttings from shoots close to the shoot tip (distal or apical) and roots
form nearest the junction between the shoot and root (proximal). Polarity observed with
respect to adventitious rooting has been correlated with auxin movement supporting the
role of auxin in root initiation (Hartmann et al. 1990). According to Arteca (1196), 2,3,5-
triiodobenzoic acid (TIBA) is an auxin antagonist which prevents rooting by inhibiting
the downward transport of Indole-3-acetic acid.

Adventitious roots of woody perennial stem cuttings usually originate from living
parenchyma cells of the young secondary phloem but these adventitious roots sometimes
arise from vascular rays, cambium, phloem, lenticels, or pith (Lovell and White, 1986;
Arteca, 1996; Hartmann, 2002). Hicks (1987) stated that root-forming cells are found in

the phloem parenchyma or cambial derivatives leading to phloem parenchyma. The

17

anatomical development of adventitious rooting in Coffea sp. is presented in the study of
Santos Jesus et a/., (2010) which shows that root development is evident at the phloem-
vascular cambium region. In hard-to-root species, rooting occurs indirectly where
nondirected cell divisions such as callusing occur from an interim period prior to
organized cell division to initiate adventitious root primordia while in easy-to-root
species, direct pattern of rooting of cells in close proximity to the vascular system
(Geneve, 1991). Pijut et a/ (2011) stated that the mechanisms that trigger or regulate the
adventitious root initiation and development in woody species stem cuttings is a complex
physiological, genetic and environmental process. They have also demonstrated that root
initiation undergo successive phases such as dedifferentiation or activation of cells by
wounding related compounds and auxin; induction or initiation of cell division where
auxin stimulates the formation of root meristemoids; and outgrowth in the stem in which
meristemoids develop into typical dome-shape root primordia and at this stage auxin
becomes inhibitory. Krajne er al. (2013) reported that auxin stimulates the mobilization of
carbohydrates in the leaves and upper stem and the translocation of assimilate towards the
rooting zone increases. Adventitious roots may originate in the callus tissue formed at the
base of the cuttings. It also arises in the stem pericycle which is a primary phloem (Esau,
1977).

The stem cutting may produce callus at the stem basal end during propagation.
Callus growth proliferates primarily from the vascular cambium, cortex cells, and pith
(Hartmann et al., 2002) and adventitious roots in hard-to-root species is believed to form

in the callus tissue. Meanwhile, for easy-to-root species, callusing and adventitious root

18

formation were believed to be independent with each other (Hartmann ef al., 2002).
Adventitious root formation in hard-to-root species has an indirect root formation where
nondirected cell divisions including callus formation occur for an interim period before
cells divide in an organized pattern to initiate adventitious root primordia (Hartmann er
al., 2002).

In addition, Pijut e¢ al. (2011) also listed some disadvantages associated with clonal
propagation and adventitious root formation. These can be less branched root growth,
more horizontal orientation, poor adventitious root distribution around the stem, and too

few roots developed.
Rooting Hormones

Rooting hormones or substances that promote the growth and development of the
adventitious roots which are used to increase the percentage of rooting success of stem
cuttings. Rooting hormones such as the auxins have its natural (endogenous) and
synthetic (exogenous) forms. Indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) and Indole-3-butyric acid (IBA)
are natural forms of auxin whereas o-naphthalene acetic acid (NAA), and 2,4-
dichlorophenoxy acetic acid (2,4-D) are some of the synthetic forms of auxins. Synthetic
auxins can be in powder or liquid forms that are applied to the stem cuttings as talcum
powder mixture or diluted/concentrated solution, respectively. Indole-3-acetic acid is
synthesized from the amino acid tryptophan in actively growing part of the plant or
meristems. It is also found in mature leaves and root tips but at lower concentrations. It

occurs as free acid and in conjugated forms. It is used in rooting because it is more easily

19

hydrolyzed and more slowly transported in different parts of the plant, perhaps leaving
more of the hormone in the stem cutting base.

Several studies were conducted to prove the effect of auxin substances in stimulating
rooting of asexually propagated plants. Akakpo et al (2014) have found that the
application of 3000 ppm IBA in sheanut stem cuttings gave best rooting. Propagation
under mist with the application of 3000 ppm IBA (talc) promoted high survival and 80-
100% rooting in difficult-to-root plant species (Rajan and Markose, 2007). Protacio and
Zara (2011) reported that quickly dipping (5 seconds) the plagiotropic older or basal
single node cacao stem cuttings in 2000 ppm of IBA and grown in commercial cutting
mix medium promoted 100% rooting after 28 days. In a study conducted by Politud and
Avako (2016) on the response of NAA in Coffea conephora under clonal chamber
condition, they found that dipping of coffee shoot cuttings between 100 to 150 ppm NAA
promoted 61-79% rooting. In another study conducted by Erdiansyah and co-workers
(2016), they have found out that Liberica coffee stem cuttings applied with 4500 ppm
IBA resulted to 21.43% rooting, produced average of 2.33 roots, and 4.98 cm long roots.
For rooting of the Mussaenda (same family with coffee) stem cuttings, application of
NAA and IBA promoted more and longer roots of Mussaenda phillipica stem cuttings
planted in topsoil and riversand (Ibironke and Victor, 2016) while the application of 100
ppm IBA for 15 and 30 minutes both resulted to high percentage of rooting and root
quality rating of Mussaenda ‘Doiia Luz’ (Protacio et al, 1999). In addition, Protacio and
co-workers (1999) have found out that an improvement of rooting in ‘Lakambini’ which

is hard-to-root cultivars of Mussaenda can be achieved by adding 250 uM dopamine or

20

100 ppm paclobutrazol to the 30-min 100 ppm IBA dip. Paclobutrazol is a triazole
fungicide and plant growth retardant that has anti-gibberellin effect especially in starch
breakdown hence, it promotes the accumulation of carbohydrates in the leaf tissues. In
mango vegetative propagation through stem cuttings, auxins (IAA or IBA) stimulated the
formation of adventitious roots wherein Indole-3-butyric acid is more effective than
Indole-3-acetic acid (Sadhu et al, 1978). The effect of polyamines on rooting was also
evident in woody plant species. Putrescine, spermidine and spermine plus IBA improved
the rooting of hazel microshoots (Rey et al.,1994) and higher endogenous levels of the
said polyamines were found in chesnut microshoots at mature phase (recalcitrant)
(Ballester et al.,1999). Polyamines may serve as secondary messenger for root initiation
and the root enhancement ability of polyamine is evident with the presence of auxin

(Hartmann et al., 2002).

Co-factors and Endogenous Inhibitors

In order for rooting to occur, stem cuttings require the proper balance and correct
level of the plant growth-promoting substances or hormones and a number of known and
unknown factors. Sugars or carbohydrate source, nitrogenous compounds, phenolic
compounds, and others have been shown to act as co-factors. The rooting of stem cuttings
is usually associated with the carbohydrates and nitrogen compound-accumulation or
their amount near the stem cutting base. The exogenous application of auxins caused the
carbohydrate and nitrogen immobilization to the site of root initiation (Naranja, 1984)

that is antagonistic to the effect of gibberellin that would lead to the breakdown and

21

mobilization of starch such as in the case of mango. In rooting, sugars are needed for the
production of new cells and for increased respiratory activity in the regenerating tissue.
The root promoting effects of auxins and non-auxin chemicals is actually due to
carbohydrate fractions utilization from the region of root formation and is assumed that
during the root development phase, the utilization of reserved polysaccharides is
important (Sadhu et al, 1978). Aslmoshtaghi and Reza-Shahsavar (2010) noted that high
rooting in olive cuttings is due to the high carbohydrate, fructose and glucose contents
and C/N ratio during the growing season. Fructose and glucose serve as energy source
during cell division in rooting (Reuveni and Raviv, 1981).

Furthermore, gibberellins and abscissic acids were known to be inhibitors of
adventitious root formation while ethylene can promote auxin-induced rooting in
herbaceous plants however not directly involved in the rooting of woody plants.
Polyamines, jasmonates and brassinosteroids can promote rooting of some species when

combined with auxin (Hartmann et al., 2002).

Indole-3-acetic acid oxidase in auxin breakdown

Aside from the fact that phenolic compounds protect the plants from oxidative stress,
it also stimulate the rooting process in asexually propagated plants by protecting the IAA
from destruction by IAA oxidase (Fadl et al, 1979; Arteca, 1996; Stefancic et al, 2007;
Krajnc et al, 2013) however IAA oxidase found in plant tissues has less effect or no effect
in exogenously-applied auxins such as Indole-3-butyric acid and a-Naphthalene acetic

acid. IAA oxidase activity was known to be inhibited by diphenols (Jarvis and Shaheed,

22

1986). Mineral nutrition sometimes affects the rooting of the cuttings especially in their
involvent in IAA oxidation activity which lowers the level of endogenous auxin in the
cuttings. Studies have revealed that Manganese (Mn) act as activator of the [AA-oxidase
enzyme system and Boron (B) may enhance [AA-oxidase activity (Jarvis, 1986).

Reports also revealed that phenolic compounds that inhibit [AA oxidation in different
plant species were chlorogenic acid, caffeic acid, ferulic acid (Kefeli and Kutacek, 1977;
Stefancic et al, 2007; Krajnc et al, 2013), catechol, gallic acid, epicatechin (Stefancic et
al, 2007; Krajnc et al, 2013), sinapic acid, and phloroglucinol (Stefancic et al, 2007). The
highest amounts of phenolics were found in the leaves, synthesized in the chloroplasts
and transported to the vacuole for storage (Mueller and Beckman, 1974). Patay ef al.
(2016) reported that nearly all coffee taxa contain phenolic compounds such as caffeic
acid, p-coumaric acid, vanillic acid, ferulic acid, and protocatechuic acid which contain
hydroxycinnamic and hydroxybenzoic structures as two carbon frameworks. It was found
out in their study that the leaves of Arabica and Bengal coffee contains caffeic acid,
chlorogenic acid, p-coumaric acid, ferulic acid, and sinapic acid as well as rutin,
quercetin, kaempferol, and isoquercetin.

De Klerk ef al. (2011) disclosed that phenolic compounds (orthodiphenols,
paradiphenols, & triphenols) promoted adventitious rooting of Malus or apple stem slices
(microshoots) cultured in modified MS medium with IAA where ferulic acid (methylated
orthodiphenol) had the largest effect and increased the number of adventitious roots from
0.9-5.8. Wound response is inherent in the preparation of stem cuttings and is inhibited by

anaerobic conditions (De Klerk et al.,2011). Moreover, phenolic compounds such as

orthodiphenols, paradiphenols, and triphenols protect the plant tissues from oxidative
stress caused by wounding (De Klerk et al., 1999). According to Lee and co-workers
(1982), monophenols act as promoters of peroxidase activity while diphenols and
polyphenols are inhibitors of peroxidase. Ferulic acid is a methylated orthodiphenol that
is believed to be an inhibitor of peroxidase. These inhibitors act as competing substrates
for the enzyme or act as free radical scavengers that inhibit oxidation that drive the
peroxidase-catalyzed reaction (Krylov ef al., 1995). Through the presence of auxin

oxidase, the promotive levels of endogenous auxin in the stem cuttings become low.

_— OH SS
OH
HO
OCHs HO
trans-ferulic acid p-coumaric acid
O OH NH
oe
° HCl
a LJ
OH
OH oh d
4-hydroxybenzoic acid 9°Pamine hydrochloride Paclobutrazol
Figure 3. Chemical structures of the different treatments used.

(PubChem, n.d; Sigma Aldrich, n.d.)

24

Phenolics such as ferulic acid and phloroglucinol protect IAA from
decarboxylation caused by wounding response which did not occur in non-wounded plant
tissues. IAA oxidation inhibitors enhance the formation of adventitious roots. Rooting
depends on the inhibition of IAA decarboxylation that would result to more auxin
availability in the plant tissues to induce roots (De Klerk et a/., 2011). Several studies
have reported that phenolics or auxin synergists act on auxin oxidase inhibition. Auxin
synergists were believed to inhibit the action of auxin oxidase which catalyzes the
destruction of IAA or simply serves as protector of indole-3-acetic acid from oxidation
(De Klerk et al., 1999). Indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) oxidative catabolism pertains to the
loss of auxin activity which is an irreversible output that regulates the levels of IAA.
Auxin catabolism in plants involves two pathways namely: decarboxylation and
oxindole-3-acetic acid or dioxindole-3-acetic acid pathway (Davies, 1995). The positive
effects of phenolic compounds in IAA oxidation protection (Volpert et a/., 1995; Krylov
et al., 1995; De Klerk et al., 1999) and in synergistic action with auxin in adventitious
rooting (Bose et al., 1972; James & Thurbon, 1981; Biswas and Roy, 1983) were proved
in several studies.

Sadhu and co-workers (1978) reported the promoting effects of three phenolics
(as p-hydroxybenzoic acid, p-coumaric acid, and ferulic acid) in the auxin-induced
rooting in mango cuttings. Moreover, the synergistic effect of ferulic acid and IBA
significantly increased the number of roots per mango cutting. The three phenolic
compounds that are stated above were identified in the easy-to-root cuttings and were

found to be auxin synergists (Basu, 1969; Basu 1970; Bose et al, 1971; Bose et al, 1973).

25

Bose and co-workers (1973) explained the low level of growth inhibitor and low rooting
factor activity in the extracts of difficult-to-root materials. The said plant phenomenon
was attributed to the absence (or presence in minute amount) of ferulic acid & p-
coumaric acid even if the p-hydroxybenzoic acid concentration is high.

Synergism of ferulic acid and auxin resulted to rooting in Excelsa coffee stem
cuttings. Sadhu and co-workers (1978) stated that synergism with phenolic was more
pronounced in the presence of IBA than with IAA. In the difficult-to-root mango stem
cuttings, ferulic acid with the presence of IBA significantly increased root number per
cutting. The effect of ferulic acid if combined with auxin (NAA, IAA, IBA) was also
evident in the study of Biswas and Roy (1983) which promoted rooting in water apple air
layers. Their study disclosed that the effect of ferulic acid plus 0.015 M IAA and 0.02 M
IBA increases the rooting of water apple air layers to 82% and 63%, respectively. Ferulic
acid, (a methylated orthodiphenol) is regarded as adjuvants during the first stages of
adventitious rooting in apple (De Klerk et a/., 1999). In the experiment conducted by De
Klerk and co-workers (1999), ferulic acid was the most effective phenolic compound to
strongly enhance the rooting of apple stem slices with the presence of indole-3-acetic acid
and slightly enhanced the rooting with the presence of a-naphthalene acetic acid. In
addition, phenolics such as ferulic acid, p-hydroxybenzoic acid and p-coumaric acid have
been found to induce rooting of Justicia cuttings together with auxin (Bose et a/., 1972).
Synergistic effect of ferulic acid and p-hydroxybenzoic acid with auxins in rooting was
also reported in litchi stem cuttings (Dhua and Sen, 1982).

The action of several amines in inhibiting the IAA oxidase was also been studied.

26

Protacio and Flores (1995) have found out that the presence of dopamine inhibits the
breakdown of [1-'4C] IAA by as much as 75% in the tobacco thin cell layers which shows
that the protective action of dopamine as an IAA oxidase inhibitor. Moreover, the
addition of catecholamines at micromolar concentrations in tobacco thin cell layers and
Acmella oppositifolia hairy root cultures caused a dramatic stimulation of growth due to
the fact that the catecholamine is a dihydroxyphenols which can promote growth of in
vitro cultured explants through inhibiting the exogenous/endogenous IAA oxidation

(Protacio et al., 1992).

Methods of Determination of [AA

In the quantification, determination, and identification of amounts or levels of plant
growth substances, bioassays and physic-chemical methods or mass spectrometry (i.e.
gas-liquid-chromatography or high performance liquid chromatography, and
immunological methods like enzyme-linked-immunosorbent assay) can be used. A
bioassay is a method of measuring the effect of a known or suspected biologically active
substance in a living material (Taiz and Zeiger, 2002). Nowadays, hormones can be
determined and quantified using easy yet accurate specialized detection methods such as
the physico-chemical assay (High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) and
Gas-Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS). Mass spectrometry is the method
that detects the information about both the chemical structure and the amount of IAA.
This method is used in conjunction with separation protocols involving gas

chromatography and allows the precise quantification and identification of auxins that

27

can detect as little as 107g (1 picogram, or pg) of IAA (Taiz and Zeiger, 2002). Simple
and accurate method of analysis like the isotopic dilution GC-MS is the best method to be
used. GC detectors are usually destructive and do not easily allow the recovery of a
radioactively labelled internal standard. Furthermore, fluorimetric detection-HPLC
(Crozier et al., 1980), and electrochemical detection-HPLC (Law and Hamilton, 1982;
Wright and Doherty, 1985) were used to quantify LAA directly (Arteca, 1996). Based on
the statement of Ostin et a/ (1992), the potential use of liquid chromatography-mass
spectrometry (LC-MS) in identifying underivatized conjugates of IAA has been

demonstrated (Arteca, 1996).
Conditions during Rooting

The presence of leaves on the stem cuttings has been shown to be beneficial to
adventitious root formation, however, if the proper water relations are not maintained, the
cuttings will not survive. A low evaporative atmosphere on plant will lower
transpirational loss, maintain root promotive temperatures while avoiding heat stress in
the leaves and maintain light levels, suitable for photosynthesis and production of
carbohydrates once rooting has occurred (Hartmann et al. 1990). In nursery propagation
of coffee stem cuttings, the atmospheric environment such as the relative humidity and
temperature must be satisfied in order to achieve higher survival of the stem cuttings.
These can be maintained under control propagation such as the use of propagating
chamber or mist beds. Purushot and Vishveshwara (1980) revealed that about 80%

rooting success can be achieved in easy-to-root coffee vegetative propagation using stem

28

cuttings under propagation chambers as compared to those propagated in nursery beds
(with about 67% rooting success).

Other propagation experiments were conducted under mist. Intermittent or
constant mist applied above the propagation bed can give results of 90% success in
propagation (Bose and Mandal, 1972). Moreover, misting and growth regulators improve
the rooting of ‘Brewster’ lychee stem cuttings (Abutiate and Nakasone, 1972).

In addition, the soil media must be fertile, sterile and favourable for rooting process.
Reddy and Rao (2010) stated that stem cuttings can be planted in sand, soil-less mixes,
sphagnum or peat moss, vermiculite, and perlite. The very important factors for
successful rooting of cuttings are the following: maintained water status of the plant,
adequate or proper temperature, low light, optimum nitrogen levels in the stock, adequate
carbon dioxide enrichment, and physiological status of the stock plant/mother plant

(Arteca, 1996). .

Nutritional and Antimicrobial Requirements in Rooting

During the process of rooting, the stem cuttings require adequate nutrition such as
sugar/carbohydrates. They are also subjected to attack or infection of pathogenic
microorganisms because the wound or cut portion of the stem cutting is exposed in the
soil. The application of a natural product such as honey that comes from bee hives of Apis
mellifera and Apis dorsata and other wild species of bees was shown to contain levels of
natural sugars that can be used by the stem cuttings as food reserve during propagation

and rooting process. The product has also antibacterial properties that can reduce the

29

infection and negative effects of pathogenic microorganisms during the propagation
period.

Interestingly, honey is a sweet, viscous or sticky natural substance produced by bees
that is used as sweetener in foods or dishes. It has a high nutritive value packed with
antioxidant, bacteriostatic, antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory properties and wound and
sunburn healing effects (Alvarez-Suarez et al, 2014). The most common or popular honey
available in the market is actually the one produced by honey bees (Apis mellifera, Apis
dorsata) and its properties was based on the food source like nectars of flowers,
environment of their habitat, species of bees involved, etc. Based on the physico-
chemical property analysis of Philippine honey produced by Apis mellifera (Sese et al,
2011), it contains 20.77% moisture content, 73.97% reducing sugar, 4.96% apparent
sucrose, and 36.12 meq hydroxymethylfurfural, with a pH of 3.77 and an electic
conductivity of 0.53mS. Moreover, honey contains natural sugars as stated on the study
of White Jr. & Doner (1980) where floral honey contains 13.4-22.9% moisture, 27.25-
44.26% levulose, 22.03-40.75% dextrose, 0.25-7.57% sucrose, 2.74-15.98% maltose, and
0.13-8.49% higher sugar whereas honeydew honey contains 12.2-18.2% moisture, 2.91-
38.12% levulose, 19.23-31.86% dextrose, 0.44-1.14% sucrose, 5.11-12.48% maltose, and
1.28-11.50% higher sugar.

Honey also contains enzymes such as invertase, diastase, and glucose oxidase.
Invertase or sucrase splits sucrose into dextrose, and levulose while diastase or amylase
converts starch to simple compounds. Furthermore, in order for principal acid in honey to

form, glucose oxidase converts dextrose to gulconolactone which in turn forms gluconic

30

acid. Catalase and acid phosphatase are the other enzymes present in honey (White Jr.
and Doner, 1980).

Honey is believed to have antimicrobial properties that can inhibit the spread and
infection of gram positive and gram negative bacteria during the rooting process. In a
study conducted by Suarez-Alvarez and co-workers (2014), bacteria including
Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, Enterococcus, Actinomyces, Stenotrophomonas,
Acinetobacter, Salmonella, Pseudomonas, Proteus, Shigella, Escherichia, Enterobacter,
Shigella, Klebsiella, Burkholderia, Helicobacter, Campylobacter, Porphyromonas were
found to be sensitive to ‘manuka’ honey. It also contains phenolic acids, flavonoids and
other compounds that can stimulate the rooting process. Honey is also used in rooting of
cuttings where increased rooting was observed in Crysanthemum cuttings treated with 5%
& 10% honey. Honey initiates rooting because of its sugar content (Smith et a/, 1969).

Blanching is described by Beyl and Sharma (2016) as placing of a light excluding or
shading barrier such as tape around a green stem for several weeks. Blanching or
sometimes known as banding is a pre-treatment, adjunct to etiolation that involves
excluding light from a stem zone that is to become the cutting base. It may be applied to
etiolated shoots which are subsequently allowed to develop normally in light, or applied
to developing light-grown shoots which are still in the softwood stage (Harrison-Murray,
1981). Blanching is a procedure which involves banding the suture stem cutting base of
light-grown shoots with adhesive tape for several weeks before planting (Bassuk and
Maynard, 1987). Girdling or ring barking, which is the removal of the phloem, may it be

all or part, plus the vascular cambium or cambium layer which can enhanced the rooting

31

of apple stems with blanced area above the girdled part of the stem (Beyl and Sharma,

2016).

CHAPTER 3

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Time and Place of the Study

The study was conducted at the greenhouse of the Crop Physiology Division,
Institute of Crop Science, College of Agriculture and Food Science of the University of
the Philippines Los Baiios, Laguna (14°09°58.5”N latitude, 121°14’22.5”E longitude with

an elevation of 40 meters above sea level) from March 28, 2018- December 7, 2018.

Figure 4a. Google earth/map view of the location of Agronomy, Soil Science
and Horticulture (ASH) Building (red circled part) of the UPLB
Campus (Source: /ittps:/Avww.google.com.ph>maps)

33

Figure 4b. Closer view of the Crop Physiology Division greenhouse using a 3D
google map. The red box shows the location of the propagation beds
(Source: IS).

The Propagation Beds

Propagation beds measuring 3.85 meters length by 1.35 meters width and 0.62
meter depth filled with 0.47 meter depth river sand were used. The area was shaded with
black nets (primary shade) while each beds were covered with black nets (60-70% shade)
(secondary shade) above the mist tubes to facilitate shading. Mist sprinklers were
installed at 0.80 meter above the sand medium. The distance between the sand medium
and the black net as secondary shade was 1.0 meter. The sides of the propagation beds
were placed with transparent plastic sheets for better monitoring when the mists were

turned on (Fig. 5).

34

Figure 5. The propagation beds. The beds before the conduct (/eff) and
during the conduct (right) of the experiments on coffee propagation.

Preparation and Dilution of the Chemical Treatments

Preparation of the different chemical treatments was done at Makapuno Embryo
Culture Laboratory of the Crop Physiology Division, Institute of Crop Science, College
of Agriculture and Food Science of the University of the Philippines Los Baijios.
Dopamine hydrochloride and paclobutrazol were dissolved in distilled water while the
trans-ferulic acid, 4-hydroxybenzoic acid, and p-coumaric acid were dissolved in 80%
ethanol. For the auxin oxidase inhibitors, to be able obtain 250 uM dopamine
hydrochloride, 250 4M trans-ferulic acid, 250 uM 4-hydroxybenzoic acid, and 250 uM
p-coumaric acid, 47.41 mg, 48.545 mg, 34.53 mg, and 41.04 mg, respectively were

dissolved in a liter of distilled water. Moreover, to be able obtain 500 uM trans-ferulic

35

acid, 97.09 mg of the chemical was dissolved in one liter of distilled water. To achieve
100 ppm paclobutrazol solution, 670 mg of Mangrow 15% WP powder was dissolved in a
liter of distilled water. The prepared chemical solutions and auxin powders (Quick root
and 500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA mixture) were placed and stored in tinted chemical
bottles and trans-ferulic acid, 4-hydroxybenzoic acid, p-coumaric acid, and paclobutrazol
solutions were stored under room temperature while dopamine hydrochloride solution

was refrigerated and stored at 5-10°C prior to use.
Chemicals and materials used in propagation

Excelsa coffee orthotropic watersprouts were gathered from the coffee plantation of
UPLB located at Narrahan-Jamboree and Institute of Crop Science coffee plantation at
the back of Agronomy-Soil Science-Horticulture building of the College of Agriculture
and Food Science, UP Los Bafios, Laguna while orthotropic Robusta watersprouts and
plagiotropic Excelsa stems were gathered at the Institute of Crop Science coffee
plantation. Materials and chemicals used in the experiments are the following: trans-
ferulic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, China), 4-hydroxybenzoic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, China), p-
coumaric acid (Sigma-Aldrich, United Kingdom), dopamine hydrochloride (Sigma-
Aldrich, Germany), paclobutrazol (Mangrow 15% WP, CyBerth Phils Inc. Nueva Ecija),
Funguran OH fungicide, KOP copper hydroxide 770 WP Agricultural Fungicide-
Bactericide (Drexel Chemical Company, Memphis, USA), Bavistin Fungicide, Quick root
auxin powder and prepared 500 ppm IBA+ 100 ppm NAA auxin powder, Langnese Pure

Bee Honey (Germany), Grow More™ Premium Plant Food foliar fertilizer (20%

36

Nitrogen (3.9% Ammoniacal Nitrogen, 5.7% Nitrate, 10.4%Urea), 20% Phosphoric acid,
20% Soluble Potash, 0.05% Chelated Copper, 0.10% Chelated Iron, 0.05% Chelated
Manganese, 0.0005% Molybdenum, 0.05% Chelated Zinc, Grow More, Gardena, CA
90248), transparent plastic cups (3.5 ounce), transparent dilution plastic containers, thin
metal wires, polyethylene sheet, electrical tape, pruning shears and grafting knife,
overhead mist nozzles (Harbest Agribusiness Corporation, No.5 Rosemarie Lane, Brgy.

Kapitolyo, Pasig City, Metro Manila).

Study 1. Rooting of Excelsa coffee stem cuttings

Experiment 1: Response of Single-node Orthotropic Excelsa Coffee Stem Cuttings
to Auxin Oxidase Inhibitors and Honey treatment under ‘Kulob’

Orthotropic Excelsa coffee stem cuttings were propagated under “kulob” system
of propagation and applied with the following treatments: Control species (Robusta
coffee), Control treatment (Excelsa coffee), 100 ppm indole-3-butyric acid (IBA), 100
ppm paclobutrazol, 250 4M dopamine hydrochloride, 250 uM trans-ferulic acid, 250
uM 4-hydroxybenzoic acid, 250 uM p-coumaric acid, 250 uM trans-ferulic acid + 250
uM 4-hydroxybenzoic acid + 250 uM p-coumaric acid, 250 1M dopamine hydrochloride
+ 100 ppm paclobutrazol, 100 ppm IBA + 250 1M dopamine hydrochloride, 100 ppm
IBA + 250 uM trans-ferulic acid, 100 ppm IBA + 250 uM 4-hydroxybenzoic acid, 100
ppm IBA + 250 uM p-coumaric acid, 100 ppm IBA + 250 uM trans-ferulic acid + 250
uM 4-hydroxybenzoic acid + 250 uM p-coumaric acid, 100 ppm IBA + 100 ppm

paclobutrazol, 250 uM dopamine hydrochloride + 100 ppm paclobutrazol, Quick root

37

auxin powder, pure honey, blanching, Quick root + pure honey, 100 ppm IBA + pure
honey, and 100 ppm IBA + blanching.

The stem cuttings were soaked in chemical treatments (phenolic acids and auxin
solutions) for 30 minutes while the stem cuttings with auxin and honey treatments were
quick dipped in auxin powder (Quick root) and pure honey prior to rooting. The stem
cuttings were planted in medium sized-hole plastic trays filled with Folia Tropica cutting
mix and covered with large transparent plastic sheet which serves as the “kulob” (Fig. 6)
or a form/type of enclosed-case system of propagation (Hartmann et al., 2002). The stem
cuttings were sprayed weekly with Funguran OH solution and the “kulobs” were opened
during night time to facilitate exchange of atmospheric gases. The “kulobs” were placed

in mist bed and the mist was operated from 8:00 am to 4:00 pm daily.

Figure 6. ‘Kulob’ system of propagation. The Excelsa coffee stem
cuttings were planted in seedling trays filled with Folia
Tropica cutting mix as soil media and were placed inside
a transparent plastic sheet.

38

Experiment 2. Rooting Response of Single-Node Orthotropic and Three-node
Plagiotropic Excelsa Coffee (Coffea excelsa A. Chev.) stem cuttings to different
Auxin Oxidase Inhibitors under Mist

Research Design

The present study was laid out employing the Completely Randomized Design
(CRD) with three replications. A total of 384 orthotropic coffee stem cuttings (24 Robusta
coffee stem cuttings and 360 Excelsa coffee stem cuttings) were applied with auxin and
auxin oxidase inhibitors (phenolic compounds), paclobutrazol as growth retardant,
dopamine as neuro-transmitter, and/or combinations. Twenty four stem cuttings (8
cuttings per replicate) were Control species (Robusta coffee), Control treatment (Excelsa
coffee), and applied or treated with auxin powder (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA), 100
ppm paclobutrazol, 250 4M dopamine hydrochloride, 250 uM trans-ferulic acid, 250
uM 4-hydroxybenzoic acid, 250 uM p-coumaric acid, 250 uM trans-ferulic acid + 250
uM 4-hydroxybenzoic acid + 250 4M p-coumaric acid, 250 4M dopamine hydrochloride
+ 100 ppm paclobutrazol, auxin + 250 4M dopamine hydrochloride, auxin + 250 uM
trans-ferulic acid, auxin + 250 1M 4-hydroxybenzoic acid, auxin + 250 1M p-coumaric
acid, auxin + 250 yM ¢rans-ferulic acid + 250 uM 4-hydroxybenzoic acid + 250 pM p-
coumaric acid, and auxin + 100 ppm paclobutrazol. The study used Robusta coffee as
control species while Excelsa coffee for the other treatments.

The experiment also evaluated the rooting of three-node stem cuttings. A total of 180
plagiotropic Excelsa coffee stem cuttings were applied with auxin and two levels of

trans-ferulic acid, and/or combinations. Thirty stem cuttings (10 cuttings per replicate)

39

were in Control treatment, and applied/treated with 500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA
(auxin powder), 250 uM trans-ferulic acid, 500 4M trans-ferulic acid, 250 1M trans-

ferulic acid + auxin, and 500 pM trans-ferulic acid + auxin.

Robusta coffee as the control species

Stem cuttings of Robusta coffee were also induced to root. The cuttings were dipped
in Quick root auxin powder for 2-3 seconds. The rooting response of Excelsa cuttings to
different rooting treatments was compared to the response of the control species

(Robusta).

Preparation of the source of planting materials

Prior to treatment, the mother trees were selected and evaluated for the availability

or presence of orthotropic mature watersprouts and enough plagiotropic stems.

Preparation of the stem cuttings

Orthotropic mature watersprouts were taken from the mother tree and nodal cuttings
with single node were obtained. Young plagiotropic shoots with 4-5 nodes which were
gathered from the apical part of the lateral branches of the mother tree. Prior to stem
gathering and segmentation, the pruning shear was sterilized with 95% ethanol. The stem
cuttings contain one node with leaves retained and were taken early in the morning. After
the stems were gathered from the mother plant, they were cut into segments and placed in

a transparent plastic sheet. The nodal segments from the orthotropic stems were cut for

40

about 60-80 mm in length (applicable to semi-hardwood and softwood stems as cutting
length which has been reported by Hartmann and co-workers (2002), retaining 10-20 mm
length above the node that has a leaf and a bud and re-cutting the basal end diagonally
into a sharp bevel cut using pruning shear. The leaves of the nodal cuttings were retained
and were cut into 1/4 of the original length for about 40-60 mm (Fig. 7). Before rooting,
the stem cuttings were washed with running tap water for 5 minutes and soaked in
Funguran OH solution (2 grams per liter of water) for 15 minutes, then air dried for 3

minutes.

Figure 7. Preparation of the three-node plagiotropic Excelsa coffee stem
cuttings. Healthy mother trees with young plagiotropic shoots were
evaluated (a) and were taken with plagiotropic apical shoot using
pruning shears (b). Three nodes of the stem cuttings with leaves
and apical meristem were retained. The lower leaves were removed
and the basal part of the cuttings was cut into a bevel cut. The
retained leaves were cut into half of its length (c).

41

For the three-node stem cuttings, the apical part of whole plagiotropic stems was cut
into a three-node cutting segment. The upper leaves (tip and middle) with the shoot tip
were retained and were cut into % of the original length for about 40-60 mm while the
leaves on the third node (base of the stem cutting) were removed. The basal part of the
stem cuttings just below the third node was cut into a diagonal or bevel cut (Fig. 7).

Before treatment, the stem cuttings were washed with running tap water for 2 minutes.
Treatment application and rooting of the stem cuttings

The basal part of the single-node watersprout stem cuttings was immersed in trans-
ferulic acid, 4-hydroxybenzoic acid, p-coumaric acid, dopamine hydrochloride, and
paclobutrazol. The basal ends were soaked in all the chemical treatments (single or
treatment combinations) for 30 minutes (Fig. 8). Those treatments with auxin were
dipped in auxin powder (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA) for 2-3 seconds after immersing
the basal part of the cuttings in chemical solutions. Treating the stem cuttings was done
by soaking the basal (1-2 cm) portion in a dilute solution (Hartmann et al, 1990). After
immersion in chemical treatments and before auxin powder dipping, the stem cuttings
were quickly immersed in KOP fungicide solution (5 grams per liter of water). The nodal

cuttings were rooted in sand medium in a propagation bed for about 1.5 -3.5 cm depth.
Rooting Conditions during the propagation

The stem cuttings were rooted in a propagation bed with sand as the rooting

medium. The sand was sterilized with Funguran OH solution (2 grams per liter of water)

42

(for single-node stem cuttings) and by sprinkling with KOP fungicide solution (5 grams

per liter of water) (for three-node stem cuttings) prior to rooting. The mist in the

propagation beds was operated daily from 8:00 am to 4:00 pm, except for rainy days. The

propagation bed was shed/covered with black net with dried coconut leaves to maintain

moderate or low shade. The temperature was monitored using a mercuric thermometer

where the temperature inside the propagation bed during mist was 28-31°C.

Figure 8.

Preparation and treating the stem cuttings with phenolic
treatments. Phenolic compounds (frans-ferulic acid, 4-
hydroxybenzoic acid, and p-coumaric acid), paclobutrazol, and
dopamine solutions were prepared (a).The single node-coffee stem
cuttings were prepared (5), placed in a clean clear plastic
containers (c), and immersed in treatment solutions for 30
minutes (d).

43

Care and Management of the stem cuttings

For single-node orthotropic Excelsa coffee stem cuttings, the stem cuttings were
sprayed 6 times with 3grams per liter of foliar fertilizer (Grow More™ Premium Plant
Food) at 22 days, 28 days, 36 days, 54 days, 93 days, and 130 days after planting. Foliar
fertilization was done late in the afternoon, sprayed to the leaves 10-15 minutes after
turning-off the mist. The stem cuttings in auxin treatments except the control species
were re-dipped thrice with Quick root auxin powder at 29 days, 34 days and 68 days after
planting. In addition, the stem cuttings were re-dipped twice with 500 ppm IBA + 100
ppm NAA auxin powder at 109 days and 140 days after planting. Re-immersing the
cuttings in all chemical treatments for 30 minutes was done at 34 days after planting.
Moreover, the Excelsa coffee stem cuttings (except the Robusta coffee cuttings) were
quickly dipped in pure honey (Langnese Pure Bee Honey, Germany) at 140 days after
planting to provide food for the stem cuttings during the rooting period.

For three-node plagiotropic Excelsa coffee stem cuttings, the stem cuttings were
sprayed with 3 grams per liter of foliar fertilizer (Grow More™ Premium Plant Food) at 9
days after planting. Foliar fertilization was done late in the afternoon, sprayed to the
leaves 10-15 minutes after turning-off the mist. The stem cuttings with auxin treatments
were re-dipped with 500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA auxin powder at 22 days after
planting. Moreover, the stem cuttings were quickly dipped in pure honey (Langnese Pure
Bee Honey, Germany) at 22 days after planting to provide food for the stem cuttings

during the rooting period.

44

Rooting Response to Photosynthate-Accumulating Techniques in Robusta (Coffea
robusta Linden) Coffee Single-Node Orthotropic Stem Cuttings

Research Design

The present study was laid out employing the Completely Randomized Design
(CRD) with three replications. A total of 300 orthotropic Robusta coffee stem cuttings
were applied with auxin, and initiated with four techniques of photosynthate
accumulation prior to rooting, and/or combinations. Thirty stem cuttings (10 cuttings per
replicate) were Control treatment, applied/treated with Quick root auxin powder,
blanching or wrapping the stem with polyethylene sheet sealed with black electrical tape,
Girdling technique 1 or stem tightening using thin metal wire in the internode, Girdling
technique 2 or removal of a ring of bark in the internode, paclobutrazol drenching of the
mother trees with watersprouts prior to stem cutting harvesting, Quick root + blanching,
Quick root + Girdling technique 1, Quick root + Girdling technique 2, and Quick root +

paclobutrazol drenching.
Preparation of the source of planting materials

Prior to treatment, the mother trees were selected and evaluated for the

availability or presence of orthotropic water sprouts.
Preparation of the stem cuttings

Orthotropic water sprouts of Robusta coffee were selected (Fig. 9). Blanching was

done by covering the stem internode through wrapping (at about 60-70 mm from the

45

upper node) with polyethylene sheet (5 cm width x 10 cm length) with 5-8 rounds and
sealed with black electrical tape in the both ends of the wrapped stem. Girdling technique
#1 was done by tightening (2 rounds) the stem internode (at about 60-70 mm below each
node per nodal segment) with thin metal wire. Girdling technique #2 was done by slicing
the bark using grafting knife and removing a ring of bark (1 cm in length). The bark was
totally separated from the pith. After removal, the wound was covered with transparent
plastic wrapper (Fig. 10). On the other hand, paclobutrazol was drench to the mother trees
(around the perimeter) at a rate of 1 gram a.i. per square meter canopy diameter. The

techniques lasted or implemented in 47-48 days duration.

Figure 9. Robusta coffee mother trees with watersprouts. Red arrows show
orthotropic watersprouts grown in the trunk and branches.

46

The stem cuttings with leaves were taken early in the morning. After the stems were
gathered from the mother plant, they were cut into segments and placed in a transparent
plastic sheet. The orthotropic stems were cut in 60-80 mm length single-node stem
segments, retaining 10-20 mm above the node that has a leaf and a bud and re-cutting the
basal end diagonally into a sharp bevel cut using pruning shear. The leaves of the nodal
cuttings were cut into 4 of the original length (40-60 mm). Before rooting, the stem
cuttings were washed with running tap water for 2 minutes and quickly dipped in KOP

Fungicide solution (10 grams per liter of tap water) then air dried for 2 minutes.

Figure 10. Photosynthate-accumulating techniques in Robusta coffee
stem cuttings. Robusta watersprout internodes were (a)
wrapped with polyethylene sheet sealed with electrical tape
(blanching), (b) tied with metal wire (girdling 1), and (c)
removed a ring of bark then wrapped with transparent plastic
sheet (girdling 2). Red arrows present the part of the stem
internode with blanching and girdling.

47

Treatment application and rooting of the stem cuttings

The single-node Robusta coffee stem cuttings with auxin treatment were dipped in
quick root auxin powder for 2-3 seconds. The nodal cuttings were rooted in sand medium

in a propagation bed inserting the stem basal end in 1.5 -3.5 cm depth.
Rooting Conditions during the propagation

The stem cuttings were rooted in a propagation bed with sand as the rooting medium.
The sand was sterilized through drenching with Bavistin Fungicide solution (10 grams
per liter of tap water) prior to rooting. The mist of the propagation bed was operated daily
from 8:00 am to 4:00 pm, except for rainy days. The propagation bed was shed with black
net covered with coconut leaves. The temperature was monitored using a mercuric

thermometer where the temperature inside the propagation bed during mist was 28-31°C.
Care and Management of the stem cuttings

The stem cuttings were sprayed twice with 3 grams per liter of foliar fertilizer
(Grow More™ Premium Plant Food) at 38 days and 75 days after planting. Foliar
fertilization was done late in the afternoon, sprayed to the leaves 10-15 minutes after

turning-off the mist.

48

Experiment 3. Rooting Response of Single-Node Orthotropic Young Watersprouts of
Excelsa (Coffea excelsa A. Chev.) Coffee with Basal Incisions to auxin and trans-
ferulic acid treatment under Mist

Research Design

The present study was laid out employing the Completely Randomized Design
(CRD) with three replications. A total of 180 orthotropic Excelsa coffee stem cuttings
were applied with auxin and two levels of trans-ferulic acid, and/or combinations. Thirty
stem cuttings (10 cuttings per replicate) were Control treatment, treated/applied with
auxin powder (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA), 250 uM trans-ferulic acid, 500 »M
trans-ferulic acid, 250 uM trans-ferulic acid + auxin, and 500 uM trans-ferulic acid +

auxin. Excelsa coffee stem cuttings under control treatment have no basal incision cuts.

Preparation of the source of planting materials

Prior to treatment application, the mother trees were selected and evaluated for the
availability or presence of enough orthotropic young watersprouts (leaves were still

succulent and some has red coloration at the abaxial part).

Preparation of the stem cuttings

Orthotropic young watersprouts were taken and single-node stem cuttings were
made. Prior to stem gathering and segmentation, the pruning shear was sterilized with
95% ethanol. The cuttings were taken early in the morning during rainy days and were

placed in a plastic sheet upon gathering. The leaves of the nodal cuttings were retained

49

and were cut into % of the original length (40-60 mm). The basal part of the stem cuttings
was cut in sharp bevel cut (Fig. 11). Before treatment, the stem cuttings were washed
with running tap water for 2 minutes. Using grafting knife, 4-5 diagonal incisions were
made around the rooting zone or base of the stem cuttings. Each stem cuttings were
measured 7-8 cm long (whole length) with 0.5 cm retained upper internode (node to

upper end).

Treatment application and rooting of the stem cuttings

The basal part of the nodal cuttings was immersed in trans-ferulic acid solution
for 30 minutes. Treatments with auxin were quickly dipped in 500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm
NAA auxin powder for 2-3 seconds after immersing in trans-ferulic acid solutions.
Treating the stem cuttings was done by soaking the basal (1-2 cm) portion in a dilute
solution (Hartmann et al, 1990). After trans-ferulic acid treatment and before auxin
powder dipping, the stem cuttings were quickly immersed in KOP fungicide solution (5
grams per liter of water). The stem cuttings were rooted in holed 3.5 oz transparent

plastic cups containing sand.

Rooting Conditions during the propagation

The stem cuttings were rooted in a propagation bed with sand as the rooting
medium. The sand was sterilized through drenching with KOP fungicide solution (5
grams per liter of water) prior to rooting. The mist of the propagation bed was operated

daily from 8:00 am to 4:00 pm, except for rainy days. The raised bed was shed with black

50

net (60% shade) and covered with coconut leaves. The temperature was monitored using

a mercuric thermometer where the temperature inside the propagation bed during mist

was 28-31°C.

Figure 11.

Preparation and _ gathering of young orthotropic
watersprouts of Excelsa coffee. Mother trees were evaluated,
selected and served as sources of young orthotropic water
sprouts (a). Watersprouts were taken using pruning shears
and single node-stem cuttings were obtained (5). The leaves
of the cuttings were cut into % to % of their size (c) and the
basal part of the cuttings was cut into a bevel cut (d).

51

Care and Management of the stem cuttings

The stem cuttings were sprayed with 3 grams per liter of foliar fertilizer (Grow
More™ Premium Plant Food) at 3 days and 40 days after planting. Foliar fertilization
was done late in the afternoon, sprayed to the leaves 10-15 minutes after turning-off the
mist. The stem cuttings were re-dipped with 500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA auxin powder
at 40 days after planting. Moreover, the stem cuttings were quickly dipped in pure honey
(Langnese Pure Bee Honey, Germany) at 40 days after planting in order to provide food

for the stem cuttings during the rooting period.

Parameters Gathered

1. Percentage Survival (%). This was obtained by counting the number of
surviving stem cuttings from the total number of cuttings planted which was

computed using the formula below:

Numberof alive cuttings per treatment

Percentage Survival (%) =
(%) Total numberof cuttings planted

x 100

2. Percentage Rooting Success. This was measured by counting the number of stem

cuttings rooted or those that produced adventitious roots (about 2 mm root is

52

considered) from the total number of stem cutting population planted per treatment

using the formula below:

Number of cuttings with roots
Total number of cuttings planted

Percentage Rooting Success (%) = x 100

3. Number of Roots. This was gathered by counting the number of adventitious
roots that emerged from the cuttings basal end. For at least 2 mm root in the stem

cuttings were considered and counted.

>

Root length (mm). This was obtained by measuring the length of the longest root
formed from the basal end of the stem cuttings to the tip of the root. The root was

measured using an electronic venier caliper expressed in millimeters.

5. Root intensity. The primary roots with the presence of secondary roots of the
stem cuttings were evaluated and rated through scoring based on the criteria

presented in table 1 and fig. 12.

Table 1. Criteria for Root Intensity Rating in Coffee stem cuttings
SCORE DESCRIPTION
0 Absence of adventitious root
1 Slightly fibrous adventitious roots
2 Moderately fibrous adventitious roots
3 Highly fibrous adventitious roots

53

54

rf

$}001 sno UaApE SNOIQqY A]YSIY -¢ ‘sj001 SNOIWUAAPE SNOIgY 4[9}e19 POU -Z
3001 sno WUaApe snoIQ!y A[JYSIS -] ‘3001 sNOWUaApE JO adUasqe - Q ‘UOWEN[LA AyIsuajul JO0Y

ALISNAUINI LOOU

‘TI eansly


55

6. Length and growth increment of the rooting zone (mm). In order to determine
the length of the rooting zone, the diameter of the basal part (bevel cut) of the
stem cuttings that was inserted in the sand medium was measured. This was
measured using a digital vernier caliper expressed in millimeters. The growth

increment of the rooting zone was determined using the formula below:

Rooting Zone Growth Increment (mm) = diameter of the basal end of
the cutting after propagation time (mm) — diameter of the basal end of the cutting

before propagation time (mm)

7. Callus Formation. Callus is a mass of undifferentiated cells proliferating at the
basal end of the stem cuttings. This was determined by detecting the presence of callus (if
any) in the stem cuttings and counting the number of stem cuttings that formed callus per

treatment. This was calculated using the formula below:

Number of cuttings that produced calli
Total number of cuttings

Percent Callus Formation (%) = x 100

8. Callus intensity. This was determined by visually detecting the presence of callus
in the stem cutting basal end and was evaluated and rated from scores 0-3 from the

criteria in table 2.

Table 2. Criteria for Callus Intensity Rating in Coffee stem cuttings

SCORE DESCRIPTION

0 No callus formation on the basal
end of the stem cutting (0%
callus)

1 The basal end of the stem
cutting started to form callus
(<50% callus)

2 More callus proliferates in the
basal end of the stem cutting
(>50% callus)

Profuse callusing in the basal
3 end of the stem cutting (100%
friable callus)

56

57

9. Shoot emergence. Each of the stem cuttings were evaluated for the presence of
shoot/s that can be in the form of a shoot bud or a shootlet. Percent shoot emergence was

computed/determined using the formula below:

_. Number of cuttings that produced shoots
Percent Shoot Emergence (%) = Total number of cuttings 10

10. Number of shoot/s per stem cutting. The shoot/s grown (if any) in the stem
cuttings were counted. Shoots that were considered are in the form of shoot bud or

shootlet.

Data Analysis
Study 1

Averages or means of rooting (rooting percentage, root length, number of roots per
stem cutting, root intensity), callus formation (percent callus formation, callus intensity),
growth of basal end (initial growth, final growth and growth increment of the rooting
zone diameter) and shoot emergence (percent shoot emergence, number of shoot/s per
stem cutting) were gathered/obtained at the end of the studies and were tabulated.
Monthly percentage survival of single-node and three-node Excelsa coffee stem cuttings
were analyzed using the Statistical Tool for Agricultural Research (STAR) 2.0.1, 2013
and the mean comparison was tested using the Tukey’s Honest Significant Difference

(HSD) at 0.05 level of significance.

58

Study 2

Stem structure (cortex, phloem, vascular cambium, xylem) thickness were
measured using Zeiss Zen 2 application of Microscope Axioscope GmbH with AxioCam

ERc5s, Carl Zeiss 37081, Gottingen, Germany.

Robusta Experiment

All the parameters were analyzed using the Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) of the
Completely Randomized Design using the Statistical Tool for Agricultural Research
(STAR) 2.0.1, 2013. Comparison among treatment means were tested using the Tukey’s

Honest Significant Difference (HSD) at 0.05 level of significance.

Study 2. Differences in the Morphological and Anatomical Structures of Coffea
excelsa A. Chev. and Coffea robusta Linden Stem Cuttings

The basal end of the stem cuttings were cut in cross and longitudinal sections in
which the two coffee species, Excelsa (hard-to-root species) and Robusta (easy-to-root
species) were compared morphologically and anatomically in a micrograph.

Preparation of the coffee stem cuttings. After 112 days of propagation under mist,
the stem cuttings were carefully uprooted and placed in labelled transparent resealable
plastic sheets. Upon transport to the laboratory, the samples were placed in an ice box
with ice cubes at the bottom filled with papers and cloths in order to avoid direct contact

of samples with the ice. The stem cuttings were brought to Mt. Zion Scientific Inc.

59

Laboratory located at the Second Floor of New Domain Plaza No.9 Holy Spirit Drive,
Don Antonio Heights, Brgy. Holy Spirit, Quezon City, Metro Manila, Philippines for the
fixation and slide preparation of the sample materials. The procedure for histological
technique using paraffin microtome was provided by the microlaboratory (Appendix B).
The prepared slides were viewed under a microscope (Microscope Axioscope GmbH with
AxioCam ERc5s, Carl Zeiss 37081, Gottingen, Germany) at 10x magnification (Fig. 13)
and using light microscope (Euromex Stereoblue Microscope, Holland) at 4x
magnification. The morphological and anatomical stem structures were identified or
characterized. These were the stem structures compared/identified: (a) periderm, (b)
lenticel, (c) sclerenchymatic band, (d) secondary phloem, (e) vascular cambium, (f)
primary xylem, (g) secondary xylem, (h) tracheids, (i) vessels, (j) ray cells, (k) cortex, (1)

pith.

Figure 13. Viewing the coffee stem slides using a microscope
with built-in camera (Microscope Axioscope GmbH
with AxioCam ERcSs, Carl Zeiss, Gottingen,
Germany)

CHAPTER 4

RESULTS

Initial observations on the Response of Coffee Stem Cuttings to propagation

One to two days after rooting in the sand, the Excelsa coffee stem cuttings started to
show abscission of the leaves, followed by browning of the stem starting from the
wounds (cut portion) of the base and apical part of the stem cutting and eventually drying
of the whole stem (Fig. 14). The affected stem cuttings were brought to the Plant Health
Clinic of the Institute of Weed Science, Entomology and Plant Pathology, College of
Agriculture and Food Science of UPLB to confirm the presence of any pathogenic
infection. According to the diagnostic report, bacterial ooze was detected in the diseased
stems (Appendix A).

All the stem cuttings and the sand in the propagation beds were treated with
fungicide solutions (Funguran OH and KOP fungicide) during the experimental set-up.
Both of the species were rooted in the same medium however only the Excelsa coffee
have shown symptoms of browning and drying of the stems and pathogenic infection
while the Robusta coffee was minimally or not affected at all. It is assumed that the
Excelsa coffee species are more susceptible to bacterial infection during propagation than
the Robusta coffee species and it is also assumed that the pathogenic infection was

already present in the mother trees and watersprouts prior to propagation.

61

Figure 14. Deterioration of Excelsa coffee stem cuttings propagated under
mist. Excelsa coffee stem cuttings that turned brown with leaf
shedding and eventually dries and die during the rooting
observation under mist.

Study 1. Rooting of Excelsa coffee stem cuttings

Experiment 1: Response of Single-node Orthotropic Excelsa Coffee Stem Cuttings
to Auxin Oxidase Inhibitors and Honey treatment under ‘Kulob’

The experiment was terminated due to the fact that all the stem cuttings in all
treatments died after 10 weeks and 5 days. It was observed that a high mortality was
observed weekly. High mortality was due to pathogenic infection in the stem cuttings
which appeared as white molds in the apical and basal ends of the stem cuttings (Fig.15b)
which resulted to abscission of the leaves and rotting/browning of the whole stem

(Fig.15a). Such observations may be attributed to the pathogens that are already present

62

in the stem cuttings before propagation or contained in the mother plants since the stem
cuttings were not treated with fungicide solution before rooting in the soil medium (Folia
Tropica cutting mix).

Moreover, based on the observations, stem cuttings that are blanched for more
than one month prior to watersprout harvesting and those that were dipped in pure honey

have better survival than the other treatments at the early period of rooting observation

(1-2 months) (Data not shown).

Figure 15a. Dead coffee stem cuttings propagated under ‘kulob’. The
stem cuttings were dried and rotting. The stem cuttings were
propagated in seedling trays filled with Folia Tropica cutting
mix under “kulob”.

Figure 15b. Dead Excelsa coffee stem cutting showing pathogenic
infection. A stem cutting that has the development of
browning at the basal and apical parts where wounds/cuts
have made. The stem cutting has also developed molds during
propagation under “kulob”. Red arrows showed the presence
or development of molds.

63

Experiment 2. Rooting Response of Single-Node Orthotropic and Three-node
Plagiotropic Excelsa Coffee (Coffea excelsa A. Chev.) stem cuttings to different
Auxin Oxidase Inhibitors under Mist

Survival rate of the single-node stem cuttings. Survival rate decreases with
extended rooting period and the single-node orthotropic Excelsa coffee stem cuttings
have lower mean survival rate than the Robusta coffee (Table 3). A large number of stem
cuttings of Excelsa coffee died with extended duration of rooting until 7 months.
However, it was observed that with the application of trans-ferulic acid and combination

Table 3. Monthly survival data of single-node orthotropic Excelsa coffee stem
cuttings propagated under mist

MONTHLY PERCENTAGE SURVIVAL
1 2 3 4 5 6 7

TREATMENTS

Control species (Robusta coffee) 100.00a 79.176 75.00a 70.834 7083a 70834 70.834

2083! 1667h 417h 417h 000g 000g 0.00f
62.50e 45.83d 2083d 2083d 833e 833e 0.00f
33.337 1667h 833g 833g 833e 833e 833d
58.33f 1250 833g 000i 000g 000g 0.00f
66.67d 45.83d 41.67¢ 41.67c¢ 25.00¢ 25.00¢ 16.67¢

5833f 3333f 1667e 1667e 4I7f 417f 4.17e
250 uM p-coumaric acid (CA) 4583; 3333f 417h 417h 417f 4.17f 0.00
250 pM FA + 250 uM PBA + 250 uM CA 0.83c 50.00c 833g 833g 833¢ 833e 833d
250 uM dopamine + 100 ppm paclobutrazol 3333j 16.67h 12.50f 1250f 1250d 1250d 833d
54.17g 3750e 833g 833g 833e 417f 0.00f
91.676 87.50a 62.505 62.506 45.836 45836 45.836
5417g 29.17g 417h 417h 000g 000g 0.00f
50.00h 29.17g 1250f 1250f 417f 417f 0.00f
33337 1250i 833g 833g 833e 833¢ 833d
25.00k 8337 833g 417h 417f 417f 0.00

Control treatment (Excelsa coffee)
Auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA)
100 ppm paclobutrazol (PBZ)

250 uM dopamine

250 pM trans-ferulic acid (FA)

250 uM 4-hydroxybenzoic acid (PBA)

Auxin + 250 1M dopamine

Auxin + 250 pM trans-ferulic acid

Auxin + 250 pM 4-hydroxybenzoic acid

Auxin + 250 uM p-coumaric acid

Auxin+250 4M FA+250 »M PBA+250 1M CA
Auxin + 100 ppm paclobutrazol

Means with the same letters are not significantly different (p<0.05) according to HSD test

64

Figure 16. Appearance of coffee stem cuttings propagated under mist until
7 months of observation. Excelsa coffee stem cuttings treated
with trans-ferulic acid and trans-ferulic acid + auxin that
survived after 4-5 months (d) and 7 months (e) of rooting
observation.

of trans-ferulic acid plus auxin reduced the mortality rate of Excelsa coffee stem cuttings.
Ferulic acid acted as a crop protection agent that reduced the incidence of stem rotting or
deterioration. Jeong and co-workers (2000) reported that ferulic acid inhibits the gram-
positive bacteria, gram-negative bacteria, and yeasts activity. Borges ef al. (2012)
reported the potential antibacterial activities of ferulic acid against E. coli, L.

monocytogenes, P. aeruginosa, and S. aureus while Ou and Kwok (2004) reported the

65

antifungal effect of ferulic acid against S. sclerotiorum, F. oxysporum, Alternaria sp., B.
cinerea, and P. digitatum. Robusta coffee treated with auxin and Excelsa coffee stem
cuttings treated with trans-ferulic acid plus auxin survived longer having obtained the
highest survival rate of 70.83% and 45.83%, respectively.

The capability of the three-node plagiotropic Excelsa coffee stem cuttings in
rooting was also evaluated until 4 months of observation. The apical part of the
plagiotropic stem was used. It was observed that the plagiotropic stem cuttings have
narrower stems than the orthotropic stem cuttings. In addition, the internodes of the
plagiotropic stems were shorter than the orthotropic stems of the same coffee species. The
leafless third node or basal node was inserted in the sand medium until half of the lower

internode (basal and middle nodes).

Survival rate of the three-node stem cuttings. Table 4 presents the monthly mean
percentage survival of the stem cuttings treated with trans-ferulic acid and auxin. A
decreasing survival rate was observed monthly however, the three-node plagiotropic
Excelsa coffee stem cuttings have better survival rate than the single-node orthotropic
Excelsa coffee stem cuttings. It is assumed that more nodes on the stem cuttings
correspond to more food reserves stored which is used by the stem cuttings during the
rooting period. Result showed that the three-node plagiotropic Excelsa coffee stem
cuttings treated with auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA), and 250 uM trans-ferulic
acid have higher average monthly percentage survival than the other treatments.

However, it is evident that a relatively declining trend was observed in all treatments.

66

Table 4. Monthly survival data of three-node plagiotropic Excelsa coffee
stem cuttings treated with auxin and frans-ferulic acid after 4
months under mist

MONTHLY PERCENTAGE SURVIVAL

TREATMENTS 1 2 3 4

Control 63.33" 60.007  60.00° 30.007
auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA) 100.00 , 96.67 ° 90.007 56.67°
250 uM trans-ferulic acid 96.67° 96.67" 90.007 60.00
500 uM trans-ferulic acid 90.00 ¢ 83.33 63.339 23.33°
250 uM trans-ferulic acid + auxin 93.33 ° 83.33> 73.33> 56.67°
500 uM trans-ferulic acid + auxin 83.33 ° 73.33°  66.67°  40.00°

Means with the same letters are not significantly different (p<0.05) according to HSD test

Root growth in single-node stem cuttings. The first recorded root protrusion in
single-node orthotropic Excelsa coffee stem cuttings treated with trans-ferulic acid was
observed to occur after 5 months and 4 days of observation under mist (Fig. 17). At least
2 mm root protrusion at the basal part of the stem cutting was considered. Rooting of the
single-node orthotropic Excelsa coffee stem cuttings was associated with survival after 7
months of rooting observation. A 37.50% rooting was recorded in Excelsa coffee stem
cuttings treated with 250 4M trans-ferulic acid plus auxin (500 ppm IBA+100 ppm
NAA) while the control species recorded 70.83% rooting. The Excelsa coffee stem
cuttings treated with ferulic acid plus auxin produced 1.27 roots per stem cutting which
are 51.91 mm long while the control species produced 2.29 roots per cutting which are
222.62 mm long. The control species produced long moderately fibrous adventitious
roots while Excelsa coffee stem cuttings treated with 250 uM trans-ferulic acid plus

auxin have produced long slightly fibrous adventitious roots (Fig. 18).

67

Figure 17. Newly emerged roots from an Excelsa coffee stem cutting
treated with trans-ferulic acid. The photograph shows the
3D view of the newly emerged roots from the stem basal
end. Red arrow represents the newly grown roots.
Propagated on March 28, 2018; Rooting was observed on
August 19. 2018

Table 5. Rooting in single-node orthotropic Excelsa coffee stem cuttings
after 7 months under mist

ROOTING PARAMETERS (MEAN)

Percentage Number Root Root
TREATMENTS Rooting of Roots length Intensity

Success (%) (mm) *
Control species (Robusta coffee) 70.83 2.29 222.62 2.53
Control treatment (Excelsa coffee) - - - -
Auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA) S = a -
100 ppm paclobutrazol (PBZ) 0 0 0 0
250 1M dopamine - - - -
250 uM frans-ferulic acid (FA) 8.33 0.50 33.19 0.75
250 uM 4-hydroxybenzoic acid (PBA) 0 0 0 0
250 4M p-coumaric acid (CA) : - - -
250 uM FA + 250 uM PBA + 250 nMCA 0 0 0 0
250 uM dopamine + 100 ppm paclobutrazol 0 0 0 0

Auxin + 250 uM dopamine - - - -
Auxin + 250 uM trans-ferulic acid 37.50 1.27 51.91 1.27
Auxin + 250 1M 4-hydroxybenzoic acid - - - 5
Auxin + 250 uM p-coumanc acid - - 5 -
Auxin+250 uM FA+250 pM PBA+250 pM CA 8.33 1 6.36 1
Auxin + 100 ppm paclobutrazol - 5 = -

*Parameter was determined using Table | / Fig. 12. (-) died

*UOQAIaSqO
JO syjuow 1 19338 pajoor ssugNnd ayy ‘UOKNTOS ple IyNAay-suv.g wr QST UI
pasiowul pue (VWN wdd oor + Var add ggg) sepmod urxne ut paddip asm s38u3nd
Ways ayy si sapun payesedoid ssuyjnd ways aajjod esjadxq Iido10qII0 pajyo0y “ST candy

68


69

“syjuOUl / [HUN padtasqo SEM SsuIjINd ay) UI BUyOOY ‘saidads
40q UT [NYssadons sem SuooY ‘aanyx1w UIXNe WYN wdd QO, + val wdd 00¢ ul paddip
Pue vonNjos sysissauXs UIXNe UF pasiourUNT a4aM sBUNIND aajjoo ws[a0xq ayty sapmod
UIXNE 3001 YING ut paddip a4am (saisads jo13U09 ay) se saatas) aa3y09 Bysnqoy ‘js1u
Jepun payesedoid ssuyynd ways 294309 eysnqoy pure BS]9dxXq pej001-uoU puke pa}00y

(poe syngy-su $2) 220D es[29xq

1D) 2aJOD vsngoy

“ol aansiy


70

Auxin powder (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm
NAA) + 250 jun trans-ferulic acid + 250 jum 4-

hydroxybenzoic acid + 250 um p-coumaric acid 250 jum trans-ferulic acid 250jum trans-ferulic acid

Auxin powder (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA) +250
yun trans-ferulic acid + 250 pm 4-hydroxybenzoic acid
+ 250 jam p-coumaric acid

Figure 20. Successfully rooted Robusta and Excelsa coffee stem cuttings
after 7 months under mist. Roots grew even if the stems appeared
dry or were dark brown in color.

71

Figure 21. Plagiotropic stem cuttings of Excelsa coffee
propagated under mist. (a) immediately after
chemical treatments (5) after 1 month, (c) 2 months,
and (d) 4 months. Photos were taken before (5),
during (c), and after (d) operation of the mist.

It was observed that the primary adventitious roots produced by Excelsa coffee
stem cuttings were thicker (wider diameter) than the Robusta coffee. Rooting was evident
in Excelsa coffee stem cuttings with the application of ferulic acid and exogenous auxin
and with the sole application of trans-ferulic acid even with the absence of exogenously-
applied auxin was may be due to the presence of endogenous/natural auxins produced by
the shoots. Weisman and Lavee (1995) reported that auxins alone (without any

application of auxin synergists) have a slight rooting effect in hard-to-root olive cultivars.

Root growth in three-node stem cuttings. \t is evident that extended rooting
period up to 4 months under mist, only a single plagiotropic Excelsa coffee stem cutting
which is treated with 500 M trans-ferulic acid rooted. The said treatment gave a 3.33%
rooting success and the rooted stem cutting has produced a 14.24 mm long single root

(Fig.22).

72

Figure 22. Early root emergence in plagiotropic stem cuttings of Excelsa
coffee after 19 weeks under mist. The stem cuttings were (A)
control, treated with auxin (B), 250 um frans-ferulic acid (C),
500 pm trans-ferulic acid (D), 250 um frans-ferulic acid + Auxin
(E), and 500 pm trans-ferulic acid + Auxin (F).

Callus Formation in the single-node stem cuttings. Callus formation is also
associated with rooting of the stem cuttings. It is important in adventitious rooting and is
a prerequisite to root initiation (Lovell and White, 1986). From the stem cuttings that
have survived, high callus formation was observed in Excelsa coffee treated with ¢rans-
ferulic acid which is higher than in control species. About 64.71% of the Robusta coffee
stem cuttings have produced less than 50% callus in the stem basal end while 75% and
90.91% of the Excelsa coffee stem cuttings treated with 250 uM ¢trans-ferulic acid and
combination of trans-ferulic acid plus auxin have produced more than 50% callus at the
stem basal end, respectively (Table 6). Callus proliferation in coffee stem cuttings
regardless of species has the same appearance. Calli produced in the stem basal end or

basal wound has light yellow to light brown coloration.

73

Table 6. Callus formation in single-node orthotropic Excelsa coffee stem
cuttings after 7 months under mist

CALLUS FORMATION PARAMETERS

TREATMENTS (MEAN)

Percent Callus formation Callus

Intensity*

Control species (Robusta coffee) 64.71 1.12
Control treatment (Excelsa coffee) - -
Auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA) - -
100 ppm paclobutrazol (PBZ) 50 1.5
250 uM dopamine 5 -
250 uM trans-ferulic acid (FA) 75 2.25
250 uM 4-hydroxybenzoic acid (PBA) 0 0
250 uM p-coumaric acid (CA) - -
250 uM FA + 250 uM PBA + 250 uM CA 100 1.5
250 uM dopamine + 100 ppm paclobutrazol 0 0
Auxin + 250 uM dopamine - S
Auxin + 250 uM trans-ferulic acid 90.91 2.73
Auxin + 250 uM 4-hydroxybenzoic acid - -
Auxin + 250 uM p-coumanric acid - S
Auxin+250 uM FA+250 1M PBA+250 uM CA 50 1.5
Auxin + 100 ppm paclobutrazol - -
*Parameter was measured using Table 2. (-) died

During the early period of observation, the calli in the basal end were white to
light yellow in appearance but with prolonged observation period, they become light
brown. Callus proliferates between the bark and pith portion of the stem exposed in the
sand medium. Callus formation is associated with the increased growth of stem basal end
diameter. The basal end of the stem cuttings represents the zone where roots arose. It is
also the area where callus proliferates. The rooting zone is the area of the stem cutting
that is cut into a sharp bevel or diagonal cut and is inserted in the sand. Results revealed
that callus proliferates more in Excelsa coffee stem cuttings treated with auxin + 250 1M

trans-ferulic acid which resulted to a high rooting zone growth increment (Table 7).

74

Table 7. Growth of basal end in single-node orthotropic Excelsa coffee stem
cuttings after 7 months under mist

BASAL END GROWTH PARAMETERS

(MEAN)

TREATMENTS Initial diameter of Final Rooting

the rooting zone diameter of zone

(mm) the rooting growth
zone (mm) increment
(mm)

Control species (Robusta coffee) 5.15 6.82 1.67
Control treatment (Excelsa coffee) > : =
Auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA) - - -
100 ppm paclobutrazol (PBZ) 4.72 5.84 1.12
250 uM dopamine a : :
250 uM trans-ferulic acid (FA) 7.13 8.71 1.59
250 uM 4-hydroxybenzoic acid (PBA) 4 3.85 -0.15
250 4M p-coumaric acid (CA) - - -
250 uM FA + 250 uM PBA + 250 uM CA 5.65 7.41 1.76
250 uM dopamine + 100 ppm paclobutrazol 5.20 5.16 -0.04
Auxin + 250 1M dopamine - - -
Auxin + 250 uM trans-ferulic acid 6.08 8.26 2.18
Auxin + 250 uM 4-hydroxybenzoic acid - - 2
Auxin + 250 1M p-coumaric acid - - -
Auxin+250 1M FA+250 uM PBA+250 uM CA 6.47 5.42 -1.05
Auxin + 100 ppm paclobutrazol : : °
(-) died

Shoot emergence in the single-node stem cuttings. The coffee stem cuttings
produced lateral shoots during the rooting period. Shoot emergence in the stem cuttings
indicates living and actively growing stem cuttings. It was assumed that the phenomenon
is an indication of food/photosynthate production through photosynthesis thus could
support the stem cuttings during the extended rooting period. Lateral shoots have
emerged in the orthotropic watersprout cuttings which are in the form of a shoot bud or a

shootlet that arises from the node of the stem cuttings (Fig.23).

75

Newly emerged shoots of the coffee stem cuttings were healthy, from a shoot bud
and becomes a shootlet with light green leaves. Almost all the cuttings that are alive have
produced shoots. However, Robusta coffee stem cuttings have produced more shoots
(2.06 shoots) than the Excelsa coffee stem cuttings (1.0-1.55 shoots) regardless of
treatments. It is evident that Excelsa coffee stem cuttings treated with auxin plus 250 uM
trans-ferulic acid have low percent shoot emergence (81.82%) in all of the stem cuttings
but are alive nevertheless (Table 8). This may be attributed to the fact that the energy or
food reserves of the stem cuttings were allotted or used more for callus proliferation and

rooting than in shoot growth.

Figure 23. Excelsa coffee stem cuttings where shoots (see
arrows) have emerged from the nodes after one
month in rooting beds.

16

Table 8. Shoot emergence in single-node orthotropic Excelsa coffee stem
cuttings after 7 months under mist

SHOOT FORMATION PARAMETERS (MEAN)

TREATMENTS Percent Shoot Emergence Number of shoot/s
per cutting
Control species (Robusta coffee) 100 2.06

Control treatment (Excelsa coffee) a S
Auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA) a .

100 ppm paclobutrazol (PBZ) 100 1.0
250 uM dopamine - -
250 uM trans-ferulic acid (FA) 100 1.25
250 uM 4-hydroxybenzoic acid (PBA) 100 1.0
250 uM p-coumaric acid (CA) - -
250 uM FA + 250 uM PBA + 250 uM CA 100 1.50
250 uM dopamine + 100 ppm paclobutrazol 100 1.50
Auxin + 250 pM dopamine - -
Auxin + 250 uM trans-ferulic acid 81.82 1.55

Auxin + 250 4M 4-hydroxybenzoic acid - -
Auxin + 250 1M p-coumaric acid - -
Auxin+250 uM FA+250 uM PBA+250 uM CA 100 1.0
Auxin + 100 ppm paclobutrazol - -

(-) died

77

Rooting Response to Photosynthate-Accumulating Techniques in Robusta (Coffea
robusta Linden) Coffee Single-Node Orthotropic Stem Cuttings

An experiment was conducted on the rooting effect of photosynthate-
accumulating techniques (techniques used to block, accumulate, or store photosynthate in
the plant or treated part) in Robusta coffee since it was observed in the rooting
experiment under ‘kulob’ that Excelsa coffee stem cuttings that are blanched have better
survival during the early period (1-2 months) of rooting observation (Data not shown).
The said experiment was done in the control species (Robusta coffee) since there is not
enough Excelsa coffee watersprouts to use. Robusta coffee mother trees with
watersprouts were drenched with paclobutrazol, and the watersprouts from other mother
trees that are not treated with paclobutrazol were blanced and girdled. The said
techniques were employed for almost one month before the stems were harvested to

ensure that they will have enough time to accumulate photosynthates

Survival rate of the stem cuttings. Increased survival of the stem cuttings is an
important factor in successful rooting. Survival with prolonged rooting period can
increase the probability and possibility of rooting in coffee. The survival rate did not
became a problem in Robusta coffee stem cuttings however treatment with auxin plus
girdling through removal of a ring of bark in the stem significantly decreased the
percentage survival. Orthotropic Robusta coffee stem cuttings treated with all treatments
have high survival rate (76%-100%) except for stem cuttings applied with auxin +
girdling (removal of a ring of bark) treatment with only 60% survival rate after 100 days

(Fig. 24).

78

12¢
% Survival
| y = «% Rooting |
5 Ge Z Y Z ZG Z Gy % Callusing |
2 Y Z Z % % N
5 V1G Y Y y % Z Z %
~ Z Z G Z Z UNS Z Y 9
20 Z Z Z Z Z Y Z ZY » % Shoot
201 J U Z Z Z
% y Z Z Z Z Y G Y ne
fn Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Emergence
= 5 bo = < 2 yy = |
= 5 E 4 F| y 4
< 5 2 3 5 2 5
s < = s s a 3
eo é Me = = =
C] 2 § a §
i 2 + €
= £ 5 rs =
2 FS Z Fl z
z 3 < = z 3
+ r¢ n
| 5 a
| | |
| |
Photosynthate-Accumulating Techniques
Figure 24. Survival, rooting, callus formation and shoot emergence of single-

node orthotropic Robusta coffee stem cuttings after 100 days under
mist. Means with the same letters are not significantly different
(p<0.05) according to HSD test.

Root growth in the stem cuttings. Stem cuttings under the control, those treated
with Quick root auxin powder, and stem cuttings without auxin but girdled with metal
wire, and drenched with paclobutrazol one month prior to stem cutting harvesting
resulted to high rooting success (76.67%-80% rooting). However, stem cuttings applied
with auxin plus girdling techniques resulted to low rooting success (30%-33%) (Fig. 24).
While rooting in Robusta coffee stem cuttings can proceed well even without rooting
treatments, stem cuttings taken from mother trees drenched with paclobutrazol
significantly produced more roots (2 roots per stem cutting) and longest roots (107.36
mm). On the other hand, the combined effect of auxin and girdling techniques reduced

rooting success (Fig. 24), root number (Fig. 25) and produced the shortest roots (Fig. 26).

79

a

8G wry rps ny
§ YUU 00m 045
ee

i] QYUGERz5 ;:( Jo1}U0>

a n= HNO

s}ooy Jo s9quinyy

Photosynthate-Accumulating Techniques

Root production of single-node orthotropic Robusta coffee stem

cuttings after 100 days under mist. Means with the same letters are

not significantly different (p<0.05) according to HSD test.

Figure 25.

Z|
| jozeaynqopeg + uIXny

ab

y ({esouras ya0q
ne WA, Jo Buta) Suypary + uxny
y (aaa
3 WA, ejow) Suypary + un

77) qauaup oreanqoped *

wy, (jeaowas
/ yaeq jo Buz) Suypar

3
ic]

/ (aayss [eym) Supa

abed

 Buryoueig

- urxny

/ jouu0D

+ a

60

c)

120
100

(wu) PySuIT] 100y

Photosynthate-Accumulating Techniques

cuttings after 100 days under mist. Means with the same letters are

Root length (mm) of single-node orthotropic Robusta coffee stem
not significantly different (p<0.05) according to HSD test.

Figure 26.

80

Treatment with auxin plus girdling through removal of a ring of bark, and auxin
plus girdling through stem tightening with metal wire significantly resulted to 0.60 and
0.43 root per stem cutting (Fig. 25) and 20.68 mm and 22.16 mm long roots (Fig. 26),
respectively. Furthermore, control stem cuttings and non auxin-treated stem cuttings from
mother trees drenched with paclobutrazol significantly produced nearly moderately
fibrous adventitious roots. Meanwhile, stem cuttings treated with auxin plus girdling

techniques produced less fibrous adventitious roots or single roots with few lateral

secondary roots (Fig. 27).

2 a
1.8 a a Root intensity
2 16 ab ib ab" t 5 ab a al
Ss 14 \ ab WY e oN - NX ’ Callus Intensity
ioe \ \ \ \ 1 at \ &
2 06 N WV WV N SN \ N :
= € - @? = - 2 =
2 2 € ¢ 6 5 ¢ # &
SoS “ § 3 Ss 2 & oa JB
a 8 $ = @ we s
—E £8 § g2 ce
2 2 2 § Oa +”
g <
FI
S
2
Photosynthate-Accumulating Techniques
Figure 27. Root and callus intensity rating of single-node orthotropic Robusta

coffee stem cuttings after 100 days under mist. Means with the
same letters are not significantly different (p<0.05) according to
HSD test. Root intensity and Callus intensity were measured using
the criteria in Table 1 / Fig.12 and Table 2, respectively.

Figure 28.

Rooted orthotropic Robusta coffee stem cuttings after 100
days of rooting observation under mist.

8]


Enhance rooting in paclobutrazol application may be due to the effect on
inhibiting GA synthesis that promotes starch breakdown (Rademacher et al., 1984; Davis
et al., 1985; Upadhyaya et al., 1985; Upadhyaya et al., 1986; Protacio et al., 2009). The
enhanced rooting effect of girdling in Robusta coffee stem cuttings was most likely due to
the disruption of downward auxin transport through the phloem and allowing
photosynthates or carbohydrates produced by the shoots above the girdle to accumulate

(Beyl and Sharma, 2016).

Callus formation in the stem cuttings. Girdling techniques (girdling with metal
wire and removal of a ring of bark) resulted to a high callus formation (90-93.33%) since
the mentioned techniques imposed wound stress and needs high tissue regeneration when
rooted. Meanwhile, low percent callus formation (40%) was noted in the control and
those applied with auxin plus girdling technique on removal of a ring of bark in the stem
basal end (Fig. 24). Furthermore, nearly more than 50% callus was formed in the stem
basal end of those treated with auxin, girdling techniques, and combination of auxin plus
girdling through tightening the stem with metal wire. Less than 50% callus was formed in
the basal end of the control stem cuttings (Fig. 27). There is no significant difference on

the growth increment of the rooting zone (Fig. 29).

Length of the Rooting Zone (mm)
Rw Rua

Figure 29.

=F

»

Vib,

83

lll

Blanching Yuu

rdling (ring of bark removal) Yl i

Ue

a 8 Initial Length
ab N
ett: me eee ee | s Final Length
aN \ \ N oe . ab
N abe babs Growth
\ Kw \ Taaecat
\
\
.

Yi

Auxin + Paclobutrazol drench oloddé£:

YZ
tity

g (ring of bark

)

Paclobutrazol drench Wud
Auxin + Blanching obh0})Jblsséw

Auxin + Girdling (metal wire)

Oo
of
s
¥
EI
<

Photosy nthate-Agcu mulating Techniqu

5

Length of the rooting zone (mm) of single-node orthotropic Robusta
coffee stem cuttings after 100 days under mist. Means with the
same letters are not significantly different (p<0.05) according to
HSD test.

Shoot emergence in the stem cuttings. Figure 24 presents the percentage shoot

emergence while Figure 30 shows the number of shoots produced per stem cutting of

Robusta coffee. Shoot production parameters (percent shoot emergence and number of

shoots) of the Robusta coffee stem cuttings were not statistically affected by any of the

treatments. The Robusta coffee stem cuttings produced average of 0.77 to 1.50 shoots per

stem cutting after 100 days of rooting observation under mist.

YU), 96 wreangopea + ny
Wlllla
YU, 9 wurorra

WU/M|LHA, (2100 1089 50 301) B01
Wd, 9 BoD
Wyse
Woda,
YWM|JIIIV." a

etrNnerwxetao

Has [UJOW) Suypary + uIsny

s}00ys Jo s9quinyy

Photosynthate-Accumulating Techniques

Shoot emergence in single-node orthotropic Robusta coffee stem

cuttings after 100 days under mist.

Figure 30.

85

Experiment 3. Rooting Response of Single-Node Orthotropic Young Watersprouts of
Excelsa (Coffea excelsa A. Chev.) Coffee with Basal Incisions to auxin and frans-
ferulic acid treatment under Mist

In this experiment, the rooting capability of single-node orthotropic Excelsa
coffee stem cuttings as affected by levels of trans-ferulic acid and auxin was evaluated
since in the previous experiment it is the most effective treatment for Excelsa coffee
(Table 5). The stem cuttings used were young waterprouts with light green, tender, and
has red-colored shoot tips. Softwood cuttings are believed to root easier and quicker as
compared to other types (Hartmann ef al., 2002) which are used in difficult-to-root
species. The orthotropic watersprouts were made into single-node stem cuttings and
incision cuts were made in the basal part of the cutting. Incisions at the basal part of the
cutting were done to cut any possible physical barriers that prevent root protrusion. Stem

cuttings under control treatment have no basal incisions.

Root growth in the stem cuttings. Ferulic acid at 250 1M concentration can
promote rooting however ferulic acid at 500 4M concentration seems to be inhibitory to
rooting. Moreover, ferulic acid regardless of concentration when combined with auxin
(500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA) can promote rooting in Excelsa coffee with basal
incisions (Table 9). A 13.33% rooting was observed in stem cuttings treated with 250 1M
trans-ferulic acid + auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA). The stem cuttings produced
3.25 roots that are 35.53 mm long. In terms of how the primary adventitious roots

produced secondary lateral roots, it was evident that both the stem cuttings treated with

86

250 uM trans-ferulic acid without auxin and 500 yM trans-ferulic acid with auxin have
both produced slightly fibrous adventitious roots while the stem cuttings treated with 250

uM trans-ferulic acid plus auxin produced slightly to moderately fibrous adventitious

roots.

Table 9. Rooting in single-node orthotropic Excelsa coffee stem cuttings with
basal incisions treated with auxin and frans-ferulic acid after 6
months under mist

ROOTING PARAMETERS (MEAN)
Percentage Number Root Root
TREATMENTS Rooting of Roots length Intensity
Success (mm) iu
(%)

Control 0 0 ) 0

Auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA) 0 0 0 0

250 uM trans-ferulic acid 3.33 1.0 9.54 1.0

500 pM trans-ferulic acid 0 0 0 0

250 pM trans-ferulic acid + auxin 13.33 3.25 35.53 1.25

500 uM trans-ferulic acid + auxin 3.33 2.0 10.53 1.0

*Parameter was measured using Table 1 / Fig. 12.

Callus formation in the stem cuttings. All the stem cuttings have produced calli
except for those treated with 500 uM trans-ferulic acid (0%). Stem cuttings treated with
500 uM trans-ferulic acid + auxin produced 100% callus with less than 50% callus
proliferation in the stem basal end. Results showed that treatment with 500 uM trans-
ferulic acid inhibited callus formation while the addition of 500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm
NAA in the said treatment promoted the activity to an extent that all the stem cuttings that

have survived in the treatment until 6 months of observation produced calli.

250 jum transeferulic acid + auxin Bg yn trans-ferlic acid + auxin HF 950 mi tras teal acid + auxin
(300 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA) MH (500 pprn BA + 100 ppm NAA) iF (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA)

|

4

250 jum trans-ferulic acid > auxin 500 jum trans-ferulic acid + auxin 250 ut trans-ferulic acd
(500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA) (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA)

Figure 31.

Single-node orthotropic Excelsa coffee watersprout cuttings
with basal incisions in combination with auxin and ferulic acid
treatments rooted after 6 months of observation under mist.

87

88

High callus formation was also observed in stem cuttings treated with 250 uM
trans-ferulic acid (85.71%). The basal end of the stem cuttings treated solely with trans-
ferulic acid and combined with auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA) except for the 500
uM trans-ferulic acid-treated cuttings have slightly profuse callus formation. However,
those stem cuttings treated with auxin alone (500 ppm IBA+ 100 ppm NAA) have more
than 50% to 100% profuse callus formation (Table 10). High growth increment or high
increase in the diameter of the rooting zone was observed both in stem cuttings wherein

auxin was present (Table 11).

Table 10. Callus formation in single-node orthotropic Excelsa coffee stem
cuttings with basal incisions treated with auxin and ¢rans-ferulic
acid after 6 months of observation.

CALLUS FORMATION PARAMETERS (MEAN)

TREATMENTS Percent Callus formation Callus Intensity*
Control 66.67 0.67
Auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm 66.67 2.5
NAA)

250 uM trans-ferulic acid 85.71 1.14

500 uM trans-ferulic acid (0) 0

250 uM trans-ferulic acid + auxin 66.67 1.67

500 uM trans-ferulic acid + auxin 100 1.0

*Parameter was measured using Table 2.

Table 11. Growth of basal end in single-node orthotropic Excelsa coffee stem
cuttings with basal incisions treated with auxin and trans-ferulic

acid after 6 months under mist

BASAL END GROWTH PARAMETERS (MEAN)

Initial diameter of Final Rooting zone
TREATMENTS the rooting zone diameter of growth
(mm) the rooting increment
SSeS zone (mm) (mm)

Control 6.75 6.47 -0.28
Auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm 7.50 9.15 1.65
NAA)

250 uM trans-ferulic acid 6.15 6.43 0.28

500 uM trans-ferulic acid 4.25 4.80 0.55

250 uM trans-ferulic acid + auxin 6.44 8.05 1.61

500 pM trans-ferulic acid + auxin 6.30 717 0.87

Figure 32. Single-node orthotropic watersprouts of Excelsa coffee with
basal incisions planted in plastic cups. Photos above show the
appearance of the stem cuttings during propagation set-up (a),
after 1 month (6) and after 4 months (c) of rooting observation.

90

Survival rate of the stem cuttings. The stem cuttings were planted in transparent
plastic cups to facilitate easier viewing of root protrusion (if any). Incisions at the base of
the stem cutting promoted high mortality which was observed a day after the start of
propagation. With prolonged rooting observation period until 6 months, the monthly
survival of the stem cuttings was decreased until 6 months. High percentage survival was
recorded in stem cuttings treated with 250 wM trans-ferulic acid (23.33%) and those
treated with 250 uM trans-ferulic acid plus auxin treatment (20%). Ferulic acid seemed
to act as an antimicrobial crop protection agent at lower concentration (250 uM).
Unfortunately, high mortality rate was observed both in stem cuttings treated with auxin

(500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA) and 500 uM trans-ferulic acid (6.67%) (Table 12).

Table 12. Shoot emergence and percentage survival of single-node
orthotropic Excelsa coffee stem cuttings with basal incisions treated
with auxin and frans-ferulic acid after 6 months under mist

SHOOT FORMATION PERCENTAGE
TREATMENTS PARAMETERS (MEAN) SURVIVAL

Percentage Number of

Shoot shoot/s per
Emergence (%) cutting

Control 100 1.67 10
Auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA) 100 1.50 6.67
250 uM trans-ferulic acid 100 1.29 23.33
500 uM trans-ferulic acid 100 2 6.67
250 pM trans-ferulic acid + auxin 100 2 20
500 uM trans-ferulic acid + auxin 66.67 0.67 10

Shoot emergence in the stem cuttings. The shoot emergence parameters of

91

single-node orthotropic Excelsa coffee stem cuttings with basal incisions treated with
trans-ferulic acid are presented in Table 12. All the stem cuttings recorded 100% shoot
emergence except those stem cuttings treated with 500 wM ¢rans-ferulic acid + auxin
(66.67%). More shoots have emerged in stem cuttings treated with 500 uM trans-ferulic
acid without auxin and 250 uM trans-ferulic acid plus auxin with an average of 2 shoots

per stem cutting.

Study 2. Differences in the Morphological and Anatomical Structures of Coffea
excelsa A. Chev. and Coffea robusta Linden Stem Cuttings

Morphological Differences of Excelsa and Robusta Coffee Watersprouts

Watersprouts of two coffee species were gathered at softwood stage and were
compared based on leaf and stem morphology. Excelsa coffee stem has a wider stem
diameter (>10 mm) than the Robusta coffee species (7 mm). The stem of Excelsa coffee
is rounder than the Robusta coffee which has a more distinct ribbed/cleaved structure
where the stem cleavage is more prominent at the middle of the stem (Fig. 33). In terms
of the internode distance of the two coffee species watersprouts, they have almost the
same internode length Moreover, the leaves of Excelsa coffee watersprouts are broader

and thicker than the Robusta coffee.

92

MADE IN JAPAN

S | q
Holo LsSitolatidatodaleSalabatalatitabetabatetalatetatititatala
Figure 33. Morphological comparison of stem of Excelsa and

Robusta coffee species. The photos present the
watersprouts of the two coffee species. Excelsa coffee
has wider stem diameter than the Robusta coffee.

Anatomical Structures of Excelsa and Robusta Coffee Stem from Watersprouts

The anatomical structures of freshly-harvested and 4 months-old Excelsa and
Robusta coffee stem cuttings were characterized and compared in this study through cross
and longitudinal section photomicrographs. The basal part of the coffee stems was
subjected to botanical microtechnique where the plant tissue was fixed and embedded in
paraffin, cut thinly using a microtome, and slides were made. Fresh stem samples used
came from freshly gathered coffee watersprouts which are softwood stems while the other

stem samples observed were stem cuttings being rooted for 4 months and 7 months. Stem

93

structures were identified and characterized using a microscope with built-in camera
(Microscope Axioscope GmbH with AxioCam ERc5s, Carl Zeiss 37081, Gottingen,
Germany) at 10x magnification and Euromex Stereoblue Microscope (Holland) at 4x
magnification. A bar representing 100 ym measurement was placed in each
photomicrograph to easily visualize and measure the sizes and distances of the structures.
In the anatomical structures of the two coffee species, the periderm consists of several
layers of collenchyma cells underlying the cortex. Collenchyma cells are small cells
while parenchyma cells are large cells. The layers of parenchyma and collenchyma cells
varying in size constitute the cortex. The cortex layer is the stem structure which serves
as the way of protruding adventitious roots.

The vascular system comprises the vascular cambium, phloem and xylem tissues.
The red/purple/pinkish cells underlying the cortex composed the sclerenchymatic band
(Fig. 34 and Fig. 35) while the secondary phloem is a layer which is near the vascular
cambium. The photosynthates flow in the phloem basipetally. The phloem consists of the
sieve tube cells (large cells) and the companion cells (small cells). The phloem is found in
between the cortex and vascular cambium. The vascular cambium gives rise to secondary
vascular tissues and usually where callus formation occurs. The vascular cambium
appears in the photomicrographs as fading cell layers. Meanwhile, the xylem consists of
vessel cells (large cells) and tracheids (small cells). Ray structures were also observed to
occur in the xylem tissue. The secondary xylem is underlying the vascular cambium
where most of the vessels are found while the primary xylem is located near the pith. The

pith comprises of large parenchymatous cells which represents the wood.

94

Anatomical Differences between Excelsa and Robusta Coffee Stems

Cross and longitudinal sections of freshly-harvested and 4-month-old Excelsa and
Robusta coffee stem cuttings

The anatomical structures of freshly-harvested Excelsa coffee and Robusta coffee
stem are presented in this study through photomicrographs (Fig 34). Comparing the cross
sections of Excelsa coffee to Robusta coffee through the basal part of the
stem/watersprout proves that there are differences in terms of the thickness of the stem
structures. It was evident that Excelsa coffee stem/watersprout has thicker cortex
(196.326 wm thicker), thicker phloem tissue (25.925 um thicker), thicker xylem tissue
(56.364 ym thicker), but has relative thinner vascular cambium (5.78 pm thinner) as

compared to Robusta coffee (Table 13).

Table 13. Stem structure thickness of freshly-harvested and 4 months-old
Excelsa and Robusta coffee stems cuttings.
THICKNESS (um) THICKNESS (um)
STEM Freshly- Freshly- Four months-old Four months-
STRUCTURE harvested harvested Excelsa coffee old Robusta
Excelsa coffee _ Robusta coffee coffee
Cortex 422.353 226.027 365.345 210.794
Phloem 116.801 90.876 126.870 100.736
Vascular cambium 30.474 36.254 48.772 33.936
Xylem 418.026 361.662 226.997 189.364

Thickness was measured using the Carl Zeiss ZEN 2 (blue edition) software of the
Axioscope.

The anatomical structures of 4 months-old Excelsa coffee and Robusta coffee

95

stem cuttings are presented in this study using photomicrographs (Fig 35). Four months-
old Excelsa coffee stem cutting has thicker stem structures than the 4 months-old Robusta
coffee stem cutting. Four months-old Excelsa coffee stem cutting has thicker cortex
(154.551 pm thicker), phloem tissue (26.134 ym thicker), vascular cambium (14.836 pm
thicker), and xylem tissue (37.633 rm thicker) (Table 13).

Based on the findings above, Excelsa coffee species has thicker stem structures
than the Robusta coffee species. However, a thicker vascular cambium was observed in
freshly-harvested Robusta coffee watersprout. Thickness of the stem vascular
tissues/structures has no effect on adventitious rooting of the stem cuttings. Comparing
freshly-harvested coffee stem from 4 months-old coffee stem cutting, they were
compared in terms of cell wall thickness, arrangement, and continuity of the
sclerenchymatic band. Sclerenchyma cells are thick-walled and serve as protection and
support. Freshly-harvested Excelsa coffee stem from watersprout has narrow, clustered,
compact or compressed sclerenchymatic band and forms about 1-3 layers of cells that are
irregularly-arranged or positioned and forms a nearly-continuous layer. Four months-old
Excelsa coffee stem cutting has sclerenchymatic band that forms about 1-2 cell layers that
are discontinuously-arranged and show gaps. Some of the cells of the sclerenchymatic
band form in clusters and others are isolated.

The sclerenchymatic band of 4 months-old Excelsa coffee stem cuttings has
thicker cell wall as compared to the sclerenchymatic band of freshly-harvested Excelsa
coffee stem. In terms of freshly-harvested and 4 months-old Robusta coffee stem cuttings,

thicker sclerenchymatic band cell wall was also evident in 4 months-old Robusta coffee

96

stem cuttings. Furthermore, thicker vascular cambium was evident in 4 months-old
Excelsa coffee stem cutting which forms about 5-7 cell layers than in freshly-harvested
Excelsa coffee stem which was composed only of 3-5 layers of cell. Vascular cambium
thickness in freshly-harvested and 4 months-old Excelsa coffee stem cutting is different
with Robusta coffee stem cutting. Thicker vascular cambium was evident in freshly-
harvested Robusta coffee stem as compared to 4 months-old Robusta coffee stem cutting.
Vascular cambium thickness of the stem may be affected by the season. Formation of the
vessel elements also vary with season and time where numerous larger vessels were
found in spring wood than in summer wood part of the stem. It was noted that the coffee
watersprouts used for morpho-anatomical study were gathered in different months.
Watersprouts used in rooting were gathered during the month of March 2018 while
freshly-harvested coffee watersprouts were gathered during the month of July 2018.

No differences on xylem structure were observed in freshly-harvested and 4
months-old coffee stem cuttings however the two coffee species have two distinct xylem
structures. It was observed that thicker cell wall was visible in the vessels of the upper
part of the secondary xylem (near the vascular cambium) and some of the vessels have a
narrow diameter. On the other hand, the vessels of the lower part of the secondary xylem
(near the primary xylem and pith) have thinner cell wall but most of the vessels have a
wider diameter. For the comparison of the two coffee species, freshly-harvested Robusta
coffee stem has small sclerenchymatic band cells (in terms of diameter) with thicker cell
wall. Generally, the sclerenchymatic band consists of a single discontinuous layer of cells

which forms about 1-2 layers.

97

226.03 pm

422.35um
36.25um 90.88um

30.47 pm 116.80nm

418.03

Figure 34. A portion of a cross section of freshly-harvested Excelsa
(a) and Robusta (5) coffee stems from watersprouts. The
photographs were captured using Axioscope with
AxioCam ERcSs at 10x magnification. Legend: per
(periderm), crt (cortex), sb (sclerencymatic band), spi
(secondary phloem) ve (vascular cambium), sxy
(secondary xylem), pxy (primary xylem), pi (pith). Bar in
the photomicrographs indicates a measurement of 100

365.35 um

126.87

48.77

226.99 pm

Figure 35.

A portion of a cross section of 4 months-old Excelsa (a)
and Robusta (b) coffee stem cuttings. The photographs
were captured using Axioscope with AxioCam ERcSs at
10x magnification. Legend: / (lenticel), per (periderm),
crt (cortex), sb (sclerenchymatic band), sp! (secondary
phloem) ve (vascular cambium), sxy (secondary xylem),
pxy (primary xylem), pi (pith). Bar in the
photomicrographs indicates a measurement of 100 pm.

98

210.79 pm

189.36 pm 33.94 wm 100.74 ym

Figure 36.

Longitudinal section of freshly-harvested Excelsa coffee (a)
and Robusta coffee (6b) stem from watersprout. The
photographs were captured using Axioscope with AxioCam
ERc5s at 10x magnification. Legend: per (periderm), crt
(cortex), sb (sclerenchymatic band), sp/ (secondary phloem) pi
(phloem) vc (vascular cambium), xy (xylem), pi (pith). Bar in
the photomicrographs indicates a measurement of 100 ym.

99


100

Figure 37. Longitudinal section of 4 months-old Excelsa coffee stem
cutting. The photographs were captured using Axioscope with
AxioCam ERcSs at 10x magnification. Legend: per (periderm),
crt (cortex), pl (phloem), vc (vascular cambium), xy (xylem), pi
(pith). Bar in the photomicrographs indicates 100 pm
measurement.

Freshly-harvested Robusta coffee stem has distinct phloem rays as compared to
freshly-harvested Excelsa coffee stem. The phloem rays in the stem functions for
horizontal transport of photoassimilates. Freshly-harvested Excelsa coffee stem consists
of a nearly-continuous layer of sclerenchymatic band but not distinct as a single layer
which forms approximately 1-3 layers of cell. Meanwhile, 4 months-old Excelsa coffee
stem cutting has thicker sclerenchymatic band cells than 4 months-old Robusta coffee
stem cutting. A more distinct xylem ray formation (Fig. 38) and primary xylem formation
(Fig 35) was observed in the stem cuttings of the 4 months-old Robusta coffee. The said
event was not clearly visible in 4 months-old Excelsa coffee stem cuttings under mist.

Meanwhile, such events were observed in the coffee stem cuttings after 7 months.

The stem cuttings both rooted after 7 months and it was found that rooted Excelsa coffee

101

stem cuttings show active cell division of the parenchyma cells in the region of the

sclerenchymatic band in several parts of the stem while rooted Robusta coffee stem

cutting show formation of new single layer of thin cell-walled sclerenchymatic band (Fig.

39) in the secondary phloem tissues.

Figure 38. A _ portion of a

longitudinal section of a 4
months-old Robusta coffee
stem cutting. Blue arrow
shows the presence of
continuous layer of
sclerenchymatic band.
Photos were taken using
Axioscope with AxioCam
ERc5s at 10x
magnification. Legend:
per (periderm), co
(collenchyma_ cells), pc
(parenchyma cells) crt
(cortex), pl (phloem), vc
(vascular cambium), xy
(xylem), pxy (primary
xylem), sxy (secondary
xylem), vs (vessels),
(tracheids), ry (ray), pi
(pith). Bar in the
photomicrographs
indicates 100 pm
measurement.

Figure 39.

A part of a cross section of 7 months-old Excelsa (a) and
Robusta (6) coffee stem cutting. The stem cuttings have
already rooted after 7 months under mist. Both coffee species
show discontinuous layer of sclerenchymatic band Blue arrow
shows the active mitotic activity of the parenchyma cells
around the phloem fibers while the red arrow shows the
formation of new discontinuous thin  cell-walled
sclerenchymatic band in the secondary phloem. The
photographs were captured using Axioscope with AxioCam
ERcS5s at 10x magnification. Legend: per (periderm), crt
(cortex), sb (sclerenchymatic band), spl (secondary phloem) vc
(vascular cambium), sxy (secondary xylem), pxy (primary
xylem), pi (pith). Bar in the photomicrographs indicates a
measurement of 100 »m.

102


103

Adventitious Rooting in 7-month-old Coffee Stem Cuttings

Excelsa and Robusta coffee were observed until 7 months under mist and the stem
cuttings that produced adventitious root were used in microtechnique. The present study
tried to trace the initiation and origin of adventitious root in coffee stem cuttings and it
was found that the adventitious root initials arose from the secondary xylem-vascular
cambium region and protruded through the phloem and cortex tissues (Fig. 41). It makes
sense that the newly emerged adventitious root has a direct attachment in the secondary
xylem since it is the organ for water and nutrient absorption and hence xylem is the
vascular tissue for the acropetal movement of water and minerals.

The root formation process at the basal part of the stem cutting undergoes three
stages namely: initiation stage, root initials elongation stage, and root growth and
development stage (Hartmann et al., 2002). It was observed that first phase of root
development is the enlargement of the secondary phloem parenchymatous cells which is
believed to be an indication of the initial formation of the adventitious root primordium
in Robusta coffee (Fig. 40). The same observation was noted by Harbage et al., (1993)
where divisions in the phloem parenchyma cells resulted in meristematic regions leading
to root primordia. Formation of the root initial possibly starts through cell division of the
parenchyma cells in the phloem pushing the discontinuous layer of sclerenchymatic band
out of the cortex such with that observed in Robusta coffee (Fig. 40). The
photomicrographs showing the dedifferentiation of the parenchyma cells in Robusta

coffee supports the view of Sachs and co-workers (1964) that the expansion and

104

proliferation of cells in the cortex, phloem, and vascular cambium cause breakage of the
sclerenchymatic band in stem cuttings of several plant species. The same event was
observed by Reafio (1940) in Coffea robusta where the root primordia grew down inside
the fiber sheath and then emerged through the stem cutting basal end.

As the dedifferentiating phloem parenchyma cells push the sclerenchymatic band
through the cortex, the parenchyma cells in the secondary xylem-vascular cambium
region start to dedifferentiate. Possibly, the dedifferentiation of the xylem parenchyma
cells leads to the formation and elongation of root primordium in the secondary xylem.
As the cell elongates and proliferates, the newly-formed adventitious root protrudes
through the phloem going to the cortex and out of the periderm. At that time, the layer of
the sclerenchymatic band has already totally broken or ruptured and pushed out of the
cortex. Once root formation takes place, the root primordia penetrates the band
discontinuities and the fiber strands being displaced apart or pushed through as the roots
emerged through the cortex as been reported by Amissah and co-workers (2008).

The sclerenchymatic band broke as the phloem parenchyma cells grow in the first
phase of root development. Even with the rupture of the sclerenchymatic band, the
secondary phloem tissue remains intact during adventitious root protrusion (Fig. 41).
With the following observations, this study concludes that the adventitious root initial
was found to originate in the secondary xylem-vascular cambium region. With the present
study’s observation on the origin of root formation, Reafio (1940) had reported that the
site of origin of adventitious root in Robusta coffee was associated with phloem and

cambium while Santos Jesus and co-workers (2010) have reported that adventitious

rooting in Arabica coffee originated close to the vascular tissues.

Figure 40. Preformed adventitious root primordia in Robusta coffee
stem cutting. A portion of the cross section of a 4 months-old
Robusta coffee stem cutting started to initiate root initial.
The parenchyma cells have dedifferentiated and started to
form root initial. Blue circle shows the formation of root
initial. Legends: per (periderm), crt (cortex), sb
(sclerenchymatic band), sp/ (secondary phloem), xy (xylem),
ve (vascular cambium), pi (pith). Photos were taken using
Axioscope with AxioCam ERc5s at 10x magnification. Bar
in the photomicrographs indicates a measurement of 100
pm.

106

Figure 41a. The initiation and development of adventitious root primordia
in a stem cutting of Excelsa coffee. A portion of a cross section
of a rooted Excelsa coffee stem cutting after 7 months of
observation under mist. Above photo was taken using a light
microscope (Euromex) at 4x magnification while the photo
below was taken using Axioscope with AxioCam ERc5s at 10x
magnification. The lower photo is a portion of the upper photo
inside the red box. Legend: per (periderm), crt (cortex), sb
(sclerenchymatic band) ve (vascular cambium), sxy (secondary
xylem), pxy (primary xylem), pi (pith). Bar in the
photomicrographs indicates a measurement of 100 ym.

Figure 41b.

The protrusion of a developed adventitious root in a stem
cutting of Excelsa coffee. A portion of a cross section of a
rooted Excelsa coffee stem cutting after 7 months of
observation under mist. Above photo was taken using a light
microscope (Euromex) at 4x magnification while the photo
below was taken using Axioscope with AxioCam ERcS5s at 10x
magnification. The lower photo is a portion of the upper photo
inside the red box. Legend: per (periderm), crt (cortex), sb
(sclerenchymatic band) ve (vascular cambium), sxy (secondary
xylem), pxy (primary xylem), pi (pith). Bar in the
photomicrographs indicates a measurement of 100 ym.

107


Figure 42.

108

The formation of a new layer of sclerenchymatic band in 7
months-old Robusta coffee stem cutting. A portion of the cross
section of a Robusta coffee stem cutting after 7 months of
rooting observation under mist. Upper photo shows the
formation of another layer of thin cell-walled shlerenchymatic
band underneath the thick cell-walled discontinuous
shlerenchymatic band. The newly-formed band arose in the
secondary phloem near the vascular cambium. Lower photo
shows the formation of new layer of sclerenchymatic band. Blue
arrows show the newly-formed two layers of sclerenchymatic
band in the secondary phloem tissue. White arrow shows the
portion where the emerged adventitious root is located.
Legends: / (lenticel), per (periderm), crt (cortex), sb
(sclerenchymatic band), sp! (secondary phloem), xy (xylem), vc
(vascular cambium), pi (pith). Photos were taken using
Axioscope with AxioCam ERcSs at 10x magnification. Bar in
the photomicrographs indicates a measurement of 100 pm.

CHAPTER 5

DISCUSSION

The major hypothesis of the present study is that rooting can be initiated in stem
cuttings through combination effect of auxin oxidase inhibitors and auxin, and supplying
or conserving energy in the stems. This study used three phenolic compounds (trans-
ferulic acid, p-coumaric acid, 4-hydroxybenzoic acid), and dopamine (a neutral amide),
as auxin oxidase inhibitors, and paclobutrazol (a triazole fungicide and known growth
retardant) to prevent starch mobilization. Rooting Experiments 1 to 3 were conducted to
find the best treatment that could promote rooting in Excelsa coffee stem cuttings while
the exploratory experiment in Robusta coffee was conducted to observe the effect of the
different photosynthate-accumulating techniques in the rooting of the stem cuttings under
mist. Rooting Experiment 1 observed the rooting effect inside a high humidity plastic
chamber or ‘kulob’ while Experiments 2 was conducted to observe the rooting capability
of single-node orthotropic and three-node plagiotropic stem cuttings under mist, and
Experiment 3 employed the strategy of making incisions in the stem cutting’s basal part
to break a hypothesized physical barrier.

Unfortunately, a high mortality was observed in Excelsa coffee stem cuttings first
propagated under ‘kulob’. The leaves abscised and the whole stem turned brown, despite
a fungicide pretreatment, which was probably caused by fungal and bacterial infection.
With the unfavorable result on ‘kulob’ system of propagation, it was decided to propagate

the stem cuttings under mist.

110

After the ‘kulob’ experiment, a rooting experiment under mist was set-up where
the same treatments were employed except for the blanching and honey treatments
because the window of opportunity for their application was lost for the Excelsa variety.
Thus, an experiment on photosynthate-accumulation in easy-to-root Robusta coffee was
done because of lack in Excelsa coffee watersprouts as materials at that time.
Photosynthate-accumulating techniques such as girdling and paclobutrazol drenching in
the mother trees were conducted in which blanching became the basis for this
experiment. Blanching treatment was used in single-node orthotropic Excelsa coffee
propagated under ‘kulob’ and was found to have better survival in the early period (1-2
months) of rooting observation (data not shown).

The rooting effect of photosynthate-accumulating techniques on the easy-to-root
species of coffee (Robusta) was observed until 100 days under mist. It was noted that the
combined effect of auxin (Quick root) and girdling (removal of a ring of bark at the base
inserted in the sand) significantly reduced the survival rate, percentage rooting success,
percent callus formation, reduced the root length and root and callus intensity of the
Robusta coffee stem cuttings. An antagonistic effect was noted in the mentioned
treatment.

Of the photosynthate-accumulating techniques, sole treatment (without auxin
application) with girdling through tightening a metal wire around the stem and
paclobutrazol drenching in the mother trees promoted high rooting success in Robusta
coffee stem cuttings. Paclobutrazol drenching in mother trees one month before

harvesting the watersprouts for propagation promoted more, longer, and denser (high root

111

intensity) adventitious roots. The result is parallel to the findings of Stoltz and Hess
(1965) and Abutiate and Nakasone (1972). These authors have claimed the positive effect
of stem girdling on the rooting of Hibiscus (Stoltz and Hess, 1965) and Litchi (Abutiate
and Nakasone, 1972) stem cuttings. Imposing this photosynthate-accumulating technique
on shoots before using them as stem cuttings can improve rooting (Hartmann, et al.,
2002). Girdling through tightening the stem with metal wire reduced the downward flow
of photosynthates going to the other parts of the plant thus focusing the supply and
accumulation of food in the girdled stem and basal part of the stem cutting. Girdling
blocks the basipetal translocation of carbohydrates, hormones, and other possible root-
promoting factors (Hartmann, ef a/., 2002) which helps in carbohydrates and free amino
acid accumulation (Stoltz and Hess, 1966) thus observed enhanced rooting. Adventitious
rooting relies on an adequate supply of carbohydrates in the zone of root regeneration
(stem cutting basal end), where they promote root initiation and development (Beeckman,
2010). In other studies, girdling significantly increased the length and number of lateral
roots and improved the number, length and shoot diameter of pomegranate stem cuttings
(Yesiloglu et al., 1997).

The root promoting effect of paclobutrazol drenching in mother plants (sources of
the watersprouts or stem cuttings) was believed to be caused by the anti-gibberellin effect
of paclobutrazol on carbohydrate activity. Paclobutrazol is a member of the triazole
family that is found to inhibit the effect of gibberellin (Rademacher et al., 1984; Davis et
al., 1985; Upadhyaya et al., 1985; Upadhyaya et al., 1986). Gibberellic acid is normally

inhibitory to rooting (Davis and Sankhla, 1989). The drenching of paclobutrazol in the

coffee mother trees was believed to reduce or prevent the carbohydrate/starch breakdown
in the leaves of the whole plant and in watersprouts resulting starch accumulation as
observed by Protacio et al., (2009) in mango. Paclobutrazol was found to increase the
sink capacity of the base of the cuttings for hormones and/or carbohydrates (Davis ef
al.,1985; Weisman and Lavee, 1995). With these, paclobutrazol drenching in the mother
trees that are future sources of the stem cuttings (reported by the present experiment) and
with direct application of paclobutrazol in the stem cuttings (as reported by Leshem and
Lunenfeld, 1968; Kefford, 1973; Davis, et al.,1985; Upadhyaya et al., 1986; Steffens and
Wang, 1986; Marino, 1988; Protacio et al., 1992) promotes root initiation.

Meanwhile, in the experiment on the effect of different auxin-oxidase inhibitors
in the rooting of single-node orthotropic Excelsa coffee under mist, treatment with trans-
ferulic acid plus auxin promoted high survival rate after almost 3 months of observation
which became the basis for conducting the rooting experiment on the effect of the three-
node plagiotropic Excelsa coffee stem cutting. The use of plagiotropic rather than
orthotropic stems was done because of the lack of Excelsa coffee stem materials. The said
experiment was done because of the expectation that more nodes and leaves in the stem
cuttings results to more stored food/food reserves contained in the stem cuttings.
Moreover, it was also reported previously that two-node stem cuttings are recommended
for hard-to- root stem cuttings (FAO, n.d). After almost 4 months of rooting observation,
one stem cutting already rooted, indicating faster rooting than the single-node stem
cuttings. The experiment with three-node stem cutting promoted high monthly survival

because of less wounding (the tip of the stem cutting was intact). Furthermore, a higher

113

mortality rate was observed with wounding, which serves as the entry point for the
microorganisms. Thus, wounding was only restricted to the base as the tips were not cut.
This suggests that future efforts in rooting cuttings for Excelsa coffee must restrict the
wounding cuts to only the basal portion.

It took almost 5 months and 4 days for the first cutting to show root formation in
single-node orthotropic Excelsa coffee stem cuttings but the observation period was
extended for another months to determine if the other stem cuttings would form roots as
well. Based on the results of the rooting experiments, ferulic acid resulted to rooting and
high survival after 7 months of rooting observation. Ferulic acid appears as antimicrobial
and survival agents in Excelsa coffee stem cuttings. Ferulic acid has been found to have
antimicrobial activities in several species of pathogenic microorganisms such as B.
subtilis, C. herbarum, A. candidus (Kwon et al.,1997), P. aeruginosa, S. aureus, L.
monocytogenes (Borges et al., 2013), and E. coli (Kwon et al.,1997; Borges et al., 2013).

Results on the rooting experiments in Excelsa coffee consistently point out that
trans-ferulic acid treatment resulted to survival and rooting. Single-node orthotropic
Excelsa coffee stem cuttings treated with trans-ferulic acid at 250 4M concentration +
500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA observed after 7 months have recorded 45.83% survival
with 37.50% rooting success and produced an average of 1.27 adventitious roots per stem
cutting, which are 51.91 mm long-slightly fibrous adventitious roots. In three-node
plagiotropic Excelsa coffee stem cuttings, ferulic acid promoted better survival rate

(23.33% - 60%) and adventitious rooting was observed in a stem cutting treated with 500

114

uM trans-ferulic acid which recorded a 3.33% rooting success after 4 months of rooting
observation. The said cutting had produced a single root which measures 14.24 mm.

For the Experiment 3, basal incisions were made in single-node orthotropic
Excelsa coffee stem cuttings which are younger and rooting was observed until 6 months.
The stem cuttings were treated with varying levels of trans-ferulic acid, single or
combined with auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA). It was observed that more roots
arose from the incised part of the Excelsa coffee stem cuttings treated with 250 uM trans-
ferulic acid plus 500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA. The technique recorded 20% survival
and gave 13.33% rooting success and produced 3.25 roots per stem cutting.

Rooting success was attributed to the positive result on survivability of the stem
cuttings during the extended period of observation allowing rooting to occur in the stem
cuttings that survived during the observation period. In addition, better survivability is
also associated with the application of honey. The mortality rate in the Excelsa coffee
stem cuttings decreased with honey application thus making them survive longer until
rooting. During the rooting observation, the stem cuttings produced shoots/shootlets. The
newly emerged shoots in the stem cuttings were believed to have a role in prolonged
survival of the stem cuttings. Leaves from the newly emerged shoot and those that were
retained from the stem cuttings were assumed to be functioning in photosynthesis even if
the stem was already detached from the mother trees. Davis and Potter (1981) reported
that the accumulated amount of carbohydrates in the base of the cuttings was correlated
with photosynthetic activity. Carbohydrates can also accumulate in the upper portion of

leafy cuttings until rooting. The presence of leaves on the cuttings exerts a strong,

115

stimulating influence on rooting of easy-to-root avocado cuttings where after five weeks
of propagation, five times more starch in the base of the cutting was observed (Hartmann
and co-workers, 2002).

Meanwhile, Robusta coffee watersprouts already rooted in just 4 months while
rooting was observed in the Excelsa coffee after 7 months of observation. Survival of the
stem cuttings for several months may be attributed to the food reserves contained in the
parenchyma cells found in the cortex and phloem tissues. Prolonged survival of the coffee
stem cuttings in the propagation beds can also possibly be due to photosynthates
produced in the photosynthesizing parts of the stem cuttings such as the newly emerged
shoots (Fig.22) and retained old leaves. Moreover, the cuttings were regularly given foliar

sprays of NPK plus microelements.

Were the morpho-anatomical differences in the stems of hard-to-root as compared to the
easy-to-root coffee species?

Freshly-harvested coffee watersprouts and 4 months-old coffee stem cuttings from
the propagation beds were evaluated and compared based on the stem morpho-anatomy.
It was revealed in the photomicrographs that Excelsa coffee species has thicker stem
structures as compared to Robusta coffee species, however the vascular cambium of
freshly-harvested Robusta coffee watersprout is thicker than the other species.
Morphological investigation revealed that Excelsa coffee watersprout has a wider stem

diameter.

116

Anatomical findings include the differences in sclerenchymatic band formation of
the two coffee species. A discontinuous single-layer of sclerenchymatic band was
observed in the easy-to-root freshly-harvested Robusta coffee while a nearly-continuous
1-3 cell layer of sclerenchymatic band was observed in freshly-harvested Excelsa coffee
species (Fig.34). Sclerenchymatic band forms a fiber-like structure (Fig.36 and Fig.38)
and is believed to act for protection and support hence the narrow, clustered and compact
nearly-continuous layer of sclerenchymatic band can possibly hinder easy root protrusion
in hard-to-root Excelsa coffee species during the early period of propagation/rooting if
there is a presence of any root initial formed. However, no root initial was observed in the
4 months-old Excelsa coffee stem cuttings where the sclerenchymatic band has already
disintegrated or naturally broken. In Arabica coffee, the cells of sclerenchyma tissues
occurs in non-continuous bands around the vascular tissues (Santos Jesus ef al.,2010)
which is the same as in Robusta coffee. It is suspected that this anatomical feature makes
the Arabica and Robusta coffee species to be easy-to-root when propagated asexually.

The Excelsa coffee stem cuttings are able to root however it takes time for the
root to protrude. It was observed that the development of root initial was delayed in
Excelsa coffee (where no root initial was observed after 4 months) as compared to
Robusta coffee (rooted earlier than 4 months). Delayed root protrusion can be possibly
due to the late development of root initial in the stem cuttings or due to the physical
hindrances of the nearly-continuous layer of narrow, clustered and compact
sclerenchymatic band in the cortex prior to rooting (as observed in the freshly-harvested

stems) however this layer of sclerenchymatic band in Excelsa coffee breaks or forms

117

discontinuous arrangement when the stem cuttings has been in the rooting bins after six
months. Physical barriers that may be present in stem cuttings of woody stems which can
be in the form of phloem fibre caps, bands of fibres/sclereids, secretory canals and resin
canals (Lovell and White, 1986). Beakbane (1969) revealed that difficult-to-root apple
stem cuttings showed differentiation of primary phloem into fibers and sclereids in
different cultivars and the level of differentiation is correlated with the difficulty in
rooting. Several studies on difficult-to-root woody species suggest that poor adventitious
rooting ability of the cutting may be associated with the presence of pericyclic
sclerenchyma layer that serves as a physical or mechanical barrier in rooting of cuttings
(Ciampi and Gellini, 1958; Beakbane, 1961; Goodin, 1965; Edwards and Thomas, 1980).
Although the sclerenchymatic band may have acted as a barrier to root emergence
or could have prevented the necessary expansion and proliferation of parenchymatous
cells needed for root initials to form (Amissah et al., 2008), other possibilities for the
Excelsa coffee’s being hard-to-root may be the lack of root initiation sites or the failure of
parenchymatous cells to dedifferentiate into cells forming the root primordia (Davies and
Hartmann, 1988). Sachs and co-workers (1964) disclosed that in olive varieties, ease-of-
rooting appear to be related to the ease-of-formation of root initials rather than
mechanical restriction of sclerenchyma. According to them, hard-to-root varieties form
fewer and slower developing root initials as compared to easy-to-root types which relates
to the ability of the cell of the root initiating tissues to proliferate and organize root

primordia.

118

How to initiate better rooting of the hard-to-root Excelsa coffee species?

Based on the photomicrographs (Fig.34 and 35), easy-to-root Robusta coffee stem
has discontinuous layer of sclerenchymatic band prior to and during rooting. The
discontinuous layer of sclerenchymatic band allows the coffee species to root faster.
Hard-to-root freshly-harvested Excelsa coffee stem has nearly-continuous layer of large,
clustered, compact layer of sclerenchymatic band that possibly serves as a physical
intervention or barrier on the rooting of the coffee species. In difficult-to-root plant
species, a continuous sclerenchyma ring between the phloem and cortex occurs as the
stem gets older or mature. In easy-to-root species, the said ring is discontinuous or occurs
as fewer cell layers (Beakbane, 1969). The nearly-continuous layer of sclerenchymatic

band possibly delays or may hinder root protrusion because of the absence of wider gaps.

Making incisions in Breakage of the layer of More roots in the
the rooting zone of sclerenchymatic band Excelsa stem cuttings
the Excelsa coffee

stem cutting prior to

propagation

Figure 43. Basal incisions in hard-to-root Excelsa coffee stem cuttings
promote more roots

119

Excelsa coffee is capable of rooting however longer time of propagation is required to
initiate adventitious root formation. As the Excelsa coffee stem remains in the rooting
bins for six months, it was observed that there were gaps present in the continuous layer
of sclerenchymatic band (Fig.35) which looks the same as in the Robusta coffee stem.

The present study employed a technique of physical breakage of the
sclerenchymatic band prior to rooting (Fig.43). The basal part of the stem cutting that is
inserted in the sand was treated or made with basal incisions, making 4-5 diagonal cuts
around the stem. This was done to physically break the barrier in order to produce more
gaps. The said technique on basal incision cutting resulted to more roots in the stem
cuttings (Fig. 43). The technique also promoted rooting in Jlex aquifolium cuttings where
Edwards and Thomas (1980) surmised that rooting was aided by wounding which
disrupts the sclerenchymatic band.

However, the incisions may have only allowed roots already initiated to merely
emerge from confinement by the nearly-continuous layer of sclerenchymatic band during
propagation/rooting. But, it still took less than six months for the roots to emerge. What is
not clear is how early did root initiation occur or why did it still take a long time for the
roots to be visible. In the rooting of three-node plagiotropic Excelsa coffee stem cuttings,
at least one cutting rooted in 4 months, suggesting that rooting in Excelsa coffee can be

achieved within 4 months however more nodes are required.

CHAPTER 6

SUMMARY, CONCLUSION, AND RECOMMENDATION

Summary and Conclusion

Asexual propagation through stem or nodal cuttings can be done in coffee to
produce true-to-type plants. However, not all the coffee species can be propagated easily
through stem cuttings and Excelsa coffee are known to be hard to root. The present study
was done to promote rooting in Excelsa coffee and with the hypotheses on the
involvement of auxin synergists or phenolic compounds which serve as inhibitors of
auxin oxidase and the promoting effects of photosynthate-accumulating techniques in
rooting.

The study was conducted to determine the best rooting treatment that could
initiate or promote adventitious root formation in Excelsa coffee and to investigate the
morphological and anatomical differences between Excelsa and Robusta coffee species to
elucidate the reason why Excelsa coffee is hard to root. Rooting experiments on coffee
were done under mist for 7 months (single-node orthotropic stem cuttings without
incision cuts), 4 months (three-node plagiotropic stem cuttings), and 6 months (single-
node orthotropic stem cuttings with basal incisions). Moreover, an exploratory
experiment on the effect of the different photosynthate-accumulating techniques in the
rooting of Robusta coffee under mist was conducted and was observed until 100 days.

With the fact that the two coffee species have different rooting response (easy and hard-

121

to-root), the present study has also characterized and determined the morpho-anatomical
differences between Excelsa and Robusta coffee stems in order to investigate the reason
why Excelsa coffee is hard-to-root. The study confirms that the application of trans-
ferulic acid with or without auxin promoted survival and rooting of the Excelsa coffee
stem cuttings. Rooting in the Excelsa coffee stem cuttings can be associated to the
increased survival rate because of the known antimicrobial effects of ferulic acid. Single-
node orthotropic Excelsa coffee stem cuttings without basal incisions applied with 250
uM trans-ferulic acid plus auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA) promoted 37.50%
rooting success and produced 1.27 roots per stem cutting that are 51.91 mm long-slightly
fibrous adventitious roots after 7 months of rooting observation. Increased in monthly
survival rate was observed in three-node plagiotropic Excelsa coffee stem cuttings with
ferulic acid treatment however, only a single cutting has produced root (14.24 mm long,
single non-fibrous root) with the application of 500 uM trans-ferulic acid after 4 months
of rooting observation. Retaining more than one node in the Excelsa coffee stem cuttings
can promote better survival due to more food reserves present in the cuttings. FAO (n.d)
has recommended the use of two-node stem cuttings in hard-to-root species.

The same treatment (250 4M trans-ferulic acid plus 500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm
NAA) also promoted rooting (13.33%) in single-node orthotropic Excelsa coffee stem
cuttings with basal incisions which produced 3.25 roots per stem cutting that are 35.53
mm long-slightly fibrous adventitious roots. Furthermore, in terms of the rooting effect of
the photosynthate-accumulating techniques, single-node orthotropic Robusta coffee stem

cuttings taken from mother trees drenched with paclobutrazol one month before

122

watersprouts gathering and metal wire-girdled coffee stem cuttings without Quick root
auxin treatment promoted 76.67% and 80% rooting success, respectively. With
paclobutrazol drenching in the mother trees prior to stem cutting gathering, good quality
roots (more fibrous and longer adventitious roots) and more roots per cutting was evident.
On the other hand, Robusta coffee stem cuttings rooted (76.67% rooting success) even
without any treatment after 100 days of rooting observation under mist. The rooting effect
of paclobutrazol drencing in the mother trees prior to stem cutting harvesting and girdling
with metal wire in Robusta coffee stem cuttings can be attributed to the enhanced
photosynthate/starch accumulation in the stem cuttings. Better photosynthate
accumulation of the above mentioned techniques was due to inhibiting, blocking or
reducing the flow of photosynthates basipetally through the phloem (in girdling) and the
anti-gibberellin effect of paclobutrazol in starch accumulation as reported in some studies
(Rademacher et al., 1984; Davis et al., 1985; Upadhyaya et al., 1985; Upadhyaya et al.,
1986, Protacio et al., 2009).

Callus growth and proliferation was also observed in the stem cutting basal end
during the rooting observation. Excelsa coffee stem cuttings treated with ferulic acid and
auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA) recorded 66.67% to 100% callus formation with
less than 50% to 100% callus proliferation. With the presence of callus in the stem cutting
basal end, the rooting zone diameter increased and gained about 0.28 mm to 2.18 mm
growth increment. Before the roots have emerged in the stem cuttings, shoots have been
emerged in the node of the stem cuttings. The shoots were in the form of shoot buds or

shootlets with light green to dark green leaves.

123

Meanwhile, morphological investigations revealed that Excelsa coffee
watersprout has a wider stem diameter than the Robusta coffee. Anatomical examinations
revealed that Excelsa coffee stem cutting has thicker stem stuructures than the Robusta
coffee except for the vascular cambium where it is thicker in freshly-harvested Robusta
coffee. As been observed in the photomicrographs, a difference on the sclerenchymatic
band formation prior and during rooting was evident in the two coffee species. In freshly-
harvested Excelsa coffee, the cells of the sclerenchymatic band are larger, narrow, more
compact, clustered, and the band forms a nearly-continuous layer. Freshly-harvested
Robusta coffee stem has small thick-walled sclerenchymatic band that forms a single
discontinuous layer. As the Excelsa coffee stem remains in the rooting bins for six
months, it was observed that more gaps were present in the layer of sclerenchymatic band
(Fig.35) which looks the same as in the Robusta coffee stem.

Adventitious rooting in coffee stems was found to originate in the secondary
xylem-vascular cambium region where root initial development was believed to occur
due to the dedifferentitation of the parenchyma cells. The dedifferentiated parenchyma
cells push the layer of sclerenchymatic band away passing through the cortex. Faster root
protrusion can be achieved with a discontinuous layer of sclerenchymatic band. The
clustered and compact nearly-continuous layer of sclerenchymatic band may possibly act
as a physical barrier in the protrusion of the root initial. With the differences on the
formation and arrangement of the sclerenchymatic band, Excelsa coffee is hard-to-root
may be due to the nearly-continuous layer of the sclerenchymatic band. After 7 months of

rooting observation, rooted Excelsa coffee stem cutting show active cell growth in the

phloem region in several parts of the stem while rooted Robusta coffee stem cutting
shows formation of new layer of sclerenchymatic band in the secondary phloem. The
sclerenchymatic band if continuous, may act as a physical barrier when the root protrude.
Considering the presence of a layer of sclerenchymatic band as possible rooting barrier,
the ease-of-rooting in coffee species is also considered. Rooting is believed to be the
dedifferentiation of parenchyma cells and the site of root initiation in Excelsa coffee was
observed in the secondary xylem-vascular cambium region. An experiment on incisions
in the rooting zone of Excelsa coffee stem cutting was done to somehow physically break
the layer of sclerenchymatic band in order to produce more gaps prior to rooting.
Breaking the nearly-continuous layer of sclerenchymatic band may facilitate weakening
of the band making the root to protrude easier. The said technique has resulted to more
roots in the Excelsa coffee stem cuttings.

To conclude, it is possible to propagate Excelsa by stem cuttings. The cuttings are
hard to root possibly because of the presence of a clustered and compact nearly-
continuous band of sclerenchyma cells three layers thick which physically prevents the
protrusion of any root initials or due to delayed development of root initials. This
physical barrier will naturally breakdown, forming more wider gaps through which root
initials can pass through in 6 months. Rooting may be hastened by 2 months if this
physical barrier is broken by making incisions at the stem bases at the time of insertion in
the rooting beds. Incisions at the rooting zone of Excelsa coffee stem cuttings would
result to more roots with the application of ferulic acid plus auxin.

Application of 250 4M trans-ferulic acid plus auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm

125

NAA) could promote survival and rooting in hard-to-root Excelsa coffee stem
cuttings after 4-7 months under mist. Auxin oxidase antagonists such as ferulic acid do
not appear to aid in root initiation, instead the addition of ferulic acid aided in survival of
the stem cuttings allowing them to root. This suggests a crop protection function for this
compound. Moreover, the positive rooting effect of photosynthate-accumulating
techniques such as girdling the stem with a metal wire and paclobutrazol drenching in
mother plants one month prior to watersprout harvesting without auxin application might

work in Excelsa coffee.

Recommendations

The procedure will start by treating the source mother trees with paclobutrazol or
girdling one month before harvesting the stem cuttings. Photosynthate-accumulating
techniques such as girdling and paclobutrazol drenching alone without the application of
auxin should be tried in propagating Excelsa coffee stem cuttings since these techniques
promoted and improved rooting in easy-to-root Robusta coffee. The application of honey
(through quick dip in the stem basal end and spreading in the leaves) in the stem cuttings
can promote better survival since it contains sucrose that serves as food for the cuttings
and has antibacterial properties that could prevent the incidence of pathogenic infection
during rooting. Three-node stem cuttings should be prepared without removing the tips to
minimize wounds that are entry points for microorganisms. It could be possible not to
trim the leaves to reduce wounding stress and the uncut leaves may also serve as source

of more food reserves during rooting and would synthesize endogenous auxin.

126

Incisions (the basal end of the stem should be cut) and dipping in 250 uM ferulic
acid and auxin mixture (Quick Root or 500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA) before rooting in
the propagation beds under mist is recommended. Incisions in the rooting zone of the
stem cutting has found to increase the root number in Excelsa coffee stems. The said
technique would break the nearly-continuous layer of sclerenchymatic band that possibly
serve as a physical barrier in root protrusion. However, a restriction on cutting the rooting
zone must be considered. Too deep incisions would lead to wounding stress. For about
370 wm (0.37 mm) to 430 wm (0.43 mm) deep cuts in the bark must be carefully done

since it is the distance that would target the sclerenchymatic band in Excelsa coffee.

LITERATURE CITED

ABUTIATE, W.S., and NAKASONE., N.Y. 1972. Studies on vegetative propagation of
the lychee (Litchi chinensis Sonn.) with special references to graftage. Ghana
Journal of Agricultural Science 5: 201-211.

AKAKPO D.B., AMISSAH, N., YEBOAH, J. and BLAY, E. 2014. Effect of indole-3-
butyric acid and media type on adventitious root formation in sheanut tree stem
cuttings. American Journal of Plant Sciences, 5: 313-318.

ALVAREZ-SUAREZ, J.M., GASPARRINI, M., FORBES-HERNANDEZ, _T.Y.,
MAZZONI, L. and GIAMPIERI, F. 2014. The composition & biological activity of
honey: A focus on manuka honey. Foods, 3: 420-432.

AMISSAH, J.N., PAOLILLO JR., D.J. and BASSUK, N. 2008. Adventitious root
formation in stem cuttings of Quercus bicolor and Quercus macrocarpa and its
relationship to stem anatomy. J. Amer. Soc. Hort. Sci. 133(4): 479-486.

ARTECA, R.N. 1996. Plant Growth Substances: Principles & Applications. New York:
Chapman & Hall.

ASLMOSHTAGHI, E. and REZA-SHAHSAVAR, A. 2010. Endogenous soluble sugars,
starch contents and phenolic compounds in easy-and difficult-to-root olive
cuttings. J. Biol. Environ. Sci 4(11): 83-86.

BALLESTER A., SAN JOSE, M.C., VIDAL, N., FERNANDEZ-LORENZO, J.L. and
VICITEZ, A.M. 1999. Anatomical and biochemical events during in vitro rooting
of microcuttings from juvenile and mature phases of chesnut. Annals Bot. 83: 619-
29.

BAREFOOT COFFEE ROASTERS. 2017. Ranking Coffee Types by Caffeine Content.
Accessed at http://barefootcoffeeroasters.com/coffee-types-by-caffeine-content/

BASSUK N. and MAYNARD, B. 1987. Stock plant etiolation. Hort Science 22: 749-750.

BEAKBANE, A.B. 1961. Structure of the plant stem in relation to adventitious rooting.
Nature, London 192: 954-955.

BEAKBANE, A.B. 1969. Relationships between structure and adventitious rooting.
Comb. Proc. Intl. Plant Prop. Soc. 19: 192-201.

BEECKMAN, T. 2010. Annual Plant Reviews Vol.37 Root Development. Blackwell

128

Publishing Ltd: John Wiley & Sons Ltd., The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester,
West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, United Kingdom. p.133.

BEYL, C.A. and SHARMA, G.C. 2016. Plant Physiology Concepts Important for
Propagation Success: Plant Propagation Concepts and Laboratory Exercises, 2"
Edition, CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group. pp.520.

BISWAS, S. and ROY, B. N. 1983. Introduction of rooting in air-layers of waterapple by
auxin and non-auxin chemicals. Punjab Horticultural Journal, 23 (3/4): 209-211.

BORGES, A., SAAVEDRA, M.J. and SIMOES, M. 2012. The activity of ferulic and
gallic acids in biofilm prevention and control of pathogenic bacteria. Biofouling:
The Journal of Bioadhesion and Biofilm Research, 28(7): 755-767.

BORGES, A., FERREIRA, C., SAAVEDRA, M.J. and SIMOES, M. 2013. Antibacterial
activity and mode of action of ferulic and gallic acids against pathogenic bacteria.
Microbial Drug Resistance 19(4): 256-265.

BOSE, T. K., ROY, B.N., and BASU, R.N. 1972. Synergism between auxins and
phenolic compounds in the rooting of cuttings. Indian Agric,16: 171-6.

BOSE, T.K. and MANDAL, D.P. 1972. Mist propagation of tropical plants. Indian
Horticulture 17: 25-26.

BOSE, T.K., BASU, S. and BASU, R.N. 1973. Changes in rooting factors during the
regeneration of roots on cuttings of easy- and difficult-to-root cultivars of
Bougainvillea and Hibiscus. University College of Agriculture, Calcutta
University,Calcutta-19. Available at
https://www.samviti.com/img/1341/society/publication/ijpp-160-1-019.pdf

BOUZA, L., JACQUES, M., SOTTA, B. and MIGINIAC, E. 1994. Relations between
auxin and cytokinin contents and in vitro rooting of tree Peony (Paeonia
suffruticosa Andr.). J. Plant Growth Regul. 15: 69-73.

BUREAU OF PLANT INDUSTRY-DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE. 2017.
Philippine Coffee Industry Roadmap 2017-2022. Available at www.bpi.da.gov.ph

CAMPOS O.V. 2014. Traders eye exports of specialty coffee beans to Japan and Korea.
Accessed at www.manilastandard.net/mobile/article/139058

CIAMPI C. and GELLINI, R. 1958. Anatomical study of the relationship between
structure and rooting capacity in olive cuttings. Nuovo Giornale Botanico Italiano
65: 417-424.

CLIFFORD, M.N. and WILLSON, K. C. 1985. Coffee, botany, biochemistry and

129

production of beans & beverage. London, Croom Helm.

COFFEE DIVISION OF ED&F MAN. 2014. Insight Special: Asia Coffee Trade Flows.
Accessed at www.volcafespecialty.com

DAGOON, J.D. 2000. Farm Crop Production and Agro-Forestry. 1" Edition. Rex Book
Store, Inc. 856. Nicanor Reyes, Sr. St., Sampaloc, Manila, Philippines. p.150.

DA-HVCDP. 2013. Coffee. Accessed at www. hvcc.da.gov.ph/coffee.htm

DA-RFU10. 2013. Coffee Production Guide. Department of Agriculture Regional Field
Unit No. 10, A. Luna St., Cagayan de Oro City, Philippines. Available at
www.cagayandeoro.da.gov.ph

DA-HVCDP. 2015. Towards a Roadmap/ Masterplan for the Philippine Coffee Industry
Powerpoint Presentation (PPT). HVCDP, DA-RFO-CAR, Philippines. Available at
www.industry.gov.ph

DAVIES, F.T., Jr. and HARTMANN, H.T. 1988. The physiological basis of adventitious
root formation. Acta Hort. 227: 113-120.

DAVIES, P. J. 1995. Plant Hormones. Physiology, biochemistry and molecular biology.
Kluwer Publishers, Dordrecht, Netherlands.

DAVIS, T.D., and POTTER, J.R. 1981. Current photosynthate as a limiting factor in
adventitious root formation in leafy pea cuttings. J. Amer. Soc. Hort. Sci. 106: 278-
282.

DAVIS T.D., SANKHLA, N., WALSER, R. and UPADHYAYA, A. 1985. Promotion of
adventitious root formation on cuttings by paclobutrazol . HortScience 20(5): 883-
884,

DE KLERK, G.J., DER KRIEKEN, W. V. and DE JONG, J. C. 1999. Review: The
formation of adventitious roots: new concepts, new possibilities. In Vitro Cell. Dev.
Biol. Plant 35: 189-199.

DE KLERK, G.J., GUAN, H., HUISMAN, P. and MARINOVA, S. 2011. Effects of
phenolic compounds on adventitious root formation and oxidative decarboxylation
of applied indole acetic acid in Malus ‘Jork 9’. Plant Growth Regul. 63: 175-185.

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE. 2009. Minimum plant material certification
guidelines for coffee (Coffea sp.) (pdf). Available at
www.nseedcouncil.bpinsicpvpo.com.ph

130

DHUA, R.S. and SEN, S.K. 1982. Root regeneration in litchi (Litchi chinensis Sonn.)
stem cuttings with auxin and auxin synergists under intermittent mist. South Indian
Hort. 30: 188-191.

EDWARDS R.A, and THOMAS, M.B. 1980. Observations on physical barrier to root
formation in cuttings. The Plant Propagator. 26: 6-8.

ENGRANO. n.d. Coffee plants. Accessed at www.engrano.nl/shop/info/coffee-plants

ERDIANSYAH, N.P., ROKHANI, I.P. and WALUYO, S. 2016. Cutting wood origin &
indole butyric acid influence success of Liberica coffee cuttings (Coffea liberica
W. Bull Ex. Hier). Pelita Perkebunan 32(3): 193-198.

FADL, M.S., EL-DEEN, A.S. and EL-MAHADY, M.A. 1979. Physiological and
chemical factors controlling adventitious root initiation in carob (Ceratonia
siliqua) stem cuttings. Egyptian Journal of Horticulture 6(1): 55-68.

FAO-ECOCROP. 2007. Coffea excelsa. Accessed at www.ecocrop.fao.org

FAO. n.d. Coffee. Accessed at www.fao.org/docrep/006/AD219E/AD219E06.htm

FAO. n.d. Rooting cuttings of tropical trees. Accessed at www. fao.org

GENEVE, R.L. 1991. Patterns of adventitious root formation in English Ivy. J. Plant
Growth Regul. 10: 215-220.

GLOBAL SUPPLIERS ONLINE. 2017. Exporters of Coffee Beans from Philippines.
Accessed at www.globalsuppliersonline.com/Philippines/Coffee%20Beans

GOODIN, J.J. 1965. Anatomical changes associated with juvenile to mature growth
phase transition in Hedera. Nature, London, 208: 504-505.

HARBAGE, J.F., STIMART, D.P. and EVERT, R.F. 1993. Anatomy of adventitious root
formation in microcuttings of Malus domestica Borkh.‘Gala’. J. Amer. Soc. Hort.
Sci. 118(5): 680-688.

HARRISON-MURRAY, R.S. 1981. Etiolation of stock plants for improved rooting of
cuttings: I. Opportunities suggested by work with apple. Proc. Intl. Plant Prop. Soc.
31: 386-392.

HARTMANN, H.T., KESTER, D.E. and DAVIES JR., F.T. 1990. Plant propagation
principles and practices. 5 Edition, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.

HARTMANN, H. T., KESTER, D.E., DAVIS JR., F.T. and GENEVE, R.L. 2002. Plant

131

Propagation: Principles and Practices,7 Edition, Pearson Educational Inc. Prentice
Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.

HICKS, G.S. 1987. Adventitious rooting of apple microcuttings in vitro: An anatomical
study. Can. J. Bot. 65: 1913-1920.

IBIRONKE, O.A., and VICTOR, O.O. 2016. Effect of media and growth hormones on
the rooting of the Queen of Philippines (Mussaenda phillipica). Journal of
Horticulture 3: 173.

JAMES, D. J. and THURBON, I. J. 1981. Shoot and root initiation in vitro in the apple
rootstock M9 and the promotive effects of phloroglucinol. J. Hort. Sci. 56: 15—20.

JARVIS, B.C. 1986. Endogenous control of adventitious rooting in non-woody species.
In M.B. Jackson, ed. New root formation in plants and cuttings. Dordrecht:
Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.

JARVIS, B. C. and SHAHEED, A. I. 1986. Adventitious root formation in relation to the
uptake and distribution of supplied auxin. New Phytologist 103: 23-31.

JEONG, Y. G., JAE, H. M., and KEUN, H. P. 2000. Isolation and identification of 3-
methoxy-4-hydroxybenzoic acid and 3-methoxy-4 hydroxycinnamic acid from hot
water extracts of Hovenia dulcis Thumb and confirmation of their antioxidant and
antimicrobial activity. Korean J. Food Sci. Technol., 32: 1403-1408.

JURGEN POHLAN, H.A., and JANSSENS, M.J.J. 2015. Growth and Production of
Coffee. Soils, Plant Growth, and Crop Production, Vol.II] cEncyclopedia of Life
Support Systems (EOLSS) pp.132. Available at https://www.eolss.net/Sample-
Chapters/C 10/E1-05A-32-00.pdf

KALAVARA.COM. 2019. Excelsa coffee. Accessed at
https://www.kalavara.com/products/excelsa-coffee?variant=2 1251138884

KAPE UMALI. 2012. Our Coffee beans. Accessed at
www.kapeumali.weebly.com/coffee-beans.html

KAU AGRI-INFOTECH. 2013. Coffea arabica Crop Management. Centre for E

Learning, Kerala Agricultural University. Accessed at
www.celkau.in/Crops/Plantation”%20Crops/Coffee/varieties_planting_materials.asp
Xx

KEFELI, V.I., and KUTACEK, M. 1977. Phenolic substances and their possible role in
plant growth regulation. P.E. Pilet (ed). c.Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.

132

KEFFORD, N. P. 1973. Effect of a hormone antagonist on the rooting of shoot cuttings.
Plant Physiology 51: 214-16.

KRAJNC, A.U., TURINEK, M. and IVANCIC, A. 2013. Morphological and
physiological changes during adventitious root formation as affected by auxin
metabolism: stimulatory effect of auxin containing seaweed extract treatment.
Agricultura 10:1-2: 17-27.

KRYLOV, S.N., AGUDA, B.D. and LIUBIMOVA, M. L. 1995. Bistability and reaction
thresholds in the phenol-inhibited peroxidase-catalyzed oxidation of indole-3-acetic
acid. Biophys. Chem. 53: 213-218.

KWON, Y.S., KOBAYASHI, A., KAJIYAMA, S.I., KAWAZU, K., KANZAKI, H. and
KIM, C.M. 1997. Antimicrobial constituents of Angelica dahurica roots.
Phytochemistry, 44(5): 887-889.

LEE T.T., STARRAT, A.N. and JEVNIKAR, J.J. 1982. Regulation of enzymatic
oxidation of indole-3-acetic acid by phenols: structure- activity relationships.
Phytochemistry 21: 517-523.

LEN’S COFFEE. 2017. Coffee Species: Beyond Arabica. Accessed at
www.lenscoffee.com/coffee-species-beyond-arabica/

LESHAM, Y. and LUNENFELD, B. 1968. Gonadotropin promotion of adventitious root
production on cuttings of Begonia semperflorens and Vitis vinifera. Plant
Physiology 43: 313-17.

LOKKER, B. 2014. Introduction to the coffee plant. Accessed at
www.coffeecrossroads.com

LOVELL P.H. and WHITE, J. 1986. Anatomical changes during adventitious root
formation. M.B. Jackson (ed), New Root Formation in Plants and Cuttings.
Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, Dordrecht, Netherlands. pp. 111-139.

MARINO, G. 1988. The effect of paclobutrazol on in vitro rooting, transplant
establishment and growth of fruit plants. Plant Growth Regulation 7: 237-247.

MCMAHON, M.J., KOFRANEK, A.M. and RUBATZKY, V.E. 2011. Plant Science:
Growth, Development, and Utilization of Cultivated Plants, 5‘ Edition. Pearson
Education Inc. Prentice Hall, One Lake St., Upper Saddle River, NJ 07458. pp.
507-509.

MENENDEZ-YUFFA, A., and DE GARCIA, E.G. 1996. Coffea Species (Coffee).
Biotechnology in Agriculture and Forestry, Vol.35. Trees IV. C Springer-Verlag

133

Berlin Heidelberg.

MIXPH-ENTREPINOYS. 2013. How to grow coffee. Accessed at
www.mixph.com/how-to-grow-coffee/

MUELLER, W.C., and BECKMAN, C.H. 1974. Ultrastructure of the phenol-storing cells
in the roots of banana. Physiologia Plant Pathology 4: 187-190.

MUNOZ-SANCHEZ, J.A., and HERNANDEZ-SOTOMAYOR, S.M.T. 2008.
Biotechnology in coffee research. The Americas Journal of Plant Science and
Biotechnology, 2(2): 85-95.

NAMUCO, L.O., and PROTACIO, C.M. 2010. Fruit and plantation crop production in
the Philippines. The University of the Philippines Press, Quezon City, Philippines.

OU, S. and KWOK, K.C. 2004. Ferulic acid: pharmaceutical functions, preparation and
applications in foods. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 84: 1261—
1269.

PABLO, M.P. 2016. Coffee Industry Roadmap Loacalization. Available at www.
industry.gov.ph/roadmap-localization-region-i/coffee-industry-roadmap-by-
regional-director-myrna-pablo-dit-car/

PATAY, E.B., BENCSIK, T. and PAPP, N. 2016. Phytochemical overview and medicinal
importance of Coffea species from the past until now. Asian Pacific Journal of
Tropical Medicine. 9(12): 1127-1135.

PATAY, E.B., SALI, N., KOSZEGI, T., CSEPREGI, R., BALAZS, V.L., NEMETH, T.S.,
NEMETH, T. and PAPP, N. 2016. Antioxidant potential, tannin, and polyphenol
contents of seed and pericarp of three Coffea species. Asian Pacific Journal of
Tropical Medicine. 9(4): 366-371.

PARRENO, R. L. 2003. Rooting of Excelsa coffee cuttings using different growth
substances. [B.S. Thesis], College, Laguna, Philippines: University of the
Philippines Los Bajfios (Available at the UPLB Library)

PIJUT, P.M., WOESTE, K.E. and MICHLER, C.H. 2011. Promotion of Adventitious root
formation of difficult-to-root hardwood tree species. Horticultural Reviews, Volume
38, Wiley-Blackwell.

PINOYBISNES.COM. 2009. Coffee Farming and Cultivation. Accessed at
www.pinoybisnes.com/agri-business/coffee-farming-and-cultivation

134

PHILIPPINE COFFEE BOARD. no date. Our coffee heritage: Coffee’s rich history in the
Philippines. Accessed at www.philcoffeeboard.com

PHILIPPINE STATISTICS AUTHORITY. 2015. Foreign Trade Statistics of the
Philippines 2015. Volume I-Imports. pp. 122-123. Available at https://psa.gov.ph

PHILIPPINE STATISTICS AUTHORITY. 2016. Major Non-Food and Industrial Crops
Quarterly Bulletin. Volume 10 No.1. Quezon City, Philippines. Available at
https://psa.gov.ph

PHILIPPINE STATISTICS AUTHORITY. 2017. Major Non-Food and Industrial Crops
Quarterly Bulletin, January-March 2017. Available at www.psa.gov.ph

PHILIPPINE STATISTICS AUTHORITY. 2018a. Selected Statistics on Agriculture 2018.
Available at https://psa.gov.ph

PHILIPPINE STATISTICS AUTHORITY. 2018b. Agricultural Exports and Imports
Report No.2018-4. Available at https://psa.gov.ph

PNS-BAFPS. 2012. Green Coffee Beans-Specifications. Philippine National Standard-
Bureau of Agriculture and Fisheries Product Standards 01:2012. BPI Compound
Visayas Ave., Diliman, Quezon City, Philippines.

POLITUD, E.R.R., and AVAKO, B. 2016. Performance of coffee (Coffea canephora)
shoot cuttings in response to levels of naphthalene acetic acid under clonal chamber
condition. International Journal of Scientific & Research Publications. 6(5): 58-61.

PRASAD, S., and KUMAR, U. 2010. A Handbook of Fruit Production. Agrobios (India),
Agro House, Babloo Offset, Jodhpur.

PROJECT SARAI-DOST-PCAARRD. 2017. Coffee-Industry. Accessed at
www.sarai@uplb.edu.ph

PROTACIO, C.M., and R.R. ZARA. 2011. Successful rooting in single-node plagiotropic
cacao stem cuttings. Philippine Journal of Crop Science 36S:98.

PROTACIO, C.M., QUINTO, J.E., SERRANO, E.P. and MARQUEZ, I.P. 2009.
Unravelling the mechanism of mango flowering. Acta Hort., 820: 259-270.

PROTACIO, C.M., OBMERGA, L.R. and SIAR, S.V. 1999. Propagation of Mussaenda
by stem cuttings. The Philippine Agricultural Scientist. 82(3): 251-259.

PROTACIO, C.M., and FLORES, H.E. 1995. Dopamine and the inhibition of indole-3-
acetic acid oxidase in tobacco thin cell layers. Asia Life Sciences 4(2): 137-145.

135

PROTACIO, C.M., DAI, Y., LEWIS, E.F. and Flores, H.E. 1992. Growth stimulation by
Catecholamines in plant tissue/ organ cultures. Plant Physiol. 98: 89-96.

PUBCHEM. nd. Chemical Structure of Paclobutrazol. Accessed at
https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov

PURUSHOT, K., and VISHVESHWARA, S. 1980. Propagating coffee by cuttings: a
preliminary report. Indian Coffee, 44(4): 55-56.

RADEMACHER, W., JUNG, J., GRAEBE, J.E. and SCHWENEN, L. 1984. On the
mode of action of tetcyclasis and triazole growth retardants. Br. Plant Growth
Regul. Group Monogr., 11: 1-11.

RAJAN, S. and MARKOSE, B.L. 2007. Propagation of Horticultural Crops: Horticulture
Science Series Vol.6. New India Publishing Agency, Pitam Pura, New Delhi. p.83.

RAMOS, J.P. 2015. Rooting of liberica and excelsa cuttings in different plant growth
regulators and commercial organic rooting mix. [B.S. Thesis], College, Laguna,
Philippines: University of the Philippines Los Bafios (Available at the UPLB
Library)

REANO, P.C. 1940. Histological study and observations on the effect of some synthetic
growth substances on stem tip cuttings of coffee. Philippine Agriculturist, 29: 87-99.

REDDY, M., and RAO, A. 2010. Plant Propagation in Horticulture. Pacific Books
International, 179, Kalyan Vihar, Ground Floor, Delhi. pp.65-89.

REUVENI, O., and RAVIV, M. 1981. Importance of leaf retention to rooting of avocado
cuttings. American Society of Horticultural Science 106: 127-130.

REY, M., DIAZ-SALA, C. and RODRIGUEZ, R. 1994. Exogenous polyamines improve
rooting of hazel microshoots. Plant Cell Tissue Org. Cult. 36: 303-308.

REZENDE, T.T., BALIZA, D.P., DE OLIVIERA, D.H., DE CARVALHO, S.P., AVILA,
F.W., DOS PASSOS, A.M.A. and GUIMARAES, R.J. 2010. Types of stem cuttings
and environments on the growth of coffee stem shoots. Scientia Agraria, Curitiba,
11(5); 387-391.

RIVERAPAULINE. n.d. Coffee-Copy. Accessed at https://riverapauline.wordpress.com
RUTHERFORD, M.A., BIEYSSE, D., LEPOINT, P. and MARAITE, H.M.M. 2009.

Biology, Taxonomy, and Epidemiology of the Coffee Wilt Pathogen Gibberella
xylarioides sensu lato. Flood J. (ed.) Coffee Wilt Disease. CABI International.

136

SACHS, R.M., LORETI, F. and DE BIE, J. 1964. Plant rooting studies indicate
sclerenchyma a restricting factor. California Agriculture,18: 4-5.

SADHU, M.K., SANGHAMITRA, B. and SAHA, L. 1978. Auxin synergists in the the
rooting of mango cuttings. Scientia Horticulturae, 9: 381-387.

SANTOS JESUS, A.M., DE CARVALHO, S.P., DE CASTRO, E.M. and GOMES, C.N.
2010. Anatomical observations in rooted cuttings of Coffea arabica L. Rev. Ceres,
Vigosa, 57(2): 175-180.

SARAI. 2017. Coffee Industry Profile. Accessed at www.sarai.ph/icm-coffee-industry

SESE, M.D., MANILA-FAJARDO, A.C., FAJARDO JR, A.C. and CERVANCIA, C.R.
2011. Physico-chemical properties of Philippine honey and their implication in the
establishment and standard for tropical honeys. Journal of Apiculture 26(1): 45-48.

SIGMA ALDRICH. n.d. Chemical Structure of trans-ferulic acid, p-coumaric acid, 4-
hydroxybenzoic acid, and dopamine hydrochloride. Accessed at
https://www.sigmaaldrich.com

SMITH, M.R., MCCAUGHEY, W.F. and KEMMERER, A.R. 1969. Biological effects of
honey. Journal of Apicultural Research, 8(2): 99-110.

STEFANCIC, M., STAMPAR, F., VEBERIC, R. and OSTERC, G. 2007. The levels of
IAA, IAAsp and some phenolics in cherry rootstock ‘G1SelAS’ leafy cuttings
pretreated with IAA and IBA. Scientia Horticulturae 112: 399-405.

STEFFENS, G. L. and WANG, S. Y. 1986. Biochemical and physiological alterations in
apple trees caused by a giberellin biosynthesis inhibitor, paclobutrazol. Acta
Horticulturae 179: 433-442.

TAIZ, L., and ZEIGER, E. 2002. Plant Physiology. 3" Edition. Sunderland: Sinauer

THE PHILIPPINE STAR. 2010. Rooting Hormones. Accessed at
www.philstar.com/gardening/608448/rooting-hormones

UPADHYAYA, A., DAVIS, T.D., SANKHLA, D., SANKHLA, N. and SMITH, B.N.
1985. Effect of paclobutrazol on the activities of proteolytic enzymes and RNase in
soybean leaves during senescence. Comparative Physiology and Ecology 10: 49-54.

UPADHYAYA, A., DAVIS, T. D. and SANKHLA, N. 1986. Some biochemical changes
associated with paclobutrazol-induced adventitious root formation on bean
hypocotyl cuttings. Annals of Botany 57: 309-315.

VOLPERT, R., OSSWALD, W. and ELSTNER, E.F. 1995. Effects of cinnamic acid

137

derivates on indole acetic acid oxidation by peroxidase. Phytochemistry 38: 19-22.

WELLMAN, F.L. 1961. Coffee: Botany, Cultivation, and Utilization. London Leonard
Hill (Books) Limited, 9 Eden St. N.W: New York InterScience Publisher Inc. 250
Fifth Avenue , New York.

WHITE JR., J.W., and DONER, L.W. 1980. Honey composition and properties.
Beekeeping in the United States Agriculture Handbook Number 335. October
1980. pp.82-91

WIESMAN, Z. and LAVEE, S. 1995. Enhancement of IBA stimulatory effect on rooting
of olive cultivar stem cutting. Scientia Horticulturae 65: 189-198.

WILLSON, K.C. 2012. Cultural Methods: Coffee: Botany, Biochemistry and Production
of Beans and Beverage. Edited by M.N. Clifford. Springer Science & Business
Media, Germany.

WILLSON, K.C. 1999. Coffee, Cocoa, and Tea. New York: CABI Publishing.

WIRYADIPUTRA, S. and TRAN, L.K. 2008. Indonesia and Vietnam. R.M. Souza (ed.)
Plant-Parasitic Nematodes of Coffee. cSpringer Science + Business Media B.V.

WRIGLEY, E. 1988. Coffee. Tropical Agriculture Series First Pub. New York: Longman
Scientific and Technical.

YESILOGLU, T., GUBBUK, H., POLAT, E. and ERKAN, M. 1997. The effects of
girdling and scoring of cuttings on the rooting rate and quality of nurse plants of
pomegranate. Acta Horticulturae 441: 407-410.

138

APPENDIX A- Plant Pathogen Diagnostic Report

Plant Health Clinic
Crop Protection Cluster — UP College of Agriculture
UPLB, College, Laguna

DIAGNOSTIC REPORT
(2 copies/erop)

Symptom(s)Damage(s): Date Referred by Client:

(Plant Health Clinic Form 08-Client #-)

Date Reported by Expert:

Place & Date Collected: A/i5t#G (CROPS Crop/Variety:
CAFS UPUB, Of- 20-2019 GXCELSA COFFEE

CLIENT: é Y A
Name/Signature: were 14\ frim

(Pls print name)

DIAGNOSIS

Batak core  nKesoWwnti to dersared stem.

RECOMMENDATIONS

SHG b se HA mectiom qaen ate ah brahon .

OPr*
TeRes m u- 27 ray

Plaalooip

Diagnosedby:

139

APPENDIX B- Histological Procedure

I. Observation of the sample plant tissues. The organ (basal part of the coffee stem
cuttings) were cut and placed in a container.

2. Dehydration. The cut organs were immersed in tap water for several times then
replacing the tap water into 50% alcohol (v/v) thrice. The samples were
transferred to increasing level of alcohol. The samples were transferred to 70%
alcohol (v/v) for three times and to 95% alcohol (v/v) once. The solvent was
changed to isopropyl alcohol (IPA) for three times. Isopropyl alcohol was a
favored reagent since it is miscible in paraffin. The 100% IPA was discarded from
the last dehydration step. For the third or last change (dehydration step) of
isopropyl alcohol, a drop of a relative amount of 100% xylene was added in a
container containing the plant tissues at an interval of three minutes (iso-xylene
solution). The iso-xylene solution was removed and replaced with pure xylene
(100% xylene) until the plant tissues were cleared until they became transparent
in nature. The pure xylene was removed to the other container in three changes
approximately 30 minutes (not more than one hour).

3. Infiltration and Embedding. After removing the pure xylene in the container, an
amount of paraffin wax was put in the plant tissues several times. The tissue is
allowed to solidify in a mold. The dissected organ was embedded within a small
cube of paraffin and placed above the embedding chamber overnight. The
paraffin was returned to the container and replaced to soft paraffin (S1). At an

interval of 1 hour, they were replaced from soft paraffins (S1, $2, S3) to hard

140

paraffins (H1, H2, H3), leaving the plant tissues in the hard paraffin overnight.

. Blocking. The specimens/plant tissues were blocked and/or transferred in the
blocking container with the paraffin and setting aside for two hours. The samples
were transferred in the refrigerator to solidify the paraffin.

. Sectioning. The plant tissue samples were sectioned or cut into longitudinal and
cross sections using a cutting apparatus or a microtome. A continuous ribbon of
sections adhering to one another with 5-10 um thickness was produced.

. Afficing and Staining. Before a section is stained, the paraffin must be removed
through clearing. The plant tissue samples were stained using safranin and fast
green to clearly visualize the tissue structures under the microscope.

. Mounting and Ovendrying. The fixed and stained tissues were carefully
transferred or placed in a microscope glass slide. The clean microscope slide was
dipped in into the adhesive solution and slowly pulling it upward, out of the
solution, allowing the sections to adhere to the surface. The bottom of the slides
was dried and carefully blotting the excess adhesive from around the sections.
The slides were ovendried overnight.

. Slide preparation and Labeling. The prepared slides were labeled according to
their corresponding three-letter labels which are as follows: CFE- Cross Section
of freshly-harvested Excelsa coffee stem, LFE- Longitudinal Section of freshly-
harvested Excelsa coffee stem; CFR- Cross Section of freshly-harvested Robusta
coffee stem; LFR- Longitudinal Section of freshly-harvested Robusta coffee

stem; CPE- Cross Section of propagated (4 months-old) Excelsa coffee stem

141

cutting; LPE- Longitudinal Section of propagated (4 months-old) Excelsa coffee
stem cutting; CPR- Cross Section of propagated (4 months-old) Robusta coffee
stem cutting; LPR- Longitudinal Section of propagated (4 months-old) Robusta
coffee stem cutting; CRR- Cross Section rooted (7 months-old) Robusta coffee
stem cutting; CRE- Cross Section rooted (7 months-old) Excelsa coffee stem

cutting

142

APPENDIX C- List of Activities

DATE ACTIVITIES
March 28, 2018 Conduct of Experiment 2 single-node

-Gathering of Excelsa and Robusta coffee watersprouts
-Segmenting the coffee watersprouts into single node
cutting

-treatment application

-sterilization of the sand with Funguran OH

April 3, 2018 Blanching and Girdling of orthotropic Robusta coffee
watersprouts
April 5, 2018 Drenching of Paclobutrazol on the Robusta coffee

mother trees

April 19, 2018 Spraying of foliar fertilizer on the stem cuttings after
operation of the mist (4:00 — 5:00 pm)

April 25, 2018 Spraying of Grow more premium plant food foliar
fertilizer (3g/li) on the stem cuttings after operation of
the mist (4:00 — 5:00 pm)

April 26, 2018 Spraying of Funguran OH (10g/li)

April 28, 2018 Data gathering on Monthly percentage survival
(Experiment 2 single-node) — 1*

May 4, 2018 Booster shot (Resoaking and redipping the stem
cuttings in the treatments)

May 21, 2018 Spraying of foliar fertilizer on the stem cuttings after
operation of the mist (4:00 — 5:00 pm)

May 22, 2018 Conduct of Experiment on Robusta
-Gathering of Robusta stem cuttings
-end of blanching and girdling treatments
-Gathering of watersprouts from mothertrees drenched
with Paclobutrazol
-segmenting the coffee watersprouts
-sterilization of the sand medium using fungicide

(Bavistin @ 10g/li)

May 28, 2018

June 26, 2018

June 28, 2018

June 29, 2018

July 7, 2018

July 18, 2018

July 21, 2018

July 27, 2018

143

Data gathering on monthly percentage survival
(Experiment 2 single-node)- 2™

Conduct of Experiment 3

-gathering of young orthotropic Excelsa coffee
watersprouts during the rainy day

-Segmentation of the watersprouts in single node stem
cuttings

-the basal part of the cuttings was wounded (4 wounds
per cutting at random)

-the cuttings were treated and were planted in 3.0 oz
transparent plastic cups filled with sand

-the sand medium was sterilized with Funguran OH
drench (Sg/li)

Data gathering on monthly percentage survival
(Experiment 2 single-node)- 3

Spraying of Grow more foliar fertilizer in all set-ups
(Experiments 2 single-node, 3, and  Robusta
experiment) at 6.67g/li

Booster shot (redipping in auxin powder) of the cuttings
in Experiment 2 single-node

Gathering of fresh and 4 month-old propagated Robusta
and Excelsa Cuttings for Morpho-Anatomical Study
(Study 2)

-gathered in the afternoon (4:00 pm)

-placed in plastic sheets and placed in an icebox

Booster shot of Excelsa coffee stem cuttings
(Experiment 2 single-node) in 500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm
NAA auxin powder

Conduct of Experiment 2 three-node

-gathering of apical plagiotropic shoots with 4-5 nodes
-the basal part of the stem cuttings were cut retaining
only 3 nodes.

- the leaves of the third node at the base were removed

- the cuttings were immediately immersed in Fungicide
(KOP fungicide @ 5g/li) solution


July 28, 2018

August 5, 2018

August 18, 2018

August 20, 2018

August 21, 2018

August 24, 2018

August 28, 2018

August 30, 2018

September 22, 2018

September 28, 2018

October 20, 2018

144

Data gathering on monthly percentage survival
(Experiment 2 single-node)- 4

Spraying of Grow more foliar fertilizer (3g/li) on the
Excelsa coffee stem cuttings in all experiments
(Experiments 2 single-node, 2 three-node and 3)

Application/Dipping of pure honey (Langnese Pure Bee
Honey) on the Excelsa coffee stem cuttings in
Experiment 2 single-node, Experiment 2 three-node,
and Experiment 3.

Dipping the stem cuttings in auxin powder (IBA+NAA)

Collection of infected Excelsa coffee stem cuttings as
sample plants for plant pest detection/diagnosis at
UPLB-CAFS Plant Health Clinic

Spraying of Grow more foliar fertilizer (3g/li) on the
stem cuttings of Robusta and Excelsa coffee in all
experiments (Experiments 2 single-node and three-node
& 3 and Robusta experiment)

Data gathering on monthly percentage survival
(Experiment 2 three-node)- 1*

Data gathering on monthly percentage survival
(Experiment 2 single-node)- 5"

Robusta stem cuttings experiment (Robusta
Experiment) was terminated
-gathering on all the data

Application/coating/spreading of pure honey on the
leaves of Excelsa coffee stem cuttings (Experiment 2
three-node)

-Data gathering on monthly percentage survival
(Experiment 2 single-node)- 6
-Data gathering on monthly percentage survival
(Experiment 2 three-node)- 2"

Booster shot (Redipping in auxin powder + honey) in
all treatments of Experiment 2 three-node


October 26, 2018

October 28, 2018

October 29, 2018

November 25, 2018

November 30, 2018

December 7, 2018

Data gathering on monthly percentage
(Experiment 2 three-node)- 3%

Data gathering on monthly percentage
(Experiment 2 single-node)- 6°

Experiment 2 single-node was terminated
-Data gathering

Experiment 3 was terminated
-Data gathering

Data gathering on monthly percentage
(Experiment 2 three-node)- 4

Experiment 2 three-node was terminated
-Data gathering

145

survival

survival

survival


1.

Molarity of the chemical = (molarity) x (molar mass) x (volume per liter)

2.

APPENDIX D- Chemical Calculations

100 ppm Paclobutrazol (Mangrow 15% WP)
= (0.15 g PBZ aii.) (1 g PBZ) = (0.1 g/liter or 100 ppm) (x)

= 0.67 g/ liter

250 uM Dopamine
= (0.00025 mol/l) (189.64 g/mole) (2 liters)
= 0.09482 g

250 pM trans-Ferulic acid
= (0.00025 mol/l) (194.18 g/mole) (2 liters)
= 0.09709 g

500 uM trans-Ferulic acid
= (0.0005 mol/l) (194.18 g/mole) (2 liters)
= 0.19418 g

250 uM 4-Hydroxybenzoic acid
= (0.00025 mol/l) (138.12 g/mole) (2 liters)
= 0.06906 g

250 uM p-Coumaric acid
= (0.00025 mol/1) (164.16 g/mole) (2 liters)
= 0.08208 g

146

APPENDIX E- Statistical Analysis Result in Root length

Statistical Tool for Agricultural Research (STAR)

Analysis of Variance
Completely Randomized Design

ANOVA TABLE
Response Variable: Root.length..mm.

Treatments 9 24756.8604 2750.7623 5.60 0.0007
Error 20 9816.7229 490.8361
Total 29 34573.5833

Pairwise Mean Comparison of Treatments

Tukeys's Honest Significant Difference (HSD) Test

Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 20
Error Mean Square 490.8361
Critical Value 5.0079
Test Statistics 64.0563

Summary of the Result:

Treatments

T1- Tap water (Control) 83.88 3 abcd
T10- Quick root + Paclobutrazol drench 92.40 3 ab
T2- Quick root auxin powder 87.82 3 ab
{T3- Blanching / wrapping the stem 58.76 3 abcd
T4- Girdling 1 - use of metal wire 85.44 3 abc
T5- Girdling 2 - removal of a ring of bark 79.03 3 abcd
T6- Paclobutrazol drench 3

17 -Quick root + Blanching 3

T8- Quick root + Girdling 1 3

T9- Quick root + Girdling 2 3

Means with the same letter are not significantly different.

147

APPENDIX F- Statistical Analysis Result in Root Intensity

Statistical Tool for Agricultural Research (STAR)

Analysis of Variance
Completely Randomized Design

ANALYSIS FOR RESPONSE VARIABLE: Root.Intensity

ANOVA TABLE
Response Variable: Root.Intensity

Source DF Sum of Square Mean Square F Value Pr(> F)
Treatments 9 5.5937 0.6215 4.74 0.0018
Error 20 2.6200 0.1310

Total 29 8.2137

Pairwise Mean Comparison of Treatments

Tukeys'’s Honest Significant Difference (HSD) Test

Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 20
Error Mean Square 0.1310
Critical value 5.0079
Test Statistics 1.0465

Summary of the Result

Treatments means N group
T1- Tap water (Control) 1.70 3a
T10- Quick root + Paclobutrazol drench 1.37 3 ab
T2- Quick root auxin powder 1.53 3 ab
13- Blanching / wrapping the stem 1.30 3 ab
T4- Girdling 1 - use of metal wire 1.47 3 ab
T5- Girdling 2 - removal of a ring of bark 1.30 3 ab
T6- Paclobutrazol drench 3a
T7 -Quick root + Blanching 3
7T8- Quick root + Girdling 1 3
T9- Quick root + Girdling 2 3

Means with the same letter are not significantly different.

148

APPENDIX G- Statistical Analysis Result in Number of Roots

Statistical Tool for Agricultural Research (STAR)

Analysis of Variance
Completely Randomized Design

ANALYSIS FOR RESPONSE VARIABLE: Number.of.roots

ANOVA TABLE

Response Variable: Number.of.roots

Source DF Sum of Square Mean Square F Value Pr(> F)
Treatments 9 7.2030 0.8003 4.23 0.0035
Error 20 3.7867 0.1893

Total 29 10.9897

Standard Errors

StdErr

Pairwise Mean Comparison of Treatments

Tukeys's Honest Significant Difference (HSD) Test

Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 20
Error Mean Square 0.1893
Critical Value 5.0079
Test Statistics 1.2581

Summary of the Result:

Treatments means N group
T1- Tap water (Control) 1.77 3 ab
T10- Quick root + Paclobutrazol drench 1.67 3 abc
T2- Quick root auxin powder 1.27 3 abe
T3- Blanching / wrapping the stem 1.23 3 abc
T4- Girdling 1 - use of metal wire 1.20 3 abe
T5- Girdling 2 - removal of a ring of bark 1.40 3 abe
T6- Paclobutrazol drench 2.03 3a
17 -Quick root + Blanching 0.77 3 be
T8- Quick root + Girdling 1 0.43 300 ¢
T9- Quick root + Girdling 2 0.60 3 be

Means with the same letter are not significantly different.

149

APPENDIX H- Statistical Analysis Result in Percentage Rooting Success

Statistical Tool for Agricultural Research (STAR)

Analysis of Variance
Completely Randomized Design

ANALYSIS FOR RESPONSE VARIABLE: Percentage.Rooting Success

ANOVA TABLE
Response Variable: Percentage.Rooting Success

Source DF Sum of Square Mean Square F Value Pr(> F)
Treatments 9 8733.3333 970.3704 6.33 0.0003
Error 20 3066.6667 153.3333

Total 29 11800.0000

Summary Statistics

Percentage.Rooting Success Mean

Pairwise Mean Comparison of Treatments

Tukeys's Honest Significant Difference (HSD) Test

Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 20
Error Mean Square 153.3333
Critical Value 5.0079
Test Statistics 35.8024

Summary of the Result:

Treatments

T1- Tap water (Control) 76.67 3a
T10- Quick root + Paclobutrazol drench 66.67 3 ab
12- Quick root auxin powder 70.00 3a
T3- Blanching / wrapping the stem 56.67 3 abe
T4- Girdling 1 - use of metal wire 80.00 3a
T5- Girdling 2 - removal of a ring of bark 63.33 3 abc
T6- Paclobutrazol drench 3

T7 -Quick root + Blanching 3

T8- Quick root + Girdling 1 3

T9- Quick root + Girdling 2 3

Means with the

same letter are not significantly different.

150

APPENDIX I- Statistical Analysis Result in Callus Intensity

Statistical Tool for Agricultural Research (STAR)

Analysis of Variance
Completely Randomized Design

ANALYSIS FOR RESPONSE VARIABLE: Callus.Intensity

ANOVA TABLE
Response Variable: Callus.Intensity

Treatments 9 4.1297 0.4589 5.53 0.0007
Error 20 1.6600 0.0830
Total 29 5.7897

Pairwise Mean Comparison of Treatments

Tukeys's Honest Significant Difference (HSD) Test

Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 20
Error Mean Square 0.0830
Critical Value 5.0079
Test Statistics 0.8330

Summary of the Result:

Treatments

T1- Tap water (Control) 0.50 3 c
T10- Quick root + Paclobutrazol drench 1.00 3 abe
T2- Quick root auxin powder 1.53 3a
T3- Blanching / wrapping the stem 1.33 3 ab
T4- Girdling 1 - use of metal wire 1.47 3a
T5- Girdling 2 - removal of a ring of bark 1.50 3a
T6- Paclobutrazol drench 0.87 3 abc
T7 -Quick root + Blanching 1.37 3 ab
T8- Quick root + Girdling 1 1.47 3a
T9- Quick root + Girdling 2 0.60 3) be

Means with the same letter are not significantly different.

151

APPENDIX J- Statistical Analysis Result in Percentage Callus Formation

Statistical Tool for Agricultural Research (STAR)

Analysis of Variance
Completely Randomized Design

ANALYSIS FOR RESPONSE VARIABLE: Percentage.Callus.Formation

ANOVA TABLE
Response Variable: Percentage.Callus. Formation

Source DF Sum of Square Mean Square F Value Pr(> F)
Treatments 9 9483.3333 1053.7037 9.03 0.0000
Error 20 2333.3333 116.6667

Total 29 11816.6667

CVv(%) Percentage.Callus.Formation Mean

15.81 68.33

Standard Errors

Pairwise Mean Comparison of Treatments

Tukeys's Honest Significant Difference (HSD) Test

Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 20
Error Mean Square 116.6667
Critical Value 5.0079
Test Statistics 31.2296

T1- Tap water (Control) 40.00 3 c
T10- Quick root + Paclobutrazol drench 56.67 3) be
T2- Quick root auxin powder 73.33 3 ab
T3- Blanching / wrapping the stem 80.00 3 ab
T4- Girdling 1 - use of metal wire 93.33 3a

T5- Girdling 2 - removal of a ring of bark 90.00 3a

T6- Paclobutrazol drench 63.33 3 abc
17 -Quick root + Blanching 66.67 3 abc
T8- Quick root + Girdling 1 80.00 3 ab
T9- Quick root + Girdling 2 40.00 300 ¢

Means with the same letter are not significantly different.

152

APPENDIX K- Statistical Analysis Result in Length of the Rooting Zone

Statistical Tool for Agricultural Research (STAR)

Analysis of Variance
Completely Randomized Design

Initial. length. of.the. rooting. zone. .mm.

ANALYSIS FOR RESPONSE VARIABLE

ANOVA TABLE
Response Variable: Initial.length.of.the. rooting. zone. .mm.

Source DF Sum of Square Mean Square F Value Pr(> F)
Treatments 9 20.1016 2.2335 2.94 0.0213
Error 20 15.1808 0.7590

Total 29 35.2824

Pairwise Mean Comparison of Treatments

Tukeys's Honest Significant Difference (HSD) Test

Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 20
Error Mean Square 0.7590
Critical Value 5.0079
Test Statistics 2.5190

Summary of the Result

Treatments means N group
T1- Tap water (Control) 4.89 3 ab
T10- Quick root + Paclobutrazol drench 4.05 3 ab
T2- Quick root auxin powder 5.02 3 ab
T3- Blanching / wrapping the stem 5.60 3 ab
T4- Girdling 1 - use of metal wire 5.99 3 ab
T5- Girdling 2 - removal of a ring of bark 5.52 3 ab
T6- Paclobutrazol drench 3

17 -Quick root + Blanching 3
T8- Quick root + Girdling 1 3
T9- Quick root + Girdling 2 3

Means with the same letter are not significantly different.

153

Statistical Tool for Agricultural Research (STAR)

Analysis of Variance
Completely Randomized Design

ANALYSIS FOR RESPONSE VARIABL!

Final. length.of.the.rooting.zone. .mm

ANOVA TABLE
Response Variable: Final.length.of.the.rooting.zone..mm.

Treatments 9 29.1439 3.2382 3.09 0.0171
Error 20 20.9598 1.0480
Total 29 50.1037

Pairwise Mean Comparison of Treatments

Tukeys's Honest Significant Difference (HSD) Test

Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 20
Error Mean Square 1.0480
Critical Value 5.0079
Test Statistics 2.9599

Summary of the Result:

Treatments

T1- Tap water (Control) 5.76 3 ab
T10- Quick root + Paclobutrazol drench 4.84 3 ab
T2- Quick root auxin powder 6.33 3 ab
T3- Blanching / wrapping the stem 6.24 3 ab
T4- Girdling 1 - use of metal wire 6.97 3 ab
T5- Girdling 2 - removal of a ring of bark 6.03 3 ab
T6- Paclobutrazol drench 3

T7 -Quick root + Blanching 3
T8- Quick root + Girdling 1 3
T9- Quick root + Girdling 2 3

Means with the same letter are not significantly different.

154

Statistical Tool for Agricultural Research (STAR)

Analysis of Variance
Completely Randomized Design

ANALYSIS FOR RESPONSE VARIABL!

ANOVA TABLE

Response Variable: growth. increment.of.the.rooting.zone..mm.

Treatments 9 2.3214 0.2579 1.53 0.2029
Error 20 3.3607 0.1680
Total 29 5.6821

Table of Means

155

Treatments growth. increment.of.the. rooting. zone. .mm.

Means

T1- Tap water (Control)

T10- Quick root + Paclobutrazol drench
T2- Quick root auxin powder

T3- Blanching / wrapping the stem

T4- Girdling 1 - use of metal wire

T5- Girdling 2 - removal of a ring of bark
T6- Paclobutrazol drench

T7 -Quick root + Blanching

T8- Quick root + Girdling 1

T9- Quick root + Girdling 2

0.86
0.79
1.32
0.64
0.98
0.51

156

APPENDIX L- Statistical Analysis Result in Number of Shoots

Statistical Tool for Agricultural Research (STAR)

Analysis of Variance
Completely Randomized Design

ANALYSIS FOR RESPONSE VARIABLE: Number.of.shoot.s

ANOVA TABLE
Response Variable: Number.of.shoot.s

Treatments 9 1.5120 0.1680 0.50 0.8544
Error 20 6.6667 0.3333
Total 29 8.1787

T1- Tap water (Control) 1.13
T10- Quick root + Paclobutrazol drench 1.10
T2- Quick root auxin powder 1.33
7T3- Blanching / wrapping the stem 0.77
T4- Girdling 1 - use of metal wire 1.50
T5- Girdling 2 - removal of a ring of bark 1.00
T6- Paclobutrazol drench 1.00
T7 -Quick root + Blanching 0.90
T8- Quick root + Girdling 1 1.40

T9- Quick root + Girdling 2 0.93

APPENDIX M- Statistical Analysis Result in Percentage Shoot Formation

Statistical Tool for Agricultural Research (STAR)

Analysis of Variance
Completely Randomized Design

ANOVA TABLE
Response Variable

Source DF Sum of Square Mean Square F Value Pr(> F)

Treatments 9 5280.0000 586.6667
Error 20 15466.6667 773.3333
Total 29 20746.6667

Table of Means

Treatments Percentage.Shoot.Formation Means
T1- Tap water (Control) 63.33
T10- Quick root + Paclobutrazol drench 60.00
T2- Quick root auxin powder 70.00
T3- Blanching / wrapping the stem 53.33
T4- Girdling 1 - use of metal wire 100.00
T5- Girdling 2 - removal of a ring of bark 63.33
T6- Paclobutrazol drench 60.00
T7 -Quick root + Blanching 50.00
T6- Quick root + Girdling 1 70.00

T9- Quick root + Girdling 2 56.67

157

158

APPENDIX N- Statistical Analysis Result in Percentage Survival

Statistical Tool for Agricultural Research (STAR)

Analysis of Variance
Completely Randomized Design

ANALYSIS FOR RESPONSE VARIABLE: Percentage.Survival (Robusta coffee)

ANOVA TABLE
Response Variable: Percentage.Survival

Source DF Sum of Square Mean Square F Value Pr(> F)
Treatments 9 3946.6667 438.5185 3.76 0.0065
Error 20 2333.3333 116.6667

Total 29 6280.0000

Pairwise Mean Comparison of Treatments

Tukeys's Honest Significant Difference (HSD) Test

Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 20
Error Mean Square 116.6667
Critical Value 5.0079
Test Statistics 31.2296

Summary of the Result:

Treatments means N group
T1- Tap water (Control) 93.33 3a
T10- Quick root + Paclobutrazol drench 76.67 3 ab
T2- Quick root auxin powder 96.67 3a
T3- Blanching / wrapping the stem 93.33 3a
T4- Girdling 1 - use of metal wire 100.00 3a
?TS- Girdling 2 - removal of a ring of bark 96.67 3a
T6- Paclobutrazol drench 3

T7 -Quick root + Blanching 3
T8- Quick root + Girdling 1 3
T9- Quick root + Girdling 2 3

Means with the same letter are not significantly different.

Statistical Tool for Agricultural Research (STAR)

Analysis of Variance
Completely Randomized Design

ANALYSIS FOR RESPONSE VARIABLE: Xl.month % Survival (Single-node orthotropic Excelsa
coffee)

ANOVA TABLE

Response Variable: X1.month

Source DF Sum of Square Mean Square F Value Pr(> F)
Treatment 15 22178 .0839 1478.5389 354849341.73 0.0000
Error 32 0.0001 0.0000

Total 47 22178.0840

Pairwise Mean Comparison of Treatment

Tukeys's Honest Significant Difference (HSD) Test

Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 32
Error Mean Square 0.0000
Critical Value 5.2440
Test Statistics 0.0062

Summary of the Result:

T1- Control species (Robusta coffee) 100.00
T2- Control treatment (Excelsa coffee) 20.83
T3- Auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA) 62.50
T4- 100 ppm Paclobutrazol (PBZ) 33.33
T5- 250 pm dopamine 58.33
T6- 250 pm trans-ferulic acid (FA) 66.67
T7- 250 pm 4-hydroxybenzoic acid (PBA) 58.33
T8- 250 pm p-coumaric acid (CA) 45.83
T9- 250 pm FA + 250 pm PBA + 250 pm CA 70.83
T10- 250 ? dopamine + 100 ppm Paclobutrazol 33.33
T11- Auxin + 250 pm dopamine 54.17
T12- Auxin + 250 pm trans-ferulic acid 91.67
T13- Auxin + 250 pm 4-hydroxybenzoic acid 54.17
T14- Auxin + 250 pm p-coumaric acid 50.00
T15- Auxin+250 pm FA+250 pm PBA+250 pm CA 33.33

T16- Auxin + 100 ppm Paclobutrazol

Means with the same letter are not significantly different.

159

puNeTe FOR RESPONSE VARIABLE: X2.months % Survival (Single-node orthotropic Excelsa
coffee)

ANOVA TABLE
Response Variable: X2.months

Treatment 15 23928.3649 1595.2243 191426919.45 0.0000
Error 32 0.0003 0.0000
Total 47 23928.3652

Pairwise Mean Comparison of Treatment

Tukeys's Honest Significant Difference (HSD) Test

Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 32
Error Mean Square 0.0000
Critical Value 5.2440
Test Statistics 0.0087

Summary of the Result:

T1- Control species (Robusta coffee) 79.17 3b
T2- Control treatment (Excelsa coffee) 16.67 3

7T3- Auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA) 45.83 3 d
T4- 100 ppm Paclobutrazol (PBZ) 16.67 3

T5- 250 pm dopamine 12.50 3

T6- 250 pm trans-ferulic acid (FA) 45.83 3 d
T7- 250 pm 4-hydroxybenzoic acid (PBA) 33.33 3

T8- 250 pm p-coumaric acid (CA) 33.33 3 f£
T9- 250 pm FA + 250 pm PBA + 250 pm CA 50.00 300¢
T10- 250 ? dopamine + 100 ppm Paclobutrazol 16.67 3

T11- Auxin + 250 pm dopamine 37.50 3 e
712- Auxin + 250 pm trans-ferulic acid 87.50 3a
T13- Auxin + 250 pm 4-hydroxybenzoic acid 29.17 3

T14- Auxin + 250 pm p-coumaric acid 29.17 3

T15- Auxin+250 pm FA+250 pm PBA+250 pm CA 12.50 3

7T16- Auxin + 100 ppm Paclobutrazol 8.33 3

Means with the same letter are not significantly different.

160

ANALYSIS
coffee)

FOR RESPONSE VARIABLE: X3.months % Survival (Single-node orthotropic Excelsa

Response Variable: X3.months

Source DF Sum of Square Mean Square F Value Pr(> F)
Treatment 15 20935.4797 1395.6986 223311783.27 0.0000
Error 32 0.0002 0.0000

Total 47 20935.4799

Pairwise Mean Comparison of Treatment

Tukeys's Honest Significant Difference (HSD) Test

Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 32
Error Mean Square 0.0000
Critical Value 5.2440
Test Statistics 0.0076

Summary of the Result

Treatment means N group
T1- Control species (Robusta coffee) 75.00 3a

T2- Control treatment (Excelsa coffee) 4.17 3 h
T3- Auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA) 20.83 3 d

T4- 100 ppm Paclobutrazol (PBZ) 8.33 3 g
T5- 250 pm dopamine 8.33 3 g
T6- 250 pm trans-ferulic acid (FA) 41.67 3 c

T7- 250 pm 4-hydroxybenzoic acid (PBA) 16.67 3

Te- 250 pm p-coumaric acid (CA) 4.17 3

T9- 250 pm FA + 250 pm PBA + 250 pm CA 8.33 3

T10- 250 ? dopamine + 100 ppm Paclobutrazol 12.50 3

T11- Auxin + 250 pm dopamine 8.33 3

T12- Auxin + 250 pm trans-ferulic acid 62.50 3 b

T13- Auxin + 250 pm 4-hydroxybenzoic acid 4.17 3 h
T14- Auxin + 250 pm p-coumaric acid 12.50 3 z
T15- Auxin+250 pm FA+250 pm PBA+250 pm CA 8.33 3 g
T16- Auxin + 100 ppm Paclobutrazol 8.33 3 g

Means with the same letter are not significantly different.

161

162

ANALYSIS FOR RESPONSE VARIABLE: X4.months % Survival (Single-node orthotropic Excelsa

coffee)

ANOVA TABLE
Response Variable: X4.months

Source DF Sum of Square Mean Square F Value Pr(> F)

Treatment 15 20594.0579 1372.9372 164752463.40 0.0000

Error 32 0.0003 0.0000
Total 47 20594.0582

Pairwise Mean Comparison of Treatment

Tukeys's Honest Significant Difference (HSD) Test

Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 32
Error Mean Square 0.0000
Critical Value 5.2440
Test Statistics 0.0087

Summary of the Result:

Treatment

T1- Control species (Robusta coffee) 70.83 3a

T2- Control treatment (Excelsa coffee) 4.17 3 h
T3- Auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA) 20.83 3 d

T4- 100 ppm Paclobutrazol (PBZ) 8.33 3 g
T5- 250 pm dopamine 0.00 3 i
T6- 250 pm trans-ferulic acid (FA) 41.67 3 c

T7- 250 pm 4-hydroxybenzoic acid (PBA) 16.67 3 e
Te- 250 pm p-coumaric acid (CA) 4.17 3 h
T9- 250 pm FA + 250 pm PBA + 250 pm CA 8.33 3 g
710- 250 pm dopamine + 100 ppm Paclobutrazol 12.50 3 f
T11- Auxin + 250 pm dopamine 8.33 3 g
T12- Auxin + 250 pm trans-ferulic acid 62.50 3 b

T13- Auxin + 250 pm 4-hydroxybenzoic acid 4.17 3 h
T14- Auxin + 250 pm p-coumaric acid 12.50 3 ft
T15- Auxin+250 pm FA+250 pm PBA+250 pm CA 8.33 3 g
T16- Auxin + 100 ppm Paclobutrazol 4.17 3 h

Means with the same letter are not significantly different.

ANALYSIS FOR RESPONSE VARIABL!
coffee)

X5.months % Survival (Single-node orthotropic Excelsa

ANOVA TABLE
Response Variable

X5.months

Source DF Sum of Square Mean Square F Value Pr(> F)
Treatment 15 16478.1308 1098.5421 175766728.53 0.0000
Error 32 0.0002 0.0000

Total 47 16478.1310

Pairwise Mean Comparison of Treatment

Tukeys's Honest Significant Difference (HSD) Test

Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 32
Error Mean Square 0.0000
Critical Value 5.2440
Test Statistics 0.0076

Summary of the Result

Treatment means N group
T1- Control species (Robusta coffee) 70.83 3a

T2- Control treatment (Excelsa coffee) 0.00 3 g
T3- Auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA) 8.33 3 e
T4- 100 ppm Paclobutrazol (PBZ) 8.33 3 e
T5- 250 pm dopamine 0.00 3 3
T6- 250 pm trans-ferulic acid (FA) 25.00 3 c
T7- 250 pm 4-hydroxybenzoic acid (PBA) 4.17 3 f
T@- 250 pm p-coumaric acid (CA) 4.17 3 f£
T9- 250 pm FA + 250 pm PBA + 250 pm CA 8.33 3 e
T10- 250 pm dopamine + 100 ppm Paclobutrazol 12.50 3 d
T11- Auxin + 250 pm dopamine 8.33 3 e
T12- Auxin + 250 pm trans-ferulic acid 45.83 3b .
T13- Auxin + 250 pm 4-hydroxybenzoic acid 0.00 3 g
T14- Auxin + 250 pm p-coumaric acid 4.17 3 f
T15- Auxin+250 pm FA+250 pm PBA+250 pm CA 8.33 3 e
T16- Auxin + 100 ppm Paclobutrazol 4.17 3 £

Means with the same letter are not significantly different.

163

ANALYSIS FOR RESPONSE VARIABLE: X6.months % Survival (Single-node orthotropic Excelsa
coffee)

ANOVA TABLE
Response Variable: X6.months

Source DF Sum of Square Mean Square

Treatment 15 16650.3548 1110.0237 177603784.53
Error 32 0.0002 0.0000

Total 47 16650.3550

Pairwise Mean Comparison of Treatment

Tukeys's Honest Significant Difference (HSD) Test

Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 32
Error Mean Square 0.0000
Critical Value 5.2440
Test Statistics 0.0076

Summary of the Result:

Treatment
T1- Control species (Robusta coffee)

T2- Control treatment (Excelsa coffee)

T3- Auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA)

T4- 100 ppm Paclobutrazol (PBZ)

TS5- 250 pm dopamine

T6- 250 pm trans-ferulic acid (FA)

T7- 250 pm 4-hydroxybenzoic acid (PBA)

T8- 250 pm p-coumaric acid (CA)

T9- 250 pm FA + 250 pm PBA + 250 pm CA

T10- 250 pm dopamine + 100 ppm Paclobutrazol
T11- Auxin + 250 pm dopamine

T12- Auxin + 250 pm trans-ferulic acid

T13- Auxin + 250 pm 4-hydroxybenzoic acid
T14- Auxin + 250 pm p-coumaric acid

T15- Auxin+250 pm FA+250 pm PBA+250 pm CA
T16- Auxin + 100 ppm Paclobutrazol

70.83
0.00
8.33
8.33
0.00

Means with the same letter are not significantly different.

164

ANALYSIS FOR RESPONSE VARIABL: X7.months % Survival (Single-node orthotropic Excelsa
coffee)

ANOVA TABLE
Response Variable: X7.months

Treatment 15 17598 .0264 1173.2018 281568422.94 0.0000
Error 32 0.0001 0.0000
Total 47 17598 .0266

017

Pairwise Mean Comparison of Treatment

Tukeys's Honest Significant Difference (HSD) Test

Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 32
Error Mean Square 0.0000
Critical Value 5.2440
Test Statistics 0.0062

T1- Control species (Robusta coffee) 70.83 3a

T2- Control treatment (Excelsa coffee) 0.00 3 ft
T3- Auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA) 0.00 3 f
T4- 100 ppm Paclobutrazol (PBZ) 8.33 3 d
T5- 250 pm dopamine 0.00 3 f£
T6- 250 pm trans-ferulic acid (FA) 6.67 3 c
T7- 250 pm 4-hydroxybenzoic acid (PBA) 4.17 3 e
T6- 250 pm p-coumaric acid (CA) 0.00 3 f
T9- 250 pm FA + 250 pm PBA + 250 pm CA 8.33 3 da
7T10- 250 pm dopamine + 100 ppm Paclobutrazol 8.33 3 d
T11- Auxin + 250 pm dopamine 0.00 3 f
T12- Auxin + 250 pm trans-ferulic acid 45.83 3°b
T13- Auxin + 250 pm 4-hydroxybenzoic acid 0.00 3 f£
T14- Auxin + 250 pm p-coumaric acid 0.00 3 f
T15- Auxin+250 pm FA+250 pm PBA+250 pm CA 8.33 3 da
T16- Auxin + 100 ppm Paclobutrazol 0.00 3 f

Means with the same letter are not significantly different.

165

166

Statistical Tool for Agricultural Research (STAR)

Analysis of Variance
Completely Randomized Design

ANALYSIS FOR RESPONSE VARIABLE

Xl.month % Survival three-node plagiotropic Excelsa coffee

ANOVA TABLE
Response Variable: X1.month

Source DF Sum of Square Mean Square F Value Pr(> F)
Treatment 5 2645.5780 529.1156 95240806.60 0.0000
Error 12 0.0001 0.0000

Total 17 2645.5780

Pairwise Mean Comparison of Treatment

Tukeys's Honest Significant Difference (HSD) Test

Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 12
Error Mean Square 0.0000
Critical Value 4.7502
Test Statistics 0.0065

Summary of the Result:

T1- Control 63.33 3 f
T2- Auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA) 100.00 3a

T3- 250 pm trans-ferulic acid 96.67 3b
T4- 500 pm trans-ferulic acid 90.00 3004
T5- 250 pm trans-ferulic acid + Auxin 93.33 3006
T6~ 500 pm trans-ferulic acid + Auxin 83.33 3 e

Means with the same letter are not significantly different.

ANALYSIS FOR RESPONSE VARIABLE: X2.months % Survival three-node plagiotropic Excelsa
coffee

ANOVA TABLE
Response Variable: X2.months

Treatment 5 2978.1780 595.6356 53607203.30 0.0000
Error 12 0.0001 0.0000
Total 17 2978.1781

Effects StdErr

Treatment 0.0027

Pairwise Mean Comparison of Treatment

Tukeys's Honest Significant Difference (HSD) Test

Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 12
Error Mean Square 0.0000
Critical Value 4.7502
Test Statistics 0.0091

Summary of the Result

T1- Control 60.00 3 d
T2- Auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA) 96.67 3a
T3- 250 pm trans-ferulic acid 96.67 3a
T4- S00 pm trans-ferulic acid 83.33 3 >b
T5- 250 pm trans-ferulic acid + Auxin 83.33 3 0b
T6- 500 pm trans-ferulic acid + Auxin 73.33 3 c

Means with the same letter are not significantly different.

167

ANALYSIS FOR RESPONSE VARIABL: X3.months % Survival three-node plagiotropic Excelsa
coffee

ANOVA TABLE
Response Variable: X3.months

Source DF Sum of Square Mean Square F Value Pr(> F)
Treatment 5 2628.0000 525.6000 94608001.60 0.0000
Error 12 0.0001 0.0000

Total l7 2628.0001

Pairwise Mean Comparison of Treatment

Tukeys's Honest Significant Difference (HSD) Test

Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 12
Error Mean Square 0.0000
Critical Value 4.7502
Test Statistics 0.0065

T1- Control 60.00 3 e
T2- Auxin (500 ppm IBA + 100 ppm NAA) 90.00 3a

T3- 250 pm trans-ferulic acid 90.00 3a
T4- S500 pm trans-ferulic acid 63.33 3 d
TS- 250 pm trans-ferulic acid + Auxin 73.33 3 b
T6- 500 pm trans-ferulic acid + Auxin 66.67 3 c

Means with the same letter are not significantly different.

168

ANALYSIS FOR RESPONSE VARIABLE: X4.months % Survival three-node plagiotropic Excelsa
coffee

ANOVA TABLE
Response Variable: X4.months

Treatment 5 3645.1112 729.0222 131224002.40
Error 12 0.0001 0.0000
Total 17 3645.1112

Effects StdErr

Treatment 0.0019

Pairwise Mean Comparison of Treatment

Tukeys's Honest Significant

Alpha

Error Degrees of Freedom
Error Mean Square
Critical Value

Test Statistics

Summary of the Result:

Treatment

T1- Control

T2- Auxin (500 ppm IBA +
T3- 250 pm trans-ferulic
T4- S500 pm trans-ferulic
T5- 250 pm trans-ferulic
Té6- 500 pm trans-ferulic

Difference (HSD) Test

0.05

12

0.0000

4.7502

0.0065
means
30.00
100 ppm NAA) 56.67
acid 60.00
acid 23.33
acid + Auxin 56.67
acid + Auxin 40.00

Means with the same letter are not significantly different.

169

Sa

Coes

ness
aoe

