WASTER Or SCIEN C!

CU touitien)

UNL yore

DOST-STI LIBRARY

INA
-0210

IA
sml2

1

PEC ALALAG

ORE AMONG ADUL

rhryeate


UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS

Master of Science in Applied Nutrition

JAZELLE ANNE S. CALAYAG

READINESS TO CHANGE DIETARY BEHAVIORS AMONG ADULT

‘WOMEN WITH NON-COMMUNICABLE DISEASES
IN PARANAQUE CITY, PHILIPPINES

LEILA §S. AFRICA, Ph.D.

Adviser

JUNE 2022

This thesis can be made available to the general public

YES
This thesis can be accessed only after consultation with the author and

thesis adviser No
This thesis can be accessed only by those bound by confidentiality NO

agreement

SAZELI ES. FALAYAG

LEILA S. AFRICA, Ph.D.


READINESS TO CHANGE DIETARY BEHAVIORS AMONG ADULT
‘WOMEN WITH NON-COMMUNICABLE DISEASES
IN PARANAQUE CITY, PHILIPPINES

JAZELLE ANNE S. CALAYAG.

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF THE GRADUATE SCHOOL
UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE
DEGREE OF

MASTER OF SCIENCE
(Applied Nutrition)

JUNE 2022

The thesis attached hereto, entitled “READINESS TO CHANGE DIETARY
BEHAVIORS AMONG ADULT WOMEN WITH NON-COMMUNICABLE
DISEASES IN PARANAQUE CITY, PHILIPPINES” prepared and submitted by
JAZELLE ANNE S. CALAYAG, in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the

degree of MASTER OF SCIENCE (APPLIED NUTRITION) is hereby accepted.

ANGEL! D.RIFELIX, Ph.D. JOSEFINA T. DIZON, Ph.D.

Member, Guidance Committee Member, Guidance Committee
—20 June 2022
Date Signed Date Signed

LEILA S. £4 ‘A, Ph.D.

Chair, Guidance Committee
18 June 2022

Date Signed
Accepted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of MASTER OF
SCIENCE (APPLIED NUTRITION).
AIMEE sufi A. BARRION, Ph.D.
Director, Institute of Human Nutrition and Food — College of Human Ecology
Date Sign
JOMARF, TE, Ph.D.
Dean, Graduate School

University of the Philippines [Los Bafios
21 June 21


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

The author, Jazelle Anne S. Calayag was born on the 3" of December 1993 at Las
Pifias City, Philippines as the eldest child of Jesus and Elizabeth Calayag. She took her
primary education at the Immaculate Heart of Mary College and her secondary education
at Parafiaque Science High School. In 2010, she was admitted at the University of the
Philippines Los Bafios (UPLB) under the degree of Bachelor of Science in Nutrition. Her
initial plan was to take it as a pre-med course, but that plan waned when she got exposed
in the field of community nutrition and greatly appreciated it. She received her Bachelor
of Science degree in Nutrition by April 2014 and passed her Nutritionist-Dietitian

Licensure Examination (NDLE) by August of the same year.

After passing her NDLE, she was employed by the Department of Science and
Technology-Food and Nutrition Research Institute (DOST-FNRI) under the Nutritional
Assessment and Monitoring Division-Nutrition Intervention, Evaluation, and Policy
Section as a Project Research Assistant. For almost four years with the agency, she has
been directly involved in five projects and has co-authored two publications. In January
2017, she joined the Graduate School of UPLB to pursue Applied Nutrition minor in
Community Development as a part-time student. She committed to her graduate studies
full-time in August 2018 when she was granted with the DOST-Accelerated Science and

Technology Human Resource Development Program (ASTHRDP) scholarship.

JAZELLE ANNE S. CALAYAG

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

I would like to extend my deepest gratitude to a number of people for their help and
support during the production of this thesis.

I acknowledge the Department of Science and Technology-Science Education Institute
(DOST-SEl) for granting me the DOST-ASTHRDP scholarship.

My heartfelt respect and appreciation to my dearest adviser, Dr. Leila Aftica. Thank you
so much po for your guidance and support all throughout my MSc life. You did not just
give me valuable advice in my academics, but also in life in general. 1 will always
remember your warm encouragement every time I would almost slip. Thank you, ma’am

Lei, for always being so understanding and patient over the past years.

I would also like to extend my appreciation to my thesis committee, Dr. Angelina Felix
and Dr. Josefina Dizon, likewise for all their encouragement, assistance and support
throughout the study, and all their suggestions and corrections, which helped me improve
my writeup and my overall thesis better.

My appreciation to all the staff in UPLB Graduate School (GS) who have been so patient
with all of my questions and always ready to offer me their answers whether in person or
through chat, Tita Anna, Tita Karen, and Tita Joji, and all of the other GS staff, thank you
so much,

My deepest respect and appreciation to all of my instructors and professors in the
Institute of Human Nutrition and Food (IHNF) and College of Public Affairs and
Development (CPAf), Prof. Lei, Prof. Ning, Prof. Jopay, Prof. Tet, Prof. Aimee, Prof.
Anna, Prof. Gem, Prof. Mel, Prof. Leizl, Prof. Joyce, Prof. Chi, Prof. Clarisse, Prof.
Angie, Sir Paul, Sir John, I will always admire your passion and dedication in your work
and in this field.

Many thanks to Dr. Eriel Javier for assisting me with his technical knowledge and
suggestion on how to approach the medical aspects (NCDs) of my paper. And to Mr.

v

John Michael Borigas for being so patient in helping me with the statistical analysis of
my data.

My recognition to my past colleagues in the DOST-FNRI, Ms. JD, Ms. Mana, Ms. Claire,
Ms. Marie, Ms. Emie, Ms. Weng, Ms. Glenda, Heiden, Nelly, Nes, Kat, Asha, for all

their encouragement in pursuing this master’s degree.

I would also like to acknowledge my classmates and colleagues, Dovie, Desa, Elaine,
Bea, Diorella, Ann, Kim, who have been with me throughout my MSc journey, thank you
for all your encouragement and support, to just keep going, and now I am here. All your

little and big words made a difference in me, thank you.

My heartfelt gratitude to all of the participants who took their time and letting me bother
them in answering my questionnaires, this would not have been possible without all of

you.

To one of my greatest support systems, my best friends, Jeh, Christa, Dara, Maan, Dana,
Anzel, and Jam, you all never fail to provide me encouragement to get through this. I

appreciate all the laughter and in-betweens, and of course your friendship.

My utmost appreciation and gratitude to my family. To my mama, Elizabeth Calayag, my
papa, Jesus Calayag, my sister, Elaine Calayag. To my loving partner, Jerick Castillo.
Thank you for all your encouragement and support to me in pursuing this graduate
studies. You have given me hope to get on with this and with that hope, I was able to
reach this. To my stress-relievers, Google, Pibi, Miw, Negey, and Gowli, To all my other

relatives, my cousins, aunties, and uncles, thank you also for all of your support.

Should I fail to mention some people who have helped me in this journey, I am really

sorry, but do know that I appreciate all of your help and support.

And of course, last but not the least, thank You Lord God for all Your faithfulness and
compassion, All glory is Yours.

vi

CHAPTER

I

TABLE OF CONTENTS

IPR Page
Title Page
‘Approval Page
Biographical Sketch
Acknowledgement
Table of Contents
List of Tables
List of Figures
List of Appendices
List of Acronyms and Abbreviation
Abstract
INTRODUCTION
REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE
Non-communicable Diseases
Diabetes Mellitus
Cardiovascular Disease and Hypertension
Health Behavior Change and Health Behavior Theories

Review of Studies on the Application of Models and
Theories to Dietary Behaviors:

Transtheoretical Model

Health Belief Model

vii

xi
xii
xiii
xiv

xv

23
30
32

32
38

CHAPTER

Iv

Theory of Planned Behavior

Community Behavior Change
Theoretical Framework
Conceptual Framework
Operational Definition of Terms
METHODOLOGY

Study Design

Study Site

Sample Size

Study Participants

Data Collection Procedure

Data Analysis

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Description of Study Participants

Socioeconomic and demographic characteristics

NCD diagnosis of the participants

Household profile of the participants

Dietary Behavior of the Study Participants

Fruits
‘Consumption of fruits

Stages of change in terms of fruits

Relationship of other factors with the participant's
readiness in changing their dietary behavior towards fruits

viii

PAGE
41
45
47
49
52
56
56
56
56
37
58
59
61
61
61
62
64

68

69

CHAPTER

Vegetables
Consumption of vegetables
Stages of change in terms of vegetables

Relationship of other factors with the participant's
readiness in changing their dietary behavior towards
vegetables

Salt
Consumption of salt
Stages of change in terms of salt

Relationship of other factors with the participant’s
readiness in changing their dietary behavior towards salt

Sugar
Intake of sugar
Stages of change in terms of sugar

Relationship of other factors with the participant's
readiness in changing their dietary behavior towards sugar

Oil
Intake of oil
Stages of change in terms of oil

Relationship of other factors with the participant's
readiness in changing their dietary behavior towards Oil

Context-specific Factors Influencing Readiness to Change
Dietary Behaviors

Household Community as Supporter of Behavior Change

Strategies to Improve Readiness to Change

PAGE
WE}
B
75
76

81
81
83
84

89
89
92
92

97
97
101
100

107

112
113

SUMMARY, CONCLUSION, AND
RECOMMENDATIONS

Summary and Conclusion
Recommendations
LITERATURE CITED
APPENDICES

114

14
115
116
126

TABLE

LIST OF TABLES

Recommendations of Medical Nutrition Therapy for
Diabetes

DASH diet recommendations

Sociodemographic characteristics of the participants

NCD diagnosis of the participants.

Household characteristics of the participants

Household food environment in terms of fruit consumption
Factors affecting readiness to change in fruit consumption

Household food environment in terms of vegetable
consumption

Factors affecting readiness to change in vegetables consumption
Household food environment in terms of salt intake
Factors affecting readiness to change salt intake
Household food environment in terms of sugar intake
Factors affecting readiness to change sugar intake
Household food environment in terms of oil intake

Factors affecting readiness to change oil intake

Stages and processes of dietary behavior change in the
Stages of Change Model (Verheijden, 2004)

Stages of change of adult women with NCDs regarding the
five dietary behaviors

Algorithm components and identification of stage of change

25
61
63
64
67
na
75

78
82
87
91

95
98
103
105

121

127

LIST OF FIGURES

FIGURE PAGE

1 Readiness to Change Framework (Adapted framework from 49
Daivadanam et al., 2014)

2 Conceptual Framework of the Readiness to Change Dietary 51
Behaviors of Women with Diabetes, Cardiovascular
Diseases, and/or Hypertension

3 Consumption of Fruits 67
4 Stages of Readiness to Change in terms of Fruits 68
5 Consumption of Vegetables 14
6 Stages of Readiness to Change in terms Vegetables 16
7 Intake of Salt 82
8 Stages of Readiness to Change in terms Salt 84
9 Intake of Sugar 90
10 Stages of Readiness to Change in terms Sugar 92
in Intake of Oil 98

12 Stages of Readiness to Change in terms Oil 100

xii

APPENDIX

moa Dw

LIST OF APPENDICES

Algorithm for Identification of Stage of Change
Screening Questionnaire

Readiness to Change Questionnaire

Readiness to Change factors Questionnaire

Food Frequency Questionnaire

xiii

PAGE
127
128
129
132
134

LIST OF ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS.

AHA American Heart Association
cvD Cardiovascular disease
DASH Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension
DM Diabetes Mellitus
DOH Department of Health
DOST-FNRI Department of Science and Technology-
Food and Nutrition Research Institute
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization
FV Fruits and Vegetables
HBM Health Belief Model
HH Household
HT Hypertension
IDF International Diabetes Federation
MetS Metabolic Syndrome
NCD/s Non-communicable disease/s
sso Salt, sugar, oil
TPB Theory of Planned Behavior
TTM Transtheoretical Method
WHO World Health Organization

xiv

ABSTRACT
JAZELLE ANNE S. CALAYAG. University of the Philippines Los Bajios, June 2022.
Readiness to Change Dietary of Behaviors Among Adult Women with Non-
Communicable Diseases in Parafiaque City, Philippines.
Major Professor: Dr. LEILA S. AFRICA.

Non-communicable diseases (NCDs) have been the leading causes of death
globally. High intakes of processed, fried, sugary, salty, and fatty foods were found to
increase the risk of developing NCDs. This study determined the readiness to change
dietary behaviors among 247 adult women with NCDs from Parafiaque City and the

factors that affect this readiness to change using online data collection. Results showed

that majority of the participants’ stages of readiness to change dietary behaviors in terms
of consumption of fruits, sugar, salt and oil were in pre-contemplation, while most of the
participants were in action stage for vegetable consumption. Diagnosis of CVD, food
preference and frequency consumption tended to affect their readiness to change.
Household environment that includes purchasing power and support of household
members likewise played a vital role. Moreover, affordability was found to be an
apparent hindrance for change for all participants, specifically those in the pre-
contemplation stage. The study showed that assessing the readiness to change dietary
behaviors of adult women with NCDs can serve as basis in designing the appropriate
contextualized interventions with appropriate goals and action steps for the different

stages of change for each participant.

Keywords: non-communicable disease, readiness to change, dietary behaviors

Xv

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

Malnutrition is referred to as a deficiency, excess, or imbalance on the energy
and/or nutrient intake of an individual. In 2016, WHO reported that an estimate of 1.9
billion adults worldwide were overweight while an estimate of 462 million were
underweight. It was found that foods and drinks that are high in salt, sugar, and fav/oils
are cheaper and more readily available compared to nutritious foods like fresh fruits and
vegetables, milk, and legumes, which are not easily accessible and affordable to many
families (FAO, 2016). This leads to a rapid rise in the number of both adults and children
who are malnourished. Within the same community or household, it is common to find
malnourished people because of the common factors affecting them (WHO, 2016).
Sustained malnutrition can cause harm in the body and may disrupt its proper function
which could result in infections and diseases and may further complicate the illness,
leading to a vicious cycle of complications (Nutricia, n.d.). When diets fail to sustain
what the dietary guidelines proposes in order to meet the required intake, there is a
possibility for the prominent consequences of increasing the prevalence for chronic
lifestyle diseases or the non-communicable disease (NCDs) such as cancer and diabetes
(Brouwer & Mosack, 2015). As stated by Chuproski et al., (2012), causes of malnutrition
are influenced by health determinants and among the proximal determinants are the

consumption of food and exposure to disease, which would be related to different factors

such as food availability, accessibility, environment, etc., these factors are mostly
influenced by the family and community of the individual.

According to the Philippine Nutrition Facts and Figures 2015, since 1982, the
Philippines had already been battling with NCDs and the diseases of the heart became the
leading cause of the death in the country in the eight years that followed. NCDs was
accounted for 68% of deaths in the Philippines according to WHO (2019), and the
probability of dying between the ages of 30 and 70 years from one of the four main
NCDs (cancer, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, and chronic respiratory diseases) is
29%. In 2018, data from the DOH Philippine Health Statistics showed that the leading
cause of death with 15% was attributed to ischemic heart diseases, 5.4% due to diabetes
mellitus, 4.5% due to hypertensive diseases, 4.2% due to chronic lower respiratory
diseases, and 3.4% due to other heart diseases (DOH, 2018). For many decades, a strong
link has been reported between the increased risks of multiple chronic diseases or NCDs
and metabolic syndrome (Moore et al., 2017). According to the 6" National Nutrition
Survey (NNS) conducted by DOST-FNRI, the prevalence of metabolic syndrome in the
Philippines is 14.5% using the International Diabetes Federation (IDF) criteria. Metabolic
syndrome (MetS) is a cluster of conditions characterized by abdominal obesity, insulin
resistance, hypertension, and dyslipidemia. Incidence of developing MetS often
corresponds with the occurrence of obesity and type 2 diabetes (Saklayen, 2018).
Occurrence of metabolic syndrome often leads to NCDs which time and again, leads to

mortality.

If the lifestyle and behavior of the Filipino were modified towards healthy living,
these deaths could have been prevented since they greatly contribute to the increased risk
of developing NCDs. One of the lifestyle-related risk factors for NCDs is the diet. As
stated by Daivadanam et al. (2013), there is more to diet than just being the calories
consumed, or proportion of nutrients or adequacy of vitamins and minerals; it is more of
a complex behavioral phenomenon from a collaboration of different factors such as
location, availability, affordability, procurement, preparation time, and even cultural.
Summary of findings from the updating survey conducted by the DOST-FNRI showed
unhealthy diet as one of the modifiable risk factors that predisposes an individual to
lifestyle-related diseases wherein nine in 10 (91.4%) households failed to meet the
consumption of a total of five servings of fruits and vegetables per day as per WHO
recommendation (DOST-FNRI, 2016).

One of the integral parts of an individual’s lifestyle is his food choices which is
influenced by a lot of factors such as beliefs, norms, preferences, culture, habits,
availability of resources, health and nutrition; and their dietary patterns as affected by
their food choices often determine the nutritional and health status of the people (Mahan
& Escott-Stump, 2008). Moreover, adequate food intake is important as nutritional
wellbeing plays a very essential role in promoting and maintaining health, irrespective of
the factors affecting dietary patterns. The diet of an individual may influence the risk of
developing NCDs and may as well play a role in preventing and managing them (Nti,
2008). According to Bjelland et al. (2014), in a life-course perspective, the first to shape

the energy balance-related behaviors of an individual such as its physical activity, dietary

habits, etc. is the home environment. It has been indicated in previous studies that part of
a process of establishing and maintaining positive health behaviors is the encouraging
family system through provision of healthy foods and support for participating in healthy
behaviors.

According to Lozano et al. (2012), the utmost cause of death globally, are chronic
diseases wherein the most prominent contributions to mortality were considered to be the
different behavioral factors such as diet and activity patterns, etc. (Fisher et al., 2011).
These problems that continuously arises together with time is the very evident that there
is a need to impose positive change in the different factors that affects one’s health. But
before effecting change, one of the very important factors that has been mostly lacking
attention is the individual’s readiness to make the change. Across the different
disciplines, one of the most essential prognostics of how the implementation of programs,
interventions, policies, or practices will be successful, is the readiness for change. When
the people or organization find themselves ready to face change, they are less likely to
repel the implementation and would most likely participate better (Howley, 2012). The
theoretical basis for change readiness, according to Walinga (2008), has begun with early
studies on “creating readiness” by “reducing resistance to change”. What are usually
emphasized in models for change readiness are the importance of: disseminating
awareness of the need for change; and supporting the supposed ability of an individual to
change. According to Riddell et al. (2017), the readiness for change can be based on the
attitudes, beliefs, and intentions of the people about this change, and the extent to which

the changes are needed, and their capacity to successfully implement those changes.

Health behavior theories have been used over time in order to measure, predict, or
explain an individual or group’s certain behavior and the factors that influences their
behavior. Health behavior is defined as “those personal attributes such as beliefs,
expectations, motives, values, perceptions, and other cognitive elements; personality
characteristics, including affective and emotional states and traits; and overt behavior
patterns, actions, and habits that relate to health maintenance, to health restoration, and to
health improvement” (Gochman, 1997). Glanz et al. (2015) mentioned, that in conducting
interventions related to health behavior change, the primary goal is to enforce positive
changes in the health behaviors of the target population. If in any case the behavior has
been positively affected while health remains unimproved, other factors could be
explored to explain what may influence the health part. For this study, three health
behavior change theories: Transtheoretical Model (TTM), Health Belief Model (HBM),
and Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) have been combined in one model to properly

utilize them in assessing the readiness to change of households.

Problem Statement

NCDs have been the leading causes of death globally for decades now. Escalation
in the prevalence of NCDs worldwide goes alongside with the everyday unhealthy living
of an individual. One of the factors linked to developing NCDs, is individual lifestyle

such as dietary habits. Hig!

intakes of processed, fried, sugary, salty, and fatty foods
were found to increase the risk of developing NCDs (Agodi et al., 2018). Diet

improvement is proven as an effective strategy for prevention and management of NCDs,

but individual’s readiness to change and to adopt the intervention vary among
individuals. This study was thus conducted to determine the readiness to change dietary
behaviors among adult women with NCDs. This study specifically sought to answer the
following questions:

1. What are the socioeconomic characteristics of adult women with NCDs who are

members of barangay facebook groups in Parafiaque City?

v

. What are their dietary behaviors in terms of vegetables, fruit, salt, sugar and oil?

»

. What is their household environment?

=

. In what stage are they regarding their readiness to change their dietary behaviors?

a

Is there any relationship between their socioeconomic characteristics, dietary
behaviors, and household environment with their readiness in changing their

dietary behaviors?

Objectives of the study
In this regard, the study generally aims to assess the readiness to change dietary

behaviors of adult women with NCDs and who are members of barangay facebook
groups in Parafiaque City.
The specific objectives of this research are as follows:

1. to describe the socioeconomic characteristics of adult women with NCDs;

2. to identify the household environment of adult women with NCDs;

3. to assess the dietary behaviors on vegetables, fruit, salt, sugar and oil of adult

women with NCDs;

4. to determine the stages of readiness to change of adult women with NCDs in
changing their dietary behaviors on vegetables, fruit, salt, sugar and oil; and

5. to explain the relationship of the socioeconomic characteristics, dietary behaviors,
and household environment of adult women with NCDs with their readiness of

changing their dietary behaviors.

Significance of the study

The results of the study can provide descriptions on the adult women’s dietary
behavior and their level of welcoming change from their dietary behaviors. It can also
yield further information on how a presence of a disease condition could affect the
individual’s readiness to change. Other factors that may affect their readiness in changing
their dietary behaviors may also be obtained from the results of the study.

Moreover, outcomes of this study intend to provide further information and
understanding on how behavior change theories could be used as a tool in facilitating or
encouraging the modification of unhealthy diets or lifestyle which could be of help in
supplementing additional information on the fields of health and nutrition, and
community development.

Nutrition intervention programs are very important in addressing the nutrition
concerns of the people, specifically in the community. The assessment of the appropriate
stage of readiness of the target audience is necessary to be able to set appropriate goals
and action steps and determine the best strategies they need for intervention. The findings

of this study could be used in further researches to be able to create contextualized

intervention programs, projects and/or policies that will be appropriate for the different
stages of change.
Scope and Limitations of the Study

The targeted subjects of the study are adult women with NCDs who are members
of the barangay facebook groups in Parafiaque City. As defined in the operational
definition of terms, the NCDs considered for this study were limited to diabetes mellitus,
cardiovascular diseases, and hypertension, since these diseases have a comparable
general dietary management, that is also relevant to the type of dietary behaviors being
defined in this study.

Due to the current pandemic situation in the country, the collection of data was
very limited. The interview was conducted through a non-face-to-face medium, and the
participants were obtained online from the facebook groups in Parafiaque City.
Information regarding the diagnosis of NCDs were self-reported data and were validated
through the year when they were diagnosed and through the maintenance medication they
are taking or were prescribed. Since the identification and selection of the sample size
was limited online, as well as the data collected influenced by the pandemic, the results

of this study cannot be generalized for Filipino women with NCDs.

CHAPTER II

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

Non-Communicable Diseases

Noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) also known as chronic diseases is a medical
condition defined as noninfectious and non-transferable among people; tend to be of long
period and could result from a combination of genetic, physiological, environmental, and
behavior factors. The main types of NCDs are cardiovascular diseases (CVD), cancer,
chronic respiratory diseases (CRD), and diabetes (WHO, 2018). It has been indicated by
the reports from WHO (2014) that NCDs remain as the leading cause of death globally
but mostly in low- and middle-income countries, Mohammed et al. (2014) stated that
some factors influencing the increase of NCDs among low-and-middle-income countries
were driven by economic development such as increased consumption of processed foods
high in fat, salt, and sugar, decreased physical activities, and too much alcohol
consumption and tobacco use. It was also supported from the study of Udogadi et al.
(2019) stating that low- and middle-income countries face a rapid change in the nutrition
transition towards the increasing rate of NCDs, thus the resulting major change in diet
were seen directed towards the increased consumption of refined carbohydrates, added
sweeteners, edible oils, and animal-source foods, and reduced consumption of legumes,
other vegetables, and fruits, therefore increases the severity of existing NCDs. Almost

same factors were mentioned from the 2002 world health report of WHO, wherein the

10

important risk factors identified for NCDs were overweight, physical inactivity, alcohol
consumption, tobacco use, high blood pressure and high cholesterol (WHO, 2010). In the
Philippines, reports from DOH (2018) states that out of three Filipinos, one dies before
the age of 70 due to a noncommunicable disease.

Pinlac et al., (2015) conducted a systematic review which aimed to provide
information on the state of NCDs and their risk factors together with the existing efforts
to address the in the Philippines for the past 25 years. During the World Health
Assembly, a threefold strategy to prevent and control NCDs was identified: 1) prevention
through taking sensible action on modifiable risk factors such as unhealthy diet; 2)
management of metabolic syndromes that leads to NCDs; and 3) surveillance of
emerging NCD outbreaks and their causes. Collective results from the three strategies
would be of great help in combating NCDs. However, the third strategy is the most
crucial such as this would provide the necessary data to be able to conceptualize
appropriate actions in addressing NCDs.

Data that were outsourced showed an estimate of two-thirds out of all deaths in
the Philippines are due to NCDs with steady increasing mortality rates in the last decade
from the four most common NCDs: CVD, cancer, CRD, and diabetes. Between years
2000 and 2010, there was also a 50% surge in deaths specific to NCDs. These NCD-
related deaths affect every age group but mostly the younger age group including the
working population. On the average, 59% of the NCD-related deaths occurs earlier than
the age of 70. Aside from mortality, morbidity from NCDs is also increasing with an

estimate of a little less than 100,00 new cancer cases in the Philippines in 2012 and

1

expected to double in the next two decades. With the continuous rise in the prevalence of
NCDs, metabolic syndromes (increased blood pressure, high blood sugar, high waist
circumference and abnormal cholesterol levels) leading to NCDs are likewise shown to
have an increasing trend in the last 20 years.

As early as 1987, the Philippines through its Department of Health (DOH) has
been proactive in battling NCDs. Three years later, DOH launched its very first NCD-
specific program called the Philippine Cancer Control Program (DOH-PCCP) which
served as a commencement for a series of other related programs on prevention and
control of NCDs. Several other projects on NCDs prevention and contro! have been done
also with collaborative efforts form other agencies such as NNC by incorporation of the
project in the Philippine Plan of Action for Nutrition (PPAN), and benefit packages of
NCD management from Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (Philhealth). Not only
national agencies were involved in addressing NCDs issues but also the LGUs all over
the Philippines have been facilitating their own initiatives in combating NCDs. Aside
from programs, policies have also been implemented related to the prevention and control
of NCDs such as the Red Orchid Awards which will be awarded to tobacco-free regions.

Despite all the efforts to address NCDs, the prevalence rate still continues to rise.
There might still be gaps in the delivery of programs and policies from the national to
local grounds wherein monitoring should be strengthened to ensure that programs and
policies will be properly conveyed. Moreover, individual efforts are likewise important.
Increasing number of Filipinos consuming processed foods high in fat, salt, and oil might

be due to it being apparently more available and affordable to them. There should be

12

more efforts to look into these other factors wherein aside from the increasing metabolic
risk factors, there might be a deeper root cause of the problem such as poverty. Thus,
collaborative efforts from different agencies would really be necessary in combating
NCDs such that it being a public health concern could be rooted from wider grounds.

Kim & Oh (2013) conducted a review which aimed to appraise the prevalence and
trends of the six modifiable risk factors in the Korean population. The six modifiable
factors discussed in the review were mentioned in the World Health Report of WHO in
2002 identified as tobacco use, alcohol consumption, overweight physical inactivity, high
blood pressure, and high cholesterol (WHO, 2010). NCDs are now the leading cause of
globally but mostly on low-and-middle-income countries. In the 2008 data of WHO, four
out of five of NCD deaths occurred in the low-and-middle-income countries and one
third of these deaths hit people aged 60 years less. Most of the programs and projects
regarding NCDs targeted the modifiable risks factors in order to reduce NCD-related
mortality rates.

Use of tobacco has been the greatest cause of NCDs in Korea. It has been reported
that large percentage of morality rates due to cancer, coronary heart disease and stroke
has been caused by smoking. The Korea National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey (KNHANES) report showed that smoking rates was higher in males and in low-
class income households. In the same report, rates of alcohol consumption for at least
once a month showed 78% for male and 41% for female adults aged 19 years and older.
The prevalence rate of obesity continues to rise alongside the prevalence of diabetes.

Data showed that about one third of Korean adults have a body mass index (BMI) greater

13

that 25.0 kg/m? which is considered as overweight. It was also observed in Korea that
obesity increased in men of all income categories while in women, prevalence of obesity
was shown to increase from 26% to 34% in low-income quartile and decreased from 25%
to 22% in highest-income quartile. For physical activity, KNHANES report showed that
the percentage of exercising for both Korean men and women decreased and as their age
increased, their physical inactivity also increased. Stroke is one of the leading causes of
death among Koreans which is largely attributed to high blood pressure. KNHANES
report also showed that prevalence of hypertension in the Korean population did not
change drastically since 1998; moreover, mean blood pressure of the population was
observed to decrease continuously and was prompted by the improved management of
hypertension among the patients. However, despite the improvements in hypertension
indexes, stroke still remains the number one cause of death in Koreans. Little attention
has been given to high blood cholesterol in Korea as its prevalence rate was not as
alarming as compared to other risk factors. However, KNHANES report showed that
prevalence of high total cholesterol increased in 1998 from 9.9% to 14.5 % in 2011.
Given the wide spectrum of modifiable risk factors, there is a need to have an all-
inclusive approach in order to address NCDs. It was apparent in the data shown that the
Koreans are still struggling in changing their behaviors related to the modifiable risk
factors despite the continuous rise in NCD-related deaths. Monitoring of the prevalence
rates and trends should be reinforced to provide evidence-based programs, projects and
policies in reducing the burden of NCDs. Furthermore, existing strategies such as the

NCD prevention and control program should be strengthened as well as information

14

dissemination on the risks factors to increase awareness and prevention on adhering to

behaviors intensifying the risk factors.

Diabetes Mellitus: Dietary Management and Studies on Behavior Change

Diabetes Mellitus (DM) is a group of metabolic disorders characterized by
elevation in blood sugar and altered energy metabolism caused by poor insulin secretion
by the pancreas, or ineffectiveness of insulin produced, or both. Insulin is a kind of
hormone that regulates the blood sugar. High levels of blood sugar, also known as
hyperglycemia, is a common effect of unmanaged diabetes and over time leads to a more
serious damage. There are three types of diabetes, the most common is type 2 diabetes
which occurs when the body becomes resistant to the insulin produced and it mostly seen
on adults. Another is type 1 diabetes, previously known as insulin-dependent diabetes,
where in the pancreas produces little or no insulin on its own and requires daily
administration of insulin. Another type is one that occurs during pregnancy, called
Gestational diabetes, where in levels of blood glucose is above normal but below the
diagnostic of diabetes. The pregnant women and her child are both at an increased risk of
developing type 2 diabetes in the future. Usual symptoms for those with DM were
polydipsia, polyuria, and polyphagia which corresponds to increase in thirst, urination,
and appetite respectively, which may or may not appear concurrently (WHO, n.d.).
According to IDF (2020), 463 million people have DM worldwide while in the

Philippines, 6.3% was the prevalence for adults aged 20 to 79 years old. Another co-

15

morbidity that is usually related to DM is obesity, and in the Philippines, its burden is
also significant at 4.7% (Arcellana & Jimeno, 2020).

Nutrition and diet remain a vital player in the prevention and management of
diabetes. In 2015, the IDF Word Diabetes Day focused its campaign on healthy eating as
one of the key factors in preventing type 2 DM and managing type | and type 2 DM. It
also emphasized that unhealthy dietary practices increases the occurrences of type 2 DM,
related complications, and other NCDs (Cho et al., 2017). In the 9" edition of IDF
Diabetes Atlas, it was mentioned that randomized controlled trials that were conducted
‘over the past two decades clearly showed that management and delaying the onset of type
2 DM is possible through lifestyle modification. Attempts are focused on targeting
unhealthy diet and physical activity as the major drivers of overweight and obesity which
are the most crucial modifiable risk factor of developing type 2 DM (Williams et al.,
2019). The American Diabetes Association (ADA) provided a general recommendation
for the dietary management of DM (Table 1). In the prevention and management of DM,
it is important to note that the type or quality of nutrients are more essential than the
amount or quantity. For carbohydrates, recommended sources are from vegetables, fruits,
whole grains, legumes, and dairy and should avoid carbohydrate sources from added fats,
sugar, and sodium. For dietary fats, it is recommended to limit intakes of saturated fat,
high fat diet and dietary cholesterol. Recent evidence showed that diet with high intake of
unsaturated fatty acids prevent development of metabolic diseases such as type 2 DM

since the more fat there is in the diet, the harder time it takes for the insulin to get glucose

16

into the cells. For the intake of sodium, it is recommended to be reduced to < 2,300

mg/day (Udogadi et al., 2019).

Table 1. Recommendations of Medical Nut!

ADA Recommendations

Energy Balance

Carbohydrates

Sucrose,
Fructose, Caloric
Sweeteners

Sodium

Recommended reduced energy intake to
promote weight loss in overweight/obese
adults

Recommend carbohydrate intake from
veggies, fruits, whole grains, legumes,
and dairy; avoid other carbohydrate
sources, especially those with added fats,
sugar, and sodium

Substitute foods with lower glycemic load
for those with higher load.

Consume at least 25 g/day of fiber for
women; 38 g/day for men (14 g
fiber/1,000 keals/day) and > 50% of all
grains should be whole grains

Recommend minimizing sucrose intake
when substituting for starch; avoid
displacing nutrient-dense foods;
limivavoid sugar-sweetened beverages.

Recommends reduced intake to <2,300
mg/day for patients with diabetes and
hypertension

Modest weight loss
may improve
glycemia, BP, lipids,
particularly early in
disease process

Modest improvement
in glycemic control

Reduce risk for weight
gain and worsening of
cardiometabolic
profile.


Table 1. Continued...

17

ADA Recommendations Benefits

Dietary Fats Recommends alternatives like May improve
Mediterranean-style, MUFA-rich eating —_glycemic control,
pattern, <10% of calories of saturated fats, CVD risk factors.
<300 mg dietary cholesterol/day of Benefits on
cholesterol, Limit as much as possible lipoproteins, CVD
Trans-fat, prevention, health

outcomes.

Eat fish (particularly fatty fish) > 2
times/week, and Increase intake of foods
with EPA, DHA, ALA rather than low-
fat, high carbohydrate in patients with
type 2 diabetes

Protein Diabetes without diabetic kidney disease; _No ideal intake to
No ideal intake to improve glycemic improve glycemic
control or CVD risk with emphasis on control.
individual goals. Diabetes and macro-or
microalbuminuria; reduction of protein
intake below daily allowance of 0.8g/kg
body weight not recommended.
‘Do not use carb sources high in protein to
treat or prevent hypoglycemia for type 2
diabetes.

Alcohol Recommends daily moderation. Women: —_ Alcohol consumption

Micronutrient

‘$1 drink/day and Men: < 2 drinks/day

Recommends optimizing food choices to
meet recommended micronutrient dietary
allowance/intake

may increase risk for
delayed
hypoglycemia,
especially if taking
insulin


18

Knight et al. (2015) conducted a study entitled “Diet Self-management and
Readiness to Change in Underserved Adults with Type 2 Diabetes” which aimed to
assess underserved patient perspectives toward dietary change with the IDF self-
management framework. Readiness to change diet in underserved samples may provide
guidance for future intervention in high-risk populations, in this case, the study also
aimed to assess the utility of a rapid assessment of readiness to change diet in a medically
underserved sample. There are many opportunities offered to promote a healthy diet
especially for those patients with diabetes, however some may resist making these dietary
changes. It is important to understand the root to this receptivity especially for the
underserved samples since more often than not, they are the ones who have limited
access to nutrition and diabetes education which in turn may have tendencies to exhibit
poorer awareness of diabetes management strategies.

The study recruited from sites that are accessible to underserved, low-income
adults such as health department diabetes education programs and university-based
medical clinics in a large southeastern US city. The respondent is eligible if one is an
adult diagnosed with type 2 diabetes. For the assessment of the general diabetes self-care,
the study used a brief, patient-centered self-report questionnaire called Personal Diabetes
Questionnaire (PDQ) which consists of four domains including nutritional management,
blood glucose monitoring, medication adherence, and physical activity. The PDQ also
assessed the individual’s perceptions and hindrances regarding diabetes self-care and
readiness to change. Aside from the PDQ, the study also used Diabetes History

Questionnaire (DHQ) which assessed the individual’s basic medical and demographic

19

information that is related to diabetes. Another instrument used in the study is the
Diabetes Knowledge Test (DKT) which assessed the individual’s general knowledge on
diabetes including symptoms associated with its co-morbidities. And lastly, the study also
used Diabetes Self-Efficacy Scale (DSES) which assessed the individual’s self-efficacy
related to behaviors in managing diabetes.

Results of the study showed that stage-based comparisons identified significant
differences in diabetes and dietary domains, such as those participants whore in the
Action stage exhibited fewer behavioral dietary barriers, more frequent dietary problem-
solving, and greater diabetes self-efficacy as compared to those participants who are in
the Contemplation and Preparation stages. These findings demonstrated that the readiness
to change approach was able to differentiate and distinguish those participants by
multiple health behaviors and perceptions, which is necessary in sustaining dietary
change over time. It was also shown that Diabetes knowledge did not make any
significant difference between stages and was not linked to dietary self-management
behaviors thus, suggests that one’s lack of understanding of diabetes does not nearly
contribute in its readiness to change diet. Furthermore, the results of the study support the
use of a readiness to change approach to dietary adherence in underserved clinical
samples with type 2 diabetes and a different set of sample population could be further
investigated as well.

Jalilian et al. (2019) conducted a cross-sectional study entitled “Readiness for
Diet Change and Its Association with Diet Knowledge and Skills, Diet Decision Making

and Diet Barriers in Type 2 Diabetic Patients” with the objective to investigate stages of

20

change for dietary in type 2 diabetics and its association with diet knowledge, skills, diet
decision making, and diet barriers. Successful management of diabetes has already been
proven to postpone the complications of the disease and it is more of the patient’s
responsibility to self-manage his disease. Self-management is often in line with behavior
change because it incorporates modification in the patient’s lifestyle including its diet as
it is one of the most contributing factors to the disease. However, with limited access to a
healthy diet, diabetes education and less awareness of self-management strategies, it
results to poor diet and often times, unwelcome interventions. Assessing the individual’s
readiness to change may help in understanding which intervention would be better for
them at their own stage of change.

The study utilized a cross-sectional design. For the tools, the study utilized the
PDQ in measuring the patient’s diabetes self-care behaviors, perceptions and barriers and
physical activity. The PDQ used in this study consists of many parts: Diet Knowledge
and Skills part of the of the PDQ was used in assessing their dietary practices; Diet
Change Readiness part for assessing their reading for change for attempting dietary self-
management; Diet Decision Making part for their general diet-specific decision making
strategies; Eating Problems part for assessing the patient’s eating behavior patterns that
hinders with self-management; and Diet Barriers part that looks into other factors such as
environmental, social, and emotional factors that hinders with the patient’s self-
management.

Results of the study showed that nearly half of the patients were classified in the

pre-contemplation stage, thus are not yet in stage of considering dietary change as

21

necessary in controlling their blood glucose. It was also shown that these patients lacked
adequate awareness regarding the essence of adhering to diet as a way of controlling their
blood glucose. Only one thirds of the subjects were found to be in the action stage and
were observed to practicing fat-reducing behaviors, consumed more [adequate] fruits and
vegetables, and monitored their carbohydrate intake. It was also found that the more
eating problems and dietary adherence barriers the patient have, the less likely they are"in
the progressive stages of readiness to change. Thus, eating problems and dietary
adherence were found to have the most impact on the preparation stage of dietary change.
Factors such as diet knowledge and skills, diet decision making, and diet barriers were
found to contribute to diet readiness to change.

Zare et al. (2020) conducted a mixed method study entitled “The Barriers and
Facilitators of Self-Management Among Adults with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: A Trans
Theoretical Model (TTM)-Based Mixed Study in Iran” which aimed to determine the
behavioral status of the patients with type 2 DM based on their stage of change and to
explore what are the perceived facilitators and barriers of self-management in sample of
Iranian patients with type 2 DM. According to Busetto et al. (2015), self-management of
chronic diseases helps in reducing its burden on patients and improves their outcome.
Lifestyle modification is one self-management for type 2 DM which includes managing
their diet. However, with the absence of some effective and sustainable strategies in
supporting the patients with type 2 DM in managing their disease, might result to

overwhelming them, their families, and their communities. The patient’s readiness to

22

change and several contextual factors will influence their preparedness in making their
own informed decision.

The study applied a mix method sequential explanatory design and was conducted
through two phases: the quantitative data, followed by the qualitative data to explain and
interpret the findings for the quantitative data. The participants were first divided based
on the classification of their stage of change. A focus group discussion was also utilized
to be able to name the barriers and facilitators that influences the self-management of
patients with type 2 DM. For the quantitative phase, the patients were asked regarding
their sociodemographic and anthropometric status, and history of disease, as well as the
assessment of their stage of change. For the qualitative phase, the focus group discussion
was conducted. The patients were group based on the stage of their readiness to change.

Results showed that the common hindrance of self-management for both action
and pre-action stages were lower socio-economic status, poor performance of treatment
team, physical-intellectual factor, and lack of planning to change while common
facilitators for both stages were found to be satisfaction from treatment, belief in
diabetes, treatment team support, nutritional knowledge, and religious beliefs. The use of
stage of change in classifying the patient’s readiness to change could be a vital tool in
creating contextual interventions for the patients in different stages. It was prevalent in all
three studies how the classification of individual’s readiness to change could be of help in
designing a contextual intervention appropriate for the individual’s stage that they could

likely respond to, based on their own level of readiness.

23

Cardiovascular Disease and Hypertension: Dietary Management and Studies on
Behavior Change

Cardiovascular Diseases (CVD) are group of disorders of the heart and blood
vessels which includes: coronary heart disease (CHD) which is a disease of the blood
vessels that supplies the heart muscle; cerebrovascular disease which is a disease of the
blood vessels that supplies the brain; peripheral arterial disease which is a disease of the
blood vessels supplying the arms and legs; rheumatic heart disease which is a damage to
the heart muscle and heart valves from a rheumatic fever that is caused by streptococcal
bacteria; congenital heart disease which is a malformations of heart structure that usually
exists at birth; deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism which are blood clots in
the leg veins which can be displaced and transfer to the heart and lungs; and other
conditions. Out of five CVD deaths, four of them are due to heart attacks and strokes,
which are mainly caused by a blockage that prevents blood from flowing to the heart or
brain, Most common reason for blockage is the build-up of fatty deposits on the inner
walls of the blood vessels supplying the heart or brain. Heart attacks and strokes could
also be caused by bleeding from a blood vessel in the brain or from blood clots (WHO,
2017). According to Petrie et al. (2018), hypertension intensifies CVD leading to
mortality. Hypertension is defined as systolic blood pressure values >140 mmHg and/or
diastolic blood pressure values >90 mmHg. It was regarded as the most important global
risk factor for morbidity and mortality according to the Global Burden Disease Study by

the WHO (Kjeldsen, 2018). In the Philippines, mortality rate caused by heart diseases are

24

still leading. In 2018, data from the DOH Philippine Health Statistics showed that the
leading cause of death with 15% was attributed to ischemic heart disease, 4.5% due to
hypertensive diseases, and 3.4% due to other heart diseases (DOH, 2018).

Same with any other NCDs, nutrition and diet also perform a vital role in the
development and progression, as well as prevention and management of CVDs and
hypertension, and optimization of the diet must be considered as important lifestyle
modification for the prevention and management of CVD. According to Alissa & Ferns
(2017) previous studies were found to observe that high intakes of fruits, vegetables,
legumes, whole grains, poultry, and fish were associated with lower cardiovascular risk.
On the other hand, a westernize diet that is characterized by high intakes of red and
processed meat, sweets, fried food, and refined grains were associated with increased
cardiovascular risk, without counting in other lifestyle factors. Pallazola et al. (2019)
mentioned in their study that dietary modification is really that cornerstone of CVD
prevention since poor diet is shown to be the leading cause of obesity and type 2 DM,
which are both the leading contributors to CVD morbidity and mortality. Furthermore,
only less than 10% of hypertensive patients were found out to report healthy eating habits
(Gerage et al., 2020). The Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) is a dietary
pattern that has been initiated and promoted by National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute
(NHLBI) to control and prevent hypertension, see Table 2 (Amett et al., 2019; NIH

NHLBI, 2010; Padma, 2014)

Table 2. DASH Diet Recommendations

25

Food Group _ Recommendations

Grains 6-8 servings per day
Focus should be on whole wheat grains, pasta, brown rice, whole
grain bread. Avoid using cream, cheese, or butter

Fruits 4-5 servings per day
Except avocado and coconut, all fruits are rich in fiber, potassium,
magnesium and low in fat. Do not leave edible peel of frits like apple,
pears, etc. which are rich in nutrients and fiber. If canned fruit juice,
make sure no sugar is added.

Lean meat, 6 or fewer servings per day

fish, and

poultry Meat is a rich source of iron, proteins, B vitamins, and zinc. Eat more
of fishes that are high in Omega 3 fatty acids like salmon, herring, and
tuna.
Instead of frying in fat, trim away skin and fat from poultry and meat
and bake, broil, grill, or roast poultry and meat. Soybean products all
have amino acids and can be an alternative to meats

Vegetables 4-5 servings per day
Green leafy vegetable is recommended but all vegetables are good
source of nutrients

Sodium 2-3 g per day
Avoid processed and canned products since those foods are mostly
high in sodium. Limit intake of cured foods such as bacon and ham,
and condiments such as soy sauce. Use spices for flavoring food in
cooking and in table instead of salt.

Nuts, seeds, 4-5 servings per week

and legumes

Seeds like almonds, kidney beans, peas, lentils, sunflower seeds, etc.,
are a good source of magnesium, protein, and potassium. These seeds
have phytochemicals and fiber which protect against CVD and some
cancers.


Table 2. Continued...

Food Group

Recommendations

26

Dairy

Fats and oils

Sweets

Alcohol and
caffeine

23 servings per day

Dairy products like milk, yogurt, and cheese are rich in calcium,
protein, and vitamin D. Check for cheese since fat-free cheeses are
high in sodium. For patient having lactose intolerance, lactose-free
dairy products are recommended

23 servings per day

27% of total calorie intake is by fat. DASH diet limits the daily
saturated fat intake to less than 6% of total calories by limiting the
intake of whole milk, creams, eggs, butter, cheese, meat, coconut, and
pal oils. Avoid foods like fried items, baked items and cracker which
have a lot of trans fat in them.

5 or fewer servings per week

Choose sweets that are low in fat like hard candy, sorbet, jellybean,
etc, Reduce intake of cola or other soft drinks ad replace them with
butter milk, coconut water, low fat milk, and plain water. Avoid
intake of added sugars which only adds calories but no nutritive value
One drink per day for women and two or less drinks per day for men

Caffeine can cause an increase in blood pressure temporarily; hence,
hypertensive patients should take caffeine with caution

Eshah (2019) conducted a study entitled “Readiness for Behavior Change in

Patients Living with Ischemic Heart Disease” with the purpose of assessing the readiness

of patients with ischemic disease to change health behaviors as well as identify the

factors that are significant to predict this change. To successfully manage ischemic heart

disease (IHD), related risk factors should be successfully controlled, and fortunately most

of its risk factors are modifiable such as their lifestyle. Importance of stages of change

27

has been considered when designing and implementing cardiac rehabilitation and risk
reduction programs,

The design of the study was a cross-sectional descriptive correlation design. Study
questionnaires were provided to the participants and were answered independently. For
their readiness to change, the study used the readiness for lifestyle changed inventory that
was developed by Krisko-Hagel in 2009 with the purposes of assessing the association
between their stage of readiness to change ad commitment to a cardiac rehabilitation
program. The questions were designed to evaluate their readiness to change in terms of
six behaviors: smoking cessation, physical activity, weight control, control over intake of
high-fat diet, eating fruits and vegetables, and practicing relaxation.

The results of the study showed that two thirds of the participants were in the
maintenance stage for behaviors concerning eating fruits and vegetable while half of
them were also in the maintenance stage for behavior concerning control over the intake
of high-fat diet. It was also shown that those participants with high cholesterol levels

showed a higher stage in terms of their readiness to reduce the amount of fat in their diet.

In connection with this, those patients being at a higher risk [of susceptibility to disease]
may strengthen their motivation to change their behavior. Moreover, those patients with
high income and being employed were found to predict higher readiness to change their
behavior in terms of eating fruits and vegetables. Thus, this behavior may relate to
economic status as those persons with higher income have relatively more resources and
access to resources. The study concluded that higher CVD risk predicts higher readiness

to change their health behavior.

28

Shakiba et al. (2018) conducted a study entitled “Efficacy of Transtheoretical
Model om Preventive Nutritional Behaviors of Cardiovascular Diseases: A Randomized
Controlled Trial” which aimed to assess the effect of educational-based promotion
interventions using TTM on nutritional behaviors (such as consumption of fruits,
vegetables, and fish) in order to reduce the risk factors for CVD in high-risk adults. The
study conducted a randomized controlled trial for adults aged 30-50 years old. Recorded
information from the patients were their knowledge regarding CVD; food intake status of
fruits, vegetable, and fish; and information regarding the intermediate factors such as
their BMI, abdominal obesity, blood pressure, blood lipids, and blood glucose. The
readiness for change of the patients were assessed based on their current food intake
status and they were classified on their stages of change. High-risk participants were
selected and were divided into the intervention and the controlled group. The intervention
group received intervention programs and were prepared based on the patient’s stage of
readiness to change and were carried through training classes, brochures and posters, and
text messages.

Results of the study showed a significant difference in knowledge and
consumption of fruits and vegetables between the intervention and the control groups.
However, even after the intervention, no significant difference was found in the
consumption of fish for both of the groups. It was found in the study how the model-
based intervention was found effective, since it was contextualized to cater the stage of

readiness to change of the patients.

29

Rodriguez et al. (2019) conducted a study entitled “A Tailored Behavioral
Intervention to Promote Adherence to the DASH Diet” which aimed to determine if a
TTM-based tailored intervention is effective in advancing the dietary stage of change and
improving adherence to the DASH dietary pattern of an individual. They did a
randomized controlled trial which evaluated whether a telephone-consultation, tailored
behavioral intervention (TBI) or non-tailored behavioral intervention (NTI) as compared
to the usual care (UC) in controlling the blood pressure (BP) and other BP-related
behaviors of individuals with uncontrolled BP. They first conducted a baseline data
collection by assessing and categorizing the participants dietary stage of change using the
TTM construct. After the baseline data collection, the participants were randomized into
the 3 study arms stratified by their dietary stage of change: first is the TBI which is a
TTM-based telephone counseling for 6 months; the next is the NTI which is a non-
tailored health education telephone consultation for 6 months; and the UC which only
participated through in-person visits with nothing more than the usual care.

The results of the study showed that the use of a tailored TTM-based intervention
can improve adherence to DASH dietary pattern as compared to NTI and UC. After the
6-month tailored intervention, the TBI group showed significant advance in the stage of
change adherence and increase in DASH diet adherence of the participants. The
intervention which was tailored to the participants stage of change were shown to have
been effective and more helpful in improving their dietary adherence. The results of the

study suggested that the use of contextualized or tailored interventions based on the

30

participant’s stage of change based on TTM may successfully improve adherence to

complex dietary recommendations requiring multiple behavioral changes.

Health Behavior Change and Health Behavior Theories

Parkerson et al. (1993) refers to health behavior as the actions of individuals,
groups, or organizations as well as the determinants, correlates, and consequences of
those actions, which also incorporates social change, policy development, and
implementation, will result in improved coping skills and an enhanced quality of life.
Which is algo similar to how Gochman (1997) defined health behavior as “those personal
attributes such as beliefs, expectations, motives, values, perceptions, and other cognitive
elements; personality characteristics, including affective and emotional states and traits;
and overt behavior patterns, actions, and habits that relate to health maintenance, to
health restoration, and to health improvement”. Particularly, the goal of conducting an
intervention on health behavior change is to enforce positive changes in the health
behaviors of the target population. Moreover, in any case that behavior may change but
health would remain unimproved, then other factors could be explored as well (Glanz et
al., 2015b).

Given that individuals are an avenue for health behavior change, there are other
range of settings and audiences, especially with the health problems currently arising, that
is also in need of health behavior strategies such as in homes and in communities. To be
able to reach large population, community-based health promotion appeals to social

relationships and organizations through media together with interpersonal strategies.

31

People in their homes could also be delivered with health behavior change interventions
through traditional public health means and through a variety of communication channels

(Glanz et al., 2015b). In the study conducted by Kegler et al. (2012), a potential to

support health behavior change at home have been demonstrated by in-home coaching
which helped people improve their home environment.

Over time, health behavior theories have been used in order to measure, predict,
or explain an individual or group’s certain behavior and the factors that influences their
behavior. Glanz et al. (2015) mentioned in their review, that although there are a lot of
theories and models developed and being used in conducting research on health behavior
change, such as some of them are considered minor versions of other existing theories,
the dominant used health behavior change theories are the Transtheoretical Model, Health
Belief Model and Social Cognitive Theory (SCT), and a few of Theory of Reasoned
Action (TRA) and Theory of Planned Behavior. But practically speaking, to have an
effective health behavior change, the appropriate behavior change theories should be used
‘on the proper situation of a study. Most of the health behavior change theories are
actually focused on the individual and very few theories are related to the community
despite the increasing number of community-based health interventions that are currently
arising. Social ecological model is one of the few models that have been developed in an
attempt to explain the interactions of health behaviors in a community setup, although
have not progressed to the building of a stage theory (Daivadanam et al., 2014). When
environment ands and policies support healthful choices, and the individuals are

motivated and informed in making those choices, healthy behaviors are being maximized.

32

On the other hand, when there is no support from the environment about healthful
choices, it is believed to produce weak and short-term effects on the behavior change.
The proposal of the social ecological model is that, in order to achieve and maintain a
positive health behavior change, there is a need to link both the individual-level and
environmental-and-policy-level interventions (Rimer & Brewer, 2015).

In seeking to change a problematic health behavior, the researcher doing the study
should very well consider the nature of the health problem or condition they wish to
intervene in order employ the appropriate theories and methods in understanding the

health behavior and how to effect change.

Review of Studies on the Application of Theories and Models to Dietary Behaviors
Transtheoretical Model (TTM)

Developed by Prochaska and DiClemente in the late 1970s, TTM’s emphasis is
on the decision-making of an individual, thus it is a model of intentional change. The
assumption of TTM is that change in behavior does not happen quickly and decisively
rather change in behavior happens continuously through-a cyclical process (LaMorte,
2018). Mundorf et al. (2018) added that TTM, addresses behavior-intention gap by
gradually moving people from ignorance towards increased readiness and finally to take
part in a series of stages of change. Past literatures mentioned about TTM being mainly
applied in areas such as drug and alcohol problems, cigarette smoking, diet, and exercise,
wherein the target for intervention in areas mentioned above points at a specific behavior

change (Kaldo et al., 2006). Even though TTM was first used to assess the readiness to

33

change of those who are addicted to smoking, it was also found to be one of the most
popular theory being used to examine other health behavior change (Horwath, 1999)
aside from addiction. Related studies were explored on the application of TTM to dietary
change.

Horwath et al. (2013) conducted a longitudinal, observational study to determine
whether TTM constructs differ between individuals making successful versus
unsuccessful stage transitions for consumption of five or more servings of fruits and
vegetables each day and thus provide a basis in designing health promotion interventions.
The following TTM hypotheses were tested in the study: 1) people who successfully
progress from precontemplation have higher perceived pros of changing and more
frequently utilize experiential processes of change, compared with those who remain in
precontemplation stage; 2) people who successfully progress from preparation have lower
perceived cons of changing, higher self-efficacy, and more frequent utilization of change
processes as compared to those who remain in preparation or regress to an earlier stage;
and 3) people who are successfully stable in maintenance have higher self-efficacy and
more frequently utilize behavioral processes of change compared to those who regress to
an earlier stage.

The design of the study was a randomly selected, multiethnic cohort of adults
assessed at 6-month intervals over two years. A computer-assisted telephone interview
survey was employed by using a random digit dialing among Hawaiian residents. The
questionnaire assessed all TTM constructs including their stage of readiness in

consuming five or more servings of FV each day together with the process of change,

34

self-efficacy, decisional balance, in addition to demographic questions and intake of FV.
The successful and unsuccessful stage transitions was defined by subtracting the results
of the scores between time 2 and time | from the four transition periods. It was
considered successful or stage progression when stage transition score was > 0, while it
was unsuccessful or stage regression/no change when stage transition score was < 0.

Results showed that those people who progressed from precontemplation stage
showed significantly greater use of the behavioral processes and consciousness raising;
with self-liberation under the behavioral process demonstrating consistent significant
difference over time. The study showed that there is limited support to prove that the
hypothesized TTM constructs predict successful transitions out of precontemplation. As
well as the statement from Prochaska et al. (2015) regarding the behavioral processes
only becoming relevant in the later stages transition. The finding may seem inconsistent
with previous literatures except for a study conducted by De Vet et al. (2008), wherein
they found that experiential and behavioral processes increased simultaneously, instead
of successively, which suggested that behavioral processes may already be relevant even
at early stage transitions. This shows that in the case of dietary behavior change, an
individual has to perform the behavior repeatedly in the succeeding stages even at the
early stages and requiring a sustained mechanism as compared 10 cessation behaviors
such as smoking.

Povey (1999) conducted a study which proposed that since the dietary behaviors
and the addictive behaviors upon which the model was originally based are different in

nature, the application of the Transtheoretical Model’s stages of change to dietary

35

behaviors may essentially be problematic. Specific problems with stage categorization for
dietary change was considered such as problems due to the probable discrepancy between
the person’s perceived and actual dietary behavior. The study employed the use of
qualitative categories (eating a healthy diet, eating a low-fat diet, eating five portions of
fruits and vegetables per day) as opposed to the standard time-dependent categories
(precontemplation, contemplation, preparation, action, and maintenance) used in the
TTM stages of change such that they hypothesized that the use of qualitative rather time-
dependent techniques would yield into a more realistic estimate of categories of stage of
change. Moreover, they also examined the extent to which the people used different time
frames in their effort to change their dietary behavior, as an attempt to explore the
relevance of time frames.

Results showed that these people who were categorized under action (making a
change) or under maintenance (maintaining a change) were performing for a range of
different time frames, with no specific cut-off point. These results suggested that the use
of time-dependent methods for categorizing stages of change were less appropriate
compared to categorizing people into stages of dietary change by recognizing the
qualitative attributes between them. More so, as the categorization of behavior becomes
more specific (i.e., from ‘eating healthy diet’ to ‘eating five portions of vegetables per
day’), results appeared to have bigger proportion of people in the motivational stages and
Jesser in action and maintenance stages. Reasons for this could be that more people were
eating (or perceive themselves to be eating) a healthy diet generally or could be due to the

different interpretations of ‘healthy eating’. These results could explain that people may

36

tend to less likely accurately perceive whether they are engaging in a general and widely
interpretable behavior categories such as ‘eating healthy diet’ than when a specific
behavior is stated.

The difference between dietary behaviors and addictive behaviors was found in
this study to be a gap such that they have different goal or endpoint. With the addictive
behavior, the goal is to completely abstain from the addictive behavior, whereas for the
dietary behavior, the goal of eating a healthy diet is more of a general behavior. With
this, problems may arise when the individual interpretations of the behavior do not agree
with the present nutritional guidelines and may lead to some individuals incorrectly
interpreting whether they are eating healthy or not.

Since the root cause of the problem relies on the individual not properly
interpreting its behavior in agreement with what should be a healthy diet, the solution
could be assessing first the individual’s knowledge on the topic and investigate whether
their knowledge meets the standard information on the matter. This will help the
researcher to assess whether the individual have wrong perceptions regarding its dietary
behaviors. More so, as stated in the study, the general ‘healthy eating’ term may not be
properly construed by the respondents because of its wide definition and interpretations
thus, using specific ‘behaviors’ may lead to a better understanding and better
interpretation for the respondents.

Ni Mhurchu et al. (1997) conducted a review study entitled “Applying the Stages-
of-Change Model to Dietary Change” which summarized studies on TTM and dietary

change and made recommendations for future research. The result of the review poses a

37

problem that regarding the assessment of dietary change as compared to change of
behavior in smoking in which the TTM was first applied. Dietary change is more
complex since it requires a person for a continuous effort in doing the ‘proper’ behavior
and to simultaneously adapt it in contrast to smoking behavior where the assessment of

change centers around the cessation of the behavior. Given this sit

‘ion, it is possible for
some people to be in more than one stage when talking about a generic ‘healthy eating
behavior’. One way to assess this conflict is to assess the stage of change in relation to a
specific food component that needs to be changed rather than using the general term of
‘healthy eating behavior’. Moreover, assessment of dietary change in terms of ‘healthy
eating behavior’ will largely depend on the dietary knowledge of the individual. Bowen
et al. (1994), listed more complications in applying the stage of change model in dietary
change such as: defining the goals of dietary change; complexity of dietary change; low
level of public knowledge on terms of nutrition and diet.

From the studies reviewed, results obtained have been validated by using dietary
assessment methodology in order to assess actual dietary intake. A link between dietary
intake and staging classification was found when a proper dietary assessment was
employed for the subject. This is for the reason that stage of dietary change is considered
to be more complex than assessment of smoking behavior. The author of the review study
suggested that a staging questionnaire specific to dietary change which includes dietary
assessment component should be developed and incorporated into the instrument.
Moreover, use of a questionnaire which focuses on a specific dietary change would also

be able to produce more credible results. The author also mentioned about the stage of

38

change model being too simple to take into account all stages of the dietary change,
another recommendation regarding this would be that the model may need to be adapted
or extended to be able to take in the complexity of dietary change.

There have been a number of studies conducted in applying TTM to dietary
behaviors and most of them found almost the same gaps in their studies. While TTM has
been found to be a good measure for readiness of change, it was also shown in previous
literatures that TTM alone is not that sufficient to properly classify the readiness to
change of an individual, and of an organization (e.g., a household), and to be able to fully
grasp the proper measurement of one’s readiness to change, it may be appropriate to

combine TTM with other health behavior change theories.

Health Belief Model (HBM)

In 1950s, HBM was developed by social psychologists in the US Public Health
Service in order to explain the failure in participating among programs to prevent and
detect diseases such as tuberculosis. It was later on extended to study the behavioral
responses of people to opportunities to detect diseases. According to Ronis (1992), past
literatures found HBM to be useful in understanding preventive health behaviors. It is
widely known as a tool used to try and predict health behaviors and it is based on a theory
that the willingness of a person to change their health behavior is primarily due to their:
perceived susceptibility, perceived severity, perceived benefits, perceived barriers, cues
to action, and self-efficacy. HBM also assumes that other factors such as demographic,

psychosocial, etc., may affect beliefs and indirectly influence the health behavior of an

39

individual (Skinner et al., 2015). Related studies were explored on the application of
HBM to dietary change.

H. S. Kim et al. (2012) conducted a study entitled “Applying the Health Belief
Model to College Students’ Health Behavior”. Continuous rise in obesity and students’
decline in nutritional priorities encouraged the study. Model used for the study was HBM.
because of its assumption that the likelihood of an individual to take a preventive action
is determined through removal of the perceived barriers to healthy behavior from the
perceived benefits of healthy behaviors. The study aimed to investigate the health
behaviors of the college students to address the determinants of eating behaviors and
physical activity and to assess if underlying factors are interrelated.

The study used a convenience online sampling method among the students
enrolled during the time of the study. Result showed that the students’ objective
knowledge such as the nutrition concepts was significantly related to their confidence on
nutrition knowledge such that they were aware and comfortable in using it. Moreover,
other hypotheses of the study were found to not supported by the results of the study. The
results showed that the college students’ confidence in their nutrition knowledge did not
impact the level of worry about the diseases’ severity. Given the results, the study
suggested that nutrition confidence may see to have a stronger impact on both the benefit
and barrier compared to susceptibility and severity of the diseases. According to the
HBM, participation in healthy behaviors is influenced by beliefs about the likelihood of
an action resulting in a perceived benefit thus, the rate of the perceived benefit must

exceed the perceived barriers.

40

Talatappeh et al. (2012) conducted a cross-sectional study entitled, “Knowledge,
Beliefs and Behavior of Food Consumption among Students of Military University: The
Application of Health Belief Model (HBM)”. Since HBM has already been used in
previous studies in explaining and predicting behaviors, including behaviors related to
hygiene and nutrition, this model was used in the study, to assess the knowledge, beliefs,
and behaviors on healthy dietary pattern of medical students on the military environment.
Subjects for this study were military medical students and were selected through a
stratified random sampling method. Results showed that the knowledge and practices of
the students in connection to the factors affecting their food consumption is not desirable.
In connection with HBM constructs, the study showed that the students’ level of
knowledge, performance and perceived threat were moderate while their perceived
barriers, benefits and efficacy were desirable. These findings showed that the
performance and perceived threat of the students were not as good as their beliefs.
Results of the study suggests that nutrition knowledge should be more advocated for the
students especially in terms of their food consumption. Moreover, as resulted from the
study conducted by Pirouznia (2000), it also confirmed the findings of the study that
nutritional knowledge of an individual may not be the only factor that affects its
nutritional performance, given other factors such as physiological needs, preferences,
access and availability, that may also influence an individual’s food consumption.
Deshpande et al. (2009) conducted a study entitled “Factors Influencing Healthy
Eating Habits Among College Students: An Application of the Health Belief Model” with

the purpose of testing the predictive ability of HBM on the likelihood of eating healthy

41

(for the period of two weeks) among college students. The study was conducted by
encouraging the students to participate in the study in exchange for a monetary
compensation after the completion of their participation.

Results showed the HBM was indeed helpful in predicting the variance in
likelihood of healthy eating among the college students. It was also found in the study
that gender influenced the eating behavior of the college students more than the food
features, even with the given lifestyle of the surveyed students which contrasted with
other previous studies. The study failed to assess how other factors influenced the eating
behaviors of the students which may be due to the sampled respondents.

HBM constructs have consistently been found to affect health behaviors however,
due to the more sophisticated testing of developed theories, it has been more common to
combine the HBM constructs along with other theories instead of using it alone (Glanz &
Bishop, 2010). And because of the spontaneity of the HBM constructs, the use of the
model has been made popular in community-based interventions (Skinner et al., 2015).
Moreover, combining HBM with other health behavior change theories may improve and

better capture factors influencing the health behavior of an individual or an organization.

Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB)

Introduced in 1980s by Ajzen, TPB is actually an extension of the Theory of
Reasoned Action (TRA) through the consideration of an additional variable known as the
perceived control behavior, which is believed to be useful for predicting people’s

behavior (Ajzen, 1991). According to Montano & Kasprzyk (2016), TPB’s underlying

a2

assumption is that the best predictor of behavior is behavioral intention, which is
determined by three main components: attitude, perceived behavioral control and
subjective norms. The overall evaluation of a person’s behavior is referred to as the
attitude; the person’s perception of control in performing a behavior is referred to as the
perceived behavioral control; and the person’s beliefs about whether their significant
others think they should engage in a certain behavior is referred to as the subjective
norms (Livi et al., 2017). Related studies were explored on the application of TPB to
dietary change.

Chevance et al. (2017) conducted a study entitled “The adoption of physical
activity and eating behaviors among persons with obesity and in the general population:
the role of implicit attitudes within the Theory of Planned Behavior” which aimed to
explore the contribution of implications towards physical activity (PA) and eating
behaviors (EB) beyond the TPB variables among persons with obesity and from the
general population. Participants were recruited among tertiary sector companies and
inclusive of only healthy adults. Another group of participants were recruited from the
Department of nutrition and diabetes and clinical psychology from University Hospital of
Montpellier and inclusive of only obese adults.

Results showed that there is a significant association with the attitudes with PA
among obese people but not in the general population. On the other hand, with regards to
EB results, it was found not significant for obese people and slightly significant for
general population. The study highlighted the significant contribution of implicit attitudes

beyond the TPB variables in the prediction of self-reported PA among obese persons.

43

Brouwer & Mosack (2015) conducted a study entitled “Expanding the Theory of
Planned Behavior to Predict Healthy Eating Behaviors” which aimed to test whether
overall and specific healthy eating behaviors and intentions could be better predicted by
expanding the TPB to include a healthy eater identity. The study developed two
hypotheses related to TPB: a) A healthy eater identity will predict intentions to eat a
healthy diet above and beyond attitudes, perceived behavioral control and subjective
norms; and b) A healthy eater identity will predict healthy eating behaviors including
greater fruit, vegetable, low-fat dairy and whole-grain consumption, above and beyond
attitudes, perceived behavioral control, subjective norms and intentions to eat a healthy
diet.

The target sample recruited for the study was exclusive to women participants
given the factor that gender affects the food choice and behavior of their diet (Haase et
al., 2016). Participants were surveyed and were asked to complete a four-day food diary.
Results showed that attitudes, perceived behavioral control, and subjective norms all
significantly predicted intentions to eat a healthy diet which proved to support the first
hypothesis. Moreover, a healthy eater identity significantly predicted overall healthy
eating behaviors above and beyond the TPB components which also showed to have
supported the second hypothesis. A heathy eater identity predicted the overall healthy
eating behaviors and fruit and low-fat dairy consumption except for the vegetable and
whole-grain consumption. Reason for these findings may be caused by the sampled
participant did not find vegetable and whole-grain consumption as part of their ‘healthy

eater’ identity, as well as the availability and accessibility of the food mentioned since the

44

participants usually take their meals in the university cafeteria wherein the vegetable and
whole-grain may be limited. The study supported the claim (McEachan et al., 2011) that
TPB may not be as successful in predicting prospective behaviors as compared to
predicting intentions.

Zoeliner et al. (2012) conducted a study entitled “Exploring the Theory of
Planned Behavior to Explain Sugar-sweetened Beverage Consumption” which aimed to
describe sugar-sweetened beverage (SSB) consumption and to establish psychometric
properties and utility of a TPB instrument to explain SSB consumption. Since a rise in the
intake of caloric beverage was continuously found, it was targeted for behavioral
intentions.

The study conducted a cross-sectional survey among southwest Virginia
participants inclusive of female only. Results showed that the primary constructs of TPB
indicates a moderate explanation for SSB. Four out of the six belief statements by the
authors revealed weak correlations and insignificant contribution to the model. In
previous literature, beliefs associated with attitudes, perceived behavioral control, and
subjective norms have been established as important constructs for planning and
implementing TPB interventions. However for the study, the belief statements were
rarely assessed in quantitative evaluations of health behaviors. The study recommended
to discern the value of behavioral beliefs in the evaluation of health behavior
interventions. The study concluded that there is a potential in the utilization of TPB

constructs in explaining health behaviors.

45

The assumption of TPB regarding attitudes, subjective norms, and perceived
behavioral contro! all affecting behavioral intentions, are all related to behavior. Since
‘most attitudes are not constant, they are the ideal targets for intervention and one of the
‘most important step in reaching the goal of behavior change, is one’s intentions (Rimer &
Brewer, 2015). According to Sheeran (2002), TPB has been found to have substantive
significance in relating intention-behavior relationships. Moreover, since intentions do
not always translate behavior change, combining TPB with other health behavior change
theories would better capture the factors related and may better effect health behavior

change among individuals or organization.

Community Behavior Change

Community is referred to as a group of people within the same geographical area
or bounded by the shared interests or characteristics (with or within the same area) such
as race or ethnicity, sexual orientation, among others (Phillips & Pittman, 2009). In order
to affect change in a community, there is a need to engage and organize the community.
Wallerstein et al. (2015) referred community engagement as a process of working
together with the people in the community. On the other hand, community organizing is
defined as the process by which the people in the community are being facilitated to
identify their problems or what needed to be changed, mobilize them, and develop and
implement the strategies that will help them to accomplish their goals.

The study focuses on the behavior change of a community, particularly the

household. Most of the developed health behavior change theories are focused in

46

changing the behavior of an individual and very few theories are related to the
community or the household level, despite the increasing number of community-based
health interventions that are currently arising. In an attempt to explain the interactions of
health behaviors in a community setup, the social ecological model has been developed,
but this have not progressed to the building of a stage theory (Daivadanam et al., 2014).

Daivadanam et al. (2018) conducted a study entitled “Changing Household
Dietary Behaviors through Community-based Networks: A Pragmatic Cluster
Randomized Controlled Trial in Rural Kerala, India” which aimed to assess the
effectiveness of a contextualized and community-based approach utilizing sequential
stage-matched intervention strategies to change dietary behaviors in Kerala in terms of
procurement and intake of fruits and vegetables, and reduced consumption of salt, sugar,
and oil.

A stratified sampling was carried out to select the households that will participate
in the study, in two arms: intervention and control group. The main respondents in the
study considered the female heads of the households since they are the ones who have a
deeper responsibility for food-related matters in the household as well as food
procurement, preparation, and consumption practices.

Results showed that the intervention helped increase the fruits and vegetables
(FV) intake from the baseline and salt, sugar, and oil (SSO) demonstrated the greatest
reductions. From the baseline, FV intake reported very low and an intervention to
increase FV intake was employed. Other studies used different interventions to increase

FV intake. White et al. (2006) used goal setting behavior planning, while Takahashi et al.

47

(2006) used two 15-minute individual dietary counselling sessions. The previous studies
demonstrated a sustained improvement in FV intake. It was also found in the study that
there is no link between increase in FV procurement and change in FV intake. For the
SSO consumption the intervention has significantly reduced the SSO consumption. The
study implied the importance of addressing the lack of awareness and knowledge of the
household regarding their food intake and risk to NCDs. Community networks was found
to be an opportunity to raise awareness campaign to its members. The study provided a
significant contribution in understanding and promoting the dietary behavior change
relating to the intake of FV and consumption of SSO.

Nti (2008) conducted a cross-sectional study entitled “Household Dietary
Practices and Family Nutritional Status in Rural Ghana” which aimed to assess household
dietary practices, dietary quality and nutrition situation in rural Ghana, using the mother
as unit of analysis. The population of the study consisted of mothers with infants and
young children.

Results showed that the sampled population were consisted of fairly young
mothers. The study found a high correlation between levels of education and positive
health which indicated the importance of education as a factor. Higher education found to
be associated with good health and care practices. Meal patterns reported that breakfast
and lunch were found to be usually cooked meals purchased from vendors. The study
concluded inadequate nutrient in their dicts and recommended a need for more awareness

and nutrition knowledge.

48

Theoretical Framework of the Study

The theoretical framework was adapted from Daivadanam et al. (2014), which
was a combination of different theories from TTM, TPB and HBM. The stages of change
were modified into three: Pre-contemplation, Intention, and Action originated from TTM.
which claims that a change in behavior happens through a stages of readiness (Han et al.,
2017). TPB suggests that the closest determinant of an individual’s behavior is its
behavioral intention together with their attitude, subjective norms, and perceived
behavioral control (Brouwer & Mosack, 2015) which was mostly discussed in the impact,
background, and overarching factors of the theoretical framework. HBM postulates that
the willingness of an individual in changing its behavior is influenced by its perceived
threats and perceived benefits (Talatappeh et al., 2012) which could be found in the
impact and overarching factors of the theoretical framework.

In assessing the stages of change, one would normally but not necessarily start
with the pre-contemplation stage. This stage categorizes people who are not intending to
take any action in the foreseeable future. Three impact factors namely decisional balance,
risk perception, and attitude were found to probably have the greatest influence in making
the decision to change or maintain a dietary behavior. The impact factors would most
likely ignite the decision of the individual to move from one stage onto the next. While
the impact factors can influence the outcome at any stage, it is better to address them
during the first two stages wherein resistance to change seems the greatest. Moreover,
before they can move from the pre-contemplation to the next stage, which is the intention

stage, individuals are met with the overarching factors such as accessibility (affordability

49

and availability), and perceived needs and preferences; these overarching factors serve as
a barrier which prevents the individual from progressing across the stages, specifically
from the pre-contemplation to intention stage. These factors should also be addressed on
the early stages such that it would be difficult for the individual to enter the intention
stage with these factors being present. Furthermore, there are also the background factors
that act all throughout the stages from pre-contemplation, intention, and action stages;
these factors namely the personal modifiers and societal norms influences their behaviors
which the individuals have little to no control over. In planning an intervention for a
specific problem, it is not necessary to wait for all the target population to be in their
action stage. A contextualized intervention for each of the stages would be more
advantageous in setting the most appropriate goals and actions steps and determine the

best strategies and intervention that is suitable to their stage of readiness to change.

= seaceEONEEDSE >>
PREFERENCES.

Figure |. Readiness to Change Framework (Adapted framework from Daivadanam et al.,
2014)

50

Conceptual Framework of the Study

Nutrition intervention programs are very important in addressing the nutrition
problems of the people specifically in the community. However, without the proper
approach that would complement the readiness of the target people in receiving the
changes being lent to them, these interventions may tend to fail (Pellettiere, 2006). There
may be a lot of factors that could affect their decision, but one would likely be highly
influenced by their family or household members. It is very apparent that family system
or home environment plays an important role in the development of an individual’s
behavior. Environment at home plays a vital role being the first factor in shaping an
individual’s energy balance-related behaviors (EBRB) such as dietary habits and physical

activities or their overall lifestyle (Bjelland et al., 2014).

Another aspect that would apparently also affect their readiness to change is the
presence [or awareness on the risks] of disease such as non-communicable diseases. High
intakes of processed, fried, sugary, salty, and fatty foods were found to increase the risk
of non-communicable diseases (Agodi et al., 2018). Once the individual is aware of the
risks or have the disease conditions, it would presumably affect their stage of readiness in
changing their dietary behaviors as they perceive that their unhealthy dietary practices
might worsen their health status. As a part of a household, the home environment would
most probably also play a vital role in their readiness to change their dietary behaviors

considering their special needs and preferences, as well as the encouragement they

51

provide. Moreover, despite the circumstances present in the individual and the household,
a major factor that could also hinder or could facilitate their readiness to change is their
socioeconomic status since this would affect their overall accessibility to a healthy diet.
Thus, it may be necessary for some to address this factor first in order for them to
progress in their stage of change. Based on the theoretical framework, the following

conceptual framework (Figure 2) was used in the study.

Readiness to Change

Figure 2. Conceptual framework of the readiness to change dietary behaviors of women
with diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, and/or hypertension

Operational Definition of Terms

52

Non-communicable Diseases (NCDs) — for this study, the types of diseases that were
focused on were DM, CVD, and HT since these three diseases have a comparable general
dietary management, that is also relevant to the dietary behaviors being assessed in this
study.

Socioeconomic Characteristics

‘Adult Women — refers to a woman aged 20 years old and above.

Household — comprising of all individuals living under one roof, sharing a common
kitchen.

Dietary Behavior Variables

Dietary Behaviors — specific to this study, the dietary behaviors being measured were
the consumption of fruits and vegetables and intake of salt, sugar, and oil.

Food Frequency Questionnaire — originally designed to provide a qualitative
description on food-consumption patterns. [1 is composed of a list of food items and
options to indicate how frequently each food item is consumed. Questionnaire was
adapted from DOST-FNRI.

Fruits — aside from foods considered as fruits, only 100% fruit juice was considered.
Foods derived from fruits, like jams, jellies and preserves were not included.

Oils — all fats and oils added to food and used for cooking and food preparation were
considered including butter and hydrogenated vegetable oils, as well as those added to
food.

Salt — all salt, salty seasonings, and salty sauce added to food and used for meal

preparation, cooking, and eating were considered.

53

Sugars — all free sugars were considered including all mono and disaccharides added to
foods.

Household Environment Variables

Affordability — refers to the household’s purchasing power, specifically in obtaining its
dietary needs.

Availability — refers to the ease of acquiring food and food products in terms of the
purchaser and the location.

Food Habits and Preferences — refers to the frequency of consumption and fondness of
the household members to the particular diet behavior.

Support — refers to the household members’ encouragement in making the dietary
changes.

Tradition — refers to a certain tradition, culture, or belief that a household have that may

affect in changing their dietary behavior.

Readiness to Change Variables

Accessibility — one of the overarching factors that refers to the combination of a)
availability - which includes physical access to food, and b) affordability - which pertains
to costs associated with accessing foods.

Action Stage - the combination of action and maintenance stage from the TTM

construct. People in this stage are the ones who have already made specific modifications

in their actions and/or maintaining their changed behavior.

54

Attitude — one of the impact factors that refers to the extent to which a person has a
positive or negative evaluation of the particular behavior in question, in this study, their
dietary behavior.

Decisional Balance - it is one of the impact factors that refers to the relative weighing of
pros and cons of changing their behavior specifically, their dietary behavior.

Intention Stage — the combination of contemplation and preparation stage from the TTM
construct. It is a combination of people who are intending to make the changes
immediately or in the foreseeable future. People in this stage may be aware of the
consequences of their action and plans to resolve it.

Perceived Needs and Preferences — one of the overarching factors that refers to the
particular needs and preferences of other household members as perceived by the
respondent.

Personal Modifiers — one of the background factors that refers to the characteristics that
influence personal perceptions such as culture, education level, past experiences with
regards to their diet.

Pre-contemplation Stage — same as the pre-contemplation stage in the TTM construct. It
categorizes people who are not intending to take the action in the foreseeable future.
They may also be unaware of the consequences of their behaviors or are not sure of their
ability to take the change.

Readiness to Change — refers to how the attitudes, beliefs, and intentions of the people
recognizes the need for change, and their capacity to successfully accomplish those

changes.

55

Risk Perception — one of the impact factors that refers to the self-assessment of the
likelihood of developing or worsening a disease or health problem due to the continuation
of the unhealthy behavior, specifically related to dietary behavior.

Societal Norms — one of the background factors that refers to socio-economic status,
gender, and other hierarchical power structures that exists in the household and in the
community that greatly influences behavior.

Stages of Change — refers to phase categorizing the individual’s readiness to change. For

this study, the stages of change are: precontemplation, intention, and action stages.

56

CHAPTER Ill

METHODOLOGY
Research Design
A cross-sectional study was conducted among adult women diagnosed with
NCDs, specifically diabetes, CVDs, and/or hypertension, who are members of barangay

facebook groups in Parafiaque City.

Study Site

The study was conducted in Parafiaque City, which is a highly urbanized city in
Metro Manila. The rationale in choosing the target site was because Parafiaque City, as
part of the National Capital Region, was found to have high prevalence of mortality
caused by NCDs, high prevalence of abdominal obesity by waist circumference, and high
prevalence of households not meeting the WHO recommendation of per capita intake of

400 grams of fruits and vegetables (DOST-FNRI, 2015).

Sample Size
The formula on calculating the sample size was based on the study of Charan &
Biswas (2013) on the calculation of sample size for cross sectional studies.

Formula:

Z?P(1—P)
Fr

where n = sample size,

57

Z=Z statistic for a level of confidence,
P = expected proportion in population based on previous studies, and
d= precision

For this study, the level of confidence used was 95% and its Z value was 1.96.
The expected proportion in population was based on Daivadanam et al.'s (2018) study on
readiness to change dietary behaviors which was 80%. And for the precision, it was 5%
since the level of confidence used was 95%. The formula with the values was:

1.96?(0.80)(1 — 0.80)
0.05?

n=
n= 246

The calculation resulted to 246 with an initial plan to add an additional 10%

allowance during the random sampling for non-response and for those who will not pass

the screening.

Study Participants

The inclusion criteria for the study participants in this study include adult women
diagnosed with Diabetes, CVD, and/or Hypertension and who are also members
barangay facebook groups in Parafiaque City served as the sampling frame.

247 women who are members of buranguy facebook groups in Parafiaque City
were randomly selected and were messaged to ask for their consent participation. Once
they agreed, the link of the questionnaire was sent to them for the screening process. The

respondents were asked of their age and if they are diagnosed with Diabetes, CVD,

58

and/or Hypertension with a follow-up question on the year they were diagnosed and

medication for validation purposes.

Data Collection Procedure
Preliminary Activities

The researcher joined barangay facebook groups in Parafiaque City and got the
list of all the women who are members of the group. The researcher sampled a total of
247 eligible participants. They were asked to sign an informed consent form before
answering the screening form. All personal and other information that were obtained

from the research participants were kept confidential.

Development and Pre-testing of Questionnaires

Three questionnaires were used in the study. The first questionnaire was adopted
from Daivadanam, et al. (2016) and was used to assess the stage of readiness to change. It
‘was modified to add further questions in order to assess other factors that may affect the
readiness to change. Instruments were developed for: 1) assessing the readiness to change
dietary behaviors and 2) an accompanied algorithm in computing their stage of change.
Another part of the questionnaire was intended for socioeconomic and household profile,
and factors that affects their readiness to change their dietary behaviors. Instruments have
been pre-tested during a preliminary study and was found to be a valid and reliable tool in
measuring the readiness to change dietary behaviors. The last questionnaire was the food

frequency questionnaire. It was adopted from DOST-FNRI (2015) and was used to

59

provide the dietary behavior of the respondents. It was modified to describe specific
dietary behaviors regarding their consumption of fruits and vegetables and intake of salt,

sugar, and oils.

Data Analysis

All data was processed and analyzed using the Statistical Data Analysis (STATA)
software version 15.1 (StataCorp. 2017). Variables such as age, number of years
diagnosed with NCDs, household size, estimated household monthly income, and
average household daily expenses were grouped into categories. Descriptive statistics
such as frequencies and percentages were used to describe the variables in the
socioeconomic profile, dietary behaviors, household environment, and readiness to
change dietary behaviors. Cross-tabulation was done in explaining the relationship of the
variables.

In analyzing the readiness to change dietary behaviors, a modified algorithm
adapted from the study of Daivadanam et al. (2016) was employed (Table 21). A six-step
algorithm was utilized for the tool; the 1° to 5" step computed the stage for fruits,
vegetables, salt, sugar, and oil (FVSSO) respectively, while the 6" step computed the
overall stage of change. The computation of pre-contemplation and intention stages was
done using time frame for change and household willingness, efficacy, and stability,
while the computation for action stage was done using self-evaluation. Assessment of
their stages of change were identified for FVSSO separately. The stage of change was

identified as being in A) pre-contemplation stage if: 1) they are not willing to make

60

changes; 2) are willing to make changes but unsure as to when those change will be

made; and 3) with low levels of confidence or low levels stabi

. B) they were identified
as being in intention stage if: 1) they are willing to make changes immediately; and 2)
with high levels of confidence and stability. And finally, C) they were identified as being
in the action stage if they are consuming fruits and/or vegetables daily and within
recommended levels of salt, sugar, and/or oil intake.

Each variable in socioeconomic profile, dietary behaviors, and household
environment were cross tabulated against stages of readiness to change, and the

relationship were observed.

CHAPTER IV

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Description of Study Participants

1.1 Sociodemographic characteristics of the participants

61

A large proportion of the participants were in the ages of 50’s and 60’s with

32.8% and 32.4% respectively, ranging from 28 to 69 years old, and with a mean age of

53. Majority of the adult women who participated were mothers (76.9%) and there were

also a few of the participants (5.3%) who were pregnant during the time of the interview.

More than half of the participants were married and college graduates with 63.6% and

51.4% respectively.

Table 3, Sociodemographic characteristics of the participants

Variable No.

‘Age (Mean + SD)

<30 3
30-39 36
40-49 47
50-59 81

60-69 80

Percent (%)
53 + 10.8
1.2
146
19.0
32.8
32.4

Table 3. Continuation...
Variable
Position in the HH
Mother
Grandmother
Child
Pregnant
Civil status
Married
Divorced/Separated/Widowed
Single
Educational Attainment
Postgraduate
College Graduate
Vocational
College Undergraduate
High school Graduate
High school Undergraduate

No.

19
127

Percent (%)

76.9
15.0
8.1

5.26

63.6
25.1
3

514
5.3
24.3
11.0
0.4

1.2. NCD diagnosis of the participants

Majority of the participants were diagnosed with DM (59.1%) followed by with

HT and then CVD with 55.9% and 14.6% respectively. For those diagnosed with DM,

majority (95.9%) have type 2 DM and taking the prescribed medications (96.6%).

Participants have been diagnosed with DM for a range of one to 21. Of the 14.6%

63

diagnosed with CVD, majority (69.4%) were diagnosed with CHD and 83.3% reported
on taking the prescribed medication. For CVD, participant's year of diagnosis ranges
from one to 15 years. Lastly, 55.9% were diagnosed with HT and all of them were taking
their prescribed medication. Participants have been diagnosed with HT for a range of one
to 13 years. More than one-fourth (26.3%) of the participants were reported to have
multiple NCD diagnosis wherein 14.6% of the participants both were diagnosed with DM
and HT, 8.5% were diagnosed with both CVD and HT, and 3.2% were diagnosed with

DM, HT, and CVD.

Table 4. NCD diagnosis of the part

With Number of Years Diagnosed
5 Prescribed| ——$———$$ $$ _____________—_
NCD Diagnosed and Taking 1-3 4-6 7-9 >10
Diagnosis Medication Yeats years years years
no. (%) no. (%) no. (%) no. (%) no. (%) no. (%)
DM 146 (59.1) 141 (96.6) 18 57 50 21
(12.3) (39.0) (34.2) (14.4)
Type 2 140 (95.9)
Type 1 6 (4.1)
cVvD 36 (14.6) 30 (83.3) 24 5(13.9) 4(11L.1)  3(8.3)
(66.7)
CHD 25 (69.4)
RHD 6 (16.7)
IHD 4(hl)

Cardiomegaly 1 (2.8)

HT 138(55.9) 138(100.0) 19 60 44 15
(13.8) (43.5) G19) (10.9)


64

1.3 Household profile and environment of the participants

Almost half (49.4%) of the participants belong to an extended type of family with
HH size ranging from one to 11, with a mean size of five. Having two earning family
members were predominant amongst the participants with 38.9%, and majority of their
main income earners have a regular paying job with 78.5%. According to PSA, the
Philippine poverty threshold for the first semester of 2021 is estimated at P12,082.00
while the food threshold is estimated at P8,393.00. More than half (59.9%) of the
participants were below the poverty threshold, with a household monthly income ranging
from P12,000.00 to P150,000.00 with a mean of P57,056.70. On the other hand, more
than one-fourth (30.0%) of the participants were below the food threshold, with estimated
daily food expenses ranging from P100.00 to P1,000.00 with an average of P378.60.

Almost half (48.6%) of the participants have other HH members with NCDs wherein

majority of them (72.5%) have hypertension.

Table 5. Household characteristics of participants

‘Variable ~~S~SC~*~*~<“~S*‘“‘<=S*‘“‘*~NW;SCS*«é erent (%)
Household Type
Nuclear 107 43.3
Extended 122 49.4
Single Parent 13 53
Alone 5 2.0

Household size (Mean + SD) 5£16


Table 5. Continuation...
Variable
Number of HH members earning
1
2
3
4
Main Income Earner Occupation
Paid, Regular
Paid, Irregular
Own Business

Household Average Monthly Income (pesos)
(Mean + SD)

Below poverty threshold
Above and equal to poverty threshold

Household Estimate Daily Food Expenses (pesos)
(Mean + SD)

Above and equal to poverty threshold
Below food threshold
Other HH members with NCDs
HT
DM
CVD

No.

75
96
64

194,
26
27

65

Percent (%)

30.4
38.9
25.9
49

78.5
10.5
10.9

57,056.7 + 2,7352.8

148 59.9
99 40.1
378.6 + 170.4
173 70.0
74 30.0
120 48.6
87 72.5
34 28.3
32 25.8


66

Dietary Behaviors of the Study Participants

The dietary behaviors of the participants were assessed through consumption of
fruits and vegetables, and intake of salt, sugar, and oil. The stages of readiness to change
among adult women with NCDs was also identified, as well as the other factors affecting
participants’ consumption and readiness to change. Household food environment were
also discussed in terms of their affordability, availability, preferences, and the support of

their household members in making dietary changes.

2.1. Fruits
2.1.1. Consumption of fruits

The WHO recommended vegetable and fruit intake of > 400g capita per day
(WHO, 2003). Moreover, the DOST-FNRI through the Pinggang Pinoy, recommend at
least one serving of fruit per meal (DOST-FNRI, 2014). Almost three-fourths (74.5%) of
the participants do not eat fruits daily and 59. 8% of them cited unaffordability of fruits
as a reason for their non-daily intake. Some of the participants (37.7%) eat fruits only a
few times a month. Moreover, aside from unaffordability, availability of purchasing fruits
is also a factor for some. One-fifth of the participants mentioned that purchasing fruits in
terms of location is a concern for them while 39.7% mentioned availability in terms of
purchaser. In terms of preference, more than half (52.6%) reported that both the
participants and their household members like to eat fruits. In terms of HH support to the
Participant’s readiness in changing its dietary behavior towards fruit, 93.1% of the

participants reported that their HH members supports them.

Figure 3. Consumption of fruits

Table 6. Household food environment in terms of fruit consumption
Variable No. Percent (%)

Reason for non-daily consumption (n=184)"

Unaffordability 110 59.8
Dislike (Own and/or HH members) 104 56.5
Unavailable via location 50 20.2
Unavailable via purchaser 98 39.7

Frequency of consumption
Everyday/almost everyday 90 36.4
Few times a week 64 25.9

Few times a month 93 37.7


68

Table 6. Continuation.

Variable No. Percent (%)

Preference
Participant and HH members both prefer 130 52.6
Participants prefer but not all other HH members 106 42.9
Participant does not prefer but other HH
9 3.6
members do
Participant and HH both do not prefer 2 08
Support of household 230 93.1

"Multiple response question

2.1.2. Stages of change
For the readiness to change dietary behavior in terms of fruits, more than half of
the participants are in the stage of precontemplation with 53.4%. Conversely, one-fourth

(25.5%) of the participants are already in the action stage.

Figure 4. Stages of readiness to change fruit intake

69

2.1.3. Relationship of other factors with the participant’s readiness in changing their
dietary behavior towards fruits

For the readiness to change their dietary behavior towards fruits, majority of the
participants who were diagnosed with DM and HT were in pre-contemplation stage with
59.6% and 46.4% respectively, while for those diagnosed with CVD, majority were in
action stage with 38.9%. It can be observed that most of the participants diagnosed with
DM and HT were in pre-contemplation stage in terms of their readiness of changing their
dietary behavior towards fruit. This may suggest that those diagnosed with DM and HT
does not take into consideration their disease condition in furthering their stages of
readiness to change in terms of fruits.

For the age, majority of the participants who are in the pre-contemplation are
those from the age group of 50’s with 66.7% while majority of those who are in the
action stage are from the age group of 60’s with 36.3%. For the position in the household,
majority of those who are in the precontemplation stage are mothers with 57.9%, while
majority of those who are in the action stage are grandmothers with 37.8%. For
educational attainment, it was observed that majority of those who are in
precontemplation stage were college undergraduates with 86.7%. conversely, majority of
participants in the action stage were college graduates with 34.7%. It can be seen that
these socio-economic factors tend to show patterns wherein majority of participants were
in action stage as they increase in their age, position in HH, and educational attainment.

In terms of preference, for those who are in the action stage, majority (36.9%) of

the participants mentioned that both them and their household like fruits. Moreover,

70

88.9% of the participants who do not like fruits, but their other household members do
were in precontemplation stage. For frequency of consumption, majority (70.0%) of the
participants who eat fruits everyday/almost everyday were in action stage, while for those
participants who only ate fruits a few times a month, 79.6% of them were in pre-
contemplation stage.

Factors related to affordability such as HH’s estimated total monthly income,
occupation of main income earner, and HH’s average daily food expenses were all found
to have consistent trends within the stages of change in fruits. Majority of the participants
who were below the poverty threshold (76.4%) were in pre-contemplation stage, while
almost half (46.5%) of participants who were above the poverty threshold were in action
stage. In terms of HHs average food daily expenses, 86.5% of the participants below the
food threshold were in pre-contemplation stage, likewise majority (39.3%) of the
participants who were above the food threshold were also in pre-contemplation stage.

Support of other HH members was also observed and it was found that more than
half (51.7%) of the participants who were supported by their other HH members in terms
of their dietary behavior towards fruits were in pre-contemplation stage. It may suggest
that the support of other HH members did not further influence the participant’s readiness
in changing its dietary behavior towards fruit.

For the hindering factors, 92.7% of the participants who found affordability as a
hindrance in eating fruits daily were all in pre-contemplation stage and none in action
stage. Likewise, majority (76.0%) of the participants who found availability as a

hindrance were also in precontemplation stage. On the contrary, 86.8% who said that

7

fruits being accessible is facilitating them were in action stage. Moreover, 50.0% of those
who found knowledge on the benefits of fruits as a facilitating factor were in pre-

contemplation stage.

Table 7. Factors affecting readiness to change fruit consumption

Readiness to Change — Fruits

Variable Action Intention ae tion
No. (%) No, (%) No. (%)
NCD Diagnosis
DM diagnosed 34 (23.3) 25 (17.1) 87 (59.6)
CVD diagnosed 14 (38.9) 9 (25.0) 13 (36.1)
HT diagnosed 44 (31.9) 30 (21.7) 64 (46.4)
Age
<30 0 (0.0) 1 (33.3) 2 (66.7)
30's 8 (22.2) 8 (22.2) 20 (55.6)
40's 1027.0) 1129.7) 26 (70.3)
50’s 16 (19.8) 11 (13.6) 54 (66.7)
60's 29(363) ——-21.(26.3) 3037.5)
Position in HH
Mother 46 (24.21) 34 (17.89) 110 (57.89)
Grandmother 1437.8) 1129.7) 12 (42.4)

Child 315.0) 7 (35.0) 10 (50.0)


Table 7. Continuation

2

Readiness to Change — Fruits

Variable Action Intention onecee stion
No. (%) No.) No. (%)

Educational attainment

College grad 44 (34.7) 40 (31.5) 43 (33.9)

College undergrad 3(5.0) 5 (83) 52 (86.7)

Preference of fruits

Participant and HH both prefer 48 (36.9) 33 (25.4) 49 (37.7)

Does not prefer but other HH 0 (0.0) 1(11.1) 8 (88.9)

members do

Frequency of consumption

Everyday/almost everyday 63 (70.0) 1112.2) 16 (17.8)

Few times a month 0 (0.0) 19 (20.4) 74 (79.6)

Poverty Threshold

Below Threshold 17 (11.5) 18 (12.2) 113 (76.4)

Above & equal to Threshold 46 (46.5) 34 (34.3) 19 (19.2)

Food Threshold

Below Threshold 34.1) 795) 64 (86.5)

Above & equal to Threshold 60 (34.7) 45 (26.0) 68 (39.3)


Table 7. Continuation...

Variable

‘Support of other HH members
Hindering factors
Affordability

Availability

HH preference

Facilitating factors
Accessibility

Knowledge on benefits

2.2. Vegetables

2.

73

Readiness to Change — Fruits

Action Intention Pre
contemp lation
No. (% No. (%) No. (%)
60 (26.1) 31 (22.2) 119 (51.7)
0(0.0) 8 (7.3) 102 (92.7)
20.6) 29 (22.5) 98 (76.0)
15 (13.9) 1816.7) 75 (69.4)
59 (86.7) 6 (8.8) 3(44)
63 (27.9) 50 (22.1) 113 (50.0)

Consumption of vegetables

According to the Pinggang Pinoy developed by DOST-FNRI, they

recommended % to | cup cooked vegetables per meal (DOST-FNRI, 2014). Less

than half (43.7%) of the participants do not eat vegetables daily, and 79.6% of

them reasoned out that they and/or their other household members dislike eating

vegetables. More than half (61.5%) of the participants eat vegetables

everyday/almost everyday. Additionally, availability of vegetables is also one of

the factors that affects vegetable consumption however, it is not much of a

concern in terms of vegetables given that only few of the participants gave this as

74

a reason with only 11.3% cited unavailability in terms of location and 17.0% cited
unavailability in terms of purchaser. In terms of preference, majority (60.3%) of
the participants reported that they like vegetables but not all other houschold
members do. For the support of HH members, 79.8% of the participants reported
that their HH members support them in changing their dietary behavior towards

vegetable.

Figure 5. Consumption of vegetables

Table 8. Household food environment in terms of vegetable consumption
Variable No. Percent (%)

Reason for non-daily consumption (n=108)'

Unaffordability 56 S19
Dislike (Own and/or HH members) 86 79.6
Unavailable via location 28 13
Unavailable via purchaser 2 17.0

Frequency of consumption

Everyday/almost everyday 152 61.5
Few times a week 91 36.8
Few times a month 3 12
Never/almost never 1 0.4

Preference
Participant and HH both prefer 87 35.2
Participants prefer but not all other HH members. 149 60.3
Participant does not prefer, other HH members do 9 3.6
Participant and HH both do not prefer 2 0.8

Support of household 197 798

‘Multiple response question

2.2.1, Stages of change

For the readiness to change dietary behavior in terms of vegetables, more
than half (56.3%) of the participants are already in the action stage and only one-

fourth (25.9%) are in the pre-contemplation stage.

76

Figure 6. Stages of readiness to change vegetable intake

2.2.3. Relationship of other factors with the participant’s readiness in

changing their dietary behavior towards vegetables

For the readiness to change their dietary behavior towards vegetables,
majority of the participants who were diagnosed with DM, diagnosed with CVD,
and diagnosed with HT were in action stage with 52.7%, 83.3%, and 66.7%
respectively. Basically, majority of the participants diagnosed with NCDs were in
action stage. It may suggest that their diagnosis may have influenced them in their

dietary behavior towards vegetables.

The stage of change in vegetables across the ages of the participants were
all mostly in action stage and the majority of participants were in age of 60°s with
83.5%. For the position in household, it was very apparent that both mothers and

grandmothers were also mostly in action stage with 52.6% and 91.9%

7

respectively. While majority of the participants were in action stage for all other
socio-economic factors, when it comes to the educational attainment, half of the
college undergraduate participants were in pre-contemplation stage as compared

to college graduate participants with 70.1% in action stage.

Almost three-fourths (73.6%) of the participants who mentioned that them
and their other HH members like vegetables were in action stage. While most of
the participants who do not like vegetables, but their other HH members do were
tied in intention and pre-contemplation stages, both with 44.4%. Most of the
participants (91.5%) who eat vegetables everyday/almost every day were in action
stage while majority of the participants who eat vegetables a few times a week

were in pre-contemplation stage with 68.0%.

In terms of factors related to affordability, most of the participants who
were below and above the poverty threshold were both in action stage with 44.6%
and 73.7% respectively. Moreover, 42.3% of the participants’ HHs whose main
income earner have an irregular paying job were in pre-contemplation stage
whereas 74.1% of the participants’ HHs whose main income earner have its own
business were in action stage. In terms of HH’s average daily food expenses,
almost half (48.7%) of the participants who were below the food threshold were
in pre-contemplation stage, while 66.5% of the participants above the food
threshold were in action stage. The stages of change of the participants were not
consistent in this part. While majority of the participants who were below the

poverty threshold were already in the action stage, it was not the same for

Table 9. Factors affecting readiness to change vegetable consumption

78

majority of the participants below the food threshold. This may indicate that their

allocation of food expenses affects their dietary behavior towards vegetable.

For the support of the HH members, majority (62.4%) of the participants
who said that their other HH members support them in their dietary behaviors
toward vegetables were in action stage. It may indicate that support of other HH

members influenced their dietary behavior towards vegetables.

Three-fourths of the participants who find affordability as a hindrance in
eating vegetables were in pre-contemplation stage. Additionally, 61.4% who find
availability as a hindrance in eating vegetables were also in pre-contemplation
stage. On the other hand, 99.2% of the participants who find it easy to access
vegetables as a facilitating factor, were in action stage. Moreover, 23.4% of
participants in action stage found knowledge on benefits of vegetables as a

facilitating factor.

Readiness to Change — Vegetables

‘ " Pre-
Action Intention
contem|

No. (%)

fo)

NCD
DM diagnosed 77(52.74)  29(19.86) 40 (27.40)
CVD diagnosed 30 (83.33) 2(5.56) 41.11)

HT diagnosed 92.(66.67) 18 (13.04) 28 (20.29)


Table 9. Continuation...

Readiness to Change — Vegetables

Action Intention Le
contemplation
No. (%) No. (%) No. (%)
Age
<30 13.3) 266.7) 0(0.0)
30's 17472) 1027.8) 9 (25.0)
40's 21 (44.7) 10 (21.3) 16 (34.0)
50’s 33 (40.7) 19 (23.5) 29 (35.8)
60's 67 (83.8) 33.8) 10 (12.5)
Position in HH
Mother 100(52.6) -33(17.4) 57 (30.0)
Grandmother 34 (91.9) 12.7) 2(5.4)
Child 5 (25.0) 10 (50.0) 5 (25.0)
Educational attainment
College grad 89 (70.1) 2.17.3) 16 (12.6)
College undergrad 1931.7) 11 (18.3) 30 (50.0)
Preference of vegetables
Participants and HH both prefer 64 (73.6) 12.(13.8) 11 (12.6)
Does not prefer but other HH ray 4 (44.4) 4 (44.4)

members do


Table 9. Continuation...

Variable

Frequency of consumption
Everyday/almost everyday

Few times a week

Poverty Threshold

Below Threshold

Above & equal to Threshold
Main income earner occupation
Paid, irregular

Own Business

Food Threshold

Below Threshold

Above & equal to Threshold
Support of other HH members
Hindering factors

Affordability

Availability

Facilitating factors
Accessibility

Knowledge on benefits

Readiness to Change — Vegetables

Action

No. (%)

139 (91.5)
0(0.0)

66 (44.6)
73 (73.7)

10 (38.5)
20 (74.1)

24 (32.4)
115 (66.5)
123 (62.4)

2(3.5)
4(70)

126 (99.2)
137 (59.3)

—_ Pre-
nfention contemplation
No. %)
117.2) 2(1.3)
24 (32.0) 51 (68.0)
28 (18.9) 54 (36.5)
16 (16.2) 10 (10.1)
5(19.2) 11 (42.3)

1 (4.0) 1(4.0)

1418.9) 36 (48.7)
30 (17.3) 28 (16.2)
31 (15.7) 43 (21.8)
1221.1) 43 (75.4)
18 (31.6) 35 (61.4)
1 (0.8) 00.0)

40 (17.3) 54 (23.4)


81

2.3. Salt
2.3.1. Intake of salt

Based on WHO, the recommended daily intake of salt for adult women is
< 5g or < Itsp. More than half (67.2%) of the participants reported intake of salt
over the recommended limit. Majority of the participants (44.1%) find it
affordable to purchase salt and salty food which led their intake of it over the
recommended limit. In addition, availability of salty products also influenced their
intake wherein 61.5% of the participants find it always available to them. In terms
of preference, more than half (52.2%) of the participants reported that they like

eating salt and salt food.

There-were also majority (68.4%) of the participants who mentioned that
they were always adding salt/salty condiments in food preparation and
consumption. Most (83.8%) of the participants reported the use of lodized salt
which was also recommended by WHO to prevent iodine deficiency disorders. A
little over one-fourth (28.7%) of the participants consume salt and salty foods
daily, while majority (40.5%) consumed salt and salty foods a few times a week.
For the support of HH members, 63.2% of the participants reported that their HH

members support them in changing their dietary behavior towards salt.

Figure 7. Intake of salt

Table 10. Household food environment in terms of salt intake

Variable No.

Reason for over the limit intake

Affordability 109
Likeness (Own and/or HH members) 129
Availability 152
Adds in food prep & consumption 169
Type of salt used

lodized 207
Uniodized 4
Unsure 36

Percent (%

44.1
52.2
61.5
68.4

83.8
1.6
14.6

82


Table 10. Continuation...

‘Variable. ~~~SOS*~C<“~*‘“‘S™SCSOSCOCNSS~S~S~™C@ erent (%)
Frequency of consumption

Everyday/almost everyday n 28.7
Few times a week 100 40.5
Few times a month 65 26.3
‘Never/almost never i 45
Preference

Participant and HH both prefer 16 47.0
Participants prefer but not all other HH u 43
members .
ee does not prefer but other HH 96 38.9
Participant and HH both do not prefer 22 8.9

Support of household 156 63.2

2.3.2. Stages of change

For the readiness to change dietary behavior in terms of salt, half (50.20%)
of the participants are still in the pre-contemplation stage, while 32.4% are

already in the action stage.

84

Figure 8. Stages of readiness to change in terms of salt intake

2.3.3. Relationship of other factors with the participant’s readiness in

changing their dictary behavior towards salt

For the readiness to change their dietary behavior towards salt, majority of
the participants diagnosed with DM and HT were both in pre-contemplation stage
with 50.7% and 44.2% respectively. On the other hand, majority (72.2%) of the
participants diagnosed with CVD were in action stage. This may indicate that
those diagnosed with DM and HT does not take into consideration their disease

condition in furthering their stages of readiness to change in terms of salt.

In terms of age, majority of the participants aged 50°s were in pre-
contemplation stage with 61.7% while more than half of the participants aged
60’s were in action stage with 55.0%. Majority of the participants who were

grandmothers were in action while majority of those participants whose position

85

in HH are children were in pre-contemplation stage with 70.3% and 60.0%
respectively. Furthermore, majority of the participants who were college
undergraduates were in pre-contemplation while majority of the participants who

were college graduates were in action stage with 73.3% and 43.3% respectively.

In terms of the participant’s dietary habits towards salt such as preference,
addition of salt in food preparation and consumption, and frequency of
consumption, majority of the participants who add sal/salty condiments in food
preparation and consumption were in pre-contemplation stage which is contrast
with participants who do not add it in preparation and consumption who were in
action stage with 72.2% and 94.9% respectively. Three-fourths of the participants
who said them and their HH members like salt/salty food were in pre-
contemplation stage while 52.1% of the participants who said they do not prefer
salt/salty food, but their other HH members do were in action stage. Most of the
participants who consume salt/salty food everyday/almost everyday were in pre-
contemplation stage while majority of the participants who consume salt/salty

food few times a month were in action stage with 91.6% and 78.5% respectively.

For the factors related to affordability such as HH’s estimated total
monthly income, occupation of main income earner, and HH’s average daily food
expenses, it was found that majority (66.2%) of the participants who were below
the poverty threshold were in pre-contemplation stage, while 53.5% of the
participants who were above the poverty threshold were in action stage. Most of

the participants’ HHs whose main income earner have an irregular paying job

86

were in pre-contemplation stage with 80.8%, likewise 44.4% of the participant’s
HHs whose main income earner have its own business were also in pre-
contemplation stage. In terms of HHs average food daily expenses, 82.4% of the
participants below the food threshold were in pre-contemplation stage, whereas

41.6% of the participants above the food threshold were in action stage.

Most (42.3%) of the participants who were supported by their other HH
members in terms of salt were in action stage. It may indicate that support of other

HH members influenced their dietary behavior towards salt.

In terms of hindering and facilitating factors, majority of the participants
who find affordability of salt/salty food as a hindrance in consuming salt within
the recommended limit were in pre-contemplation stage with 87.2%. On the other
hand, 98.2% of the participants who find it difficult to access salty foods as
facilitating factor were in action stage. Furthermore, 43.8% of the participants in
pre-contemplation stage found knowledge on the disadvantages of salt as a

facilitating factor.

Table 11. Factors affecting readiness to change salt intake

Readiness to Change — Salt

Variable Action Intention contenetation
No. (%) No. (%) No. (%)
NCD diagnosis
DM diagnosed 46 (31.5) 26 (17.8) 74 (50.7)
CVD diagnosed 26 (72.2) 4 (ul) 6(16.7)
HT diagnosed 55 (39.9) 22.(15.9) 61 (44.2)
Age
<30 266.7) 00.0) 13.3)
30's 11 30.6) 41.) 21 (58.3)
40°s 5 (10.6) 1123.4) 31(66.0)
50°s 18 (22.2) 13. (16.1) 50 (61.7)
60's 44 (55.0) 15 (18.8) 21 (26.3)
Position in HH
Mother 4724.7) 37(19.5) 106 (55.8)
Grandmother 26 (70.3) 5(13.5) 6 (16.2)
Child 735.0) 1(5.0) 12 (60.0)
Educational attainment
College grad 55 (43.3) 29 (22.8) 43 (33.9)

College undergrad 10 (16.7) 6 (10.0) 44 (73.3)

Table 11, Continuation...

Variable

Preference of salty food
Own and HH both prefer

Does not prefer but other HH
members do

Add salt/salty sauce in food
preparation & consumption

Frequency of consumption
Everyday/almost everyday
Few times a month

Poverty Threshold

Below threshold

Above & equal to Threshold
Main income earner occupation
Paid, irregular

Own Business

Food Threshold

Below threshold

Above & equal to Threshold

Support of other HH members

Readiness to Change — Salt

Action

No. (%)

5(43)
50 (52.1)

6 (3.6)

0 (0.0)
51 (78.5)

27(18.2)
53 (53.5)

5 (19.2)
9 (33.3)

8 (10.8)
72 (41.6)
66 (42.3)

Intention

No. (%)

24 (20.7)
16 (16.7)

41 (24.3)

6(8.5)
9 (13.9)

23.(15.5)
20 (20.2)

0(0.0)
6 (22.2)

5 (6.8)
38 (22.0)
30 (19.2)

Pre-
contemplation
No. (%)

87 (75.0)
30 (31.3)

122 (72.2)

65 (91.6)
5(7.7)

98 (66.2)
26 (26.3)

21 (80.8)
12 (44.4)

61 (82.4)
63 (36.4)
60 (38.5)


Table 11, Continuation...

Readiness to Change — Salt

Variable

No. (%) )

Hindering factors
Affordability
Availability
Facilitating factors

Accessibility

Knowledge on disadvantages

2.4, Sugar

2.4.1, Intake of sugar

Action Intention Ere:
contempla
No. (%) No. (%
5 (4.6) 9(8.3) 95 (87.2)
149.2) 34 (22.4) 104 (68.4)
55 (98.2) 0(0.0) 1 (1.8)
78 (37.5) 39 (18.8) 91 (43.8)

Based on AHA, the recommended daily intake of sugar for adult women is

< 25g or < 6tsp. Consumption of sugar over the recommended limit was reported

by majority (69.6%) of the participants. There were 39.7% of the participants who

found it affordable to purchase sweet food and beverages which influenced their

intake of it to be over the recommended limit. In addition, availability of sweet

products also affected their intake wherein 65.7% of the participants find it

90

always available to them. In terms of preference, most (72.5%) of the participants

reported that they like eating sweet food and beverages.

There were also more than half of the participants (57.5%) who add sugar
in food preparation and consumption, while only 15.0% reported on using sugar
alternatives. Three-fourths (75.7%) of the participants mainly use white sugar as
their sweetener. It was reported that 19.0% of the participants eat sweet foods and
beverages daily while the majority (59.1%) consumed sweets a few times a week.
For the support of HH members, 74.8% of the participants reported that their HH

members support them in changing their dietary behavior towards sugar.

Figure 9. Intake of sugar

Table 12. Household food environment in terms of sugar intake
Variable No.

Reason for over the limit intake

Affordability 98
Likeness (Own and/or HH members) 179
Availability 162
‘Adds in food prep & consumption 142
Type of sugar used

White 187
Brown 60
Using sugar alternatives 37

Frequency of consumption

Everyday/almost everyday 47
Few times a week. 146
Few times a month 45
Never/almost never 9
Preference
Participant and HH both prefer 161
Participants prefer but not all other HH 18
members
Participant does not prefer but other HH

62
members do
Participant and HH both do not prefer 6

Percent (%)

39.7
72.5
65.7
57.5

15.7
24.3
15.0

19.0
59.1
18.2
3.6

65.2

24
748

Support of household 184

92

2.4.2, Stages of change

For readiness to change dietary behavior in terms of sugar, 53.0% of the
participants are still in the pre-contemplation stage, while 30.4% are already in the

action stage.

Figure 10. Stages of readiness to change in terms of sugar intake

2.4.3, Relationship of other factors with the participant’s readiness in

changing their dietary behavior towards sugar

For the readiness to change their dietary behavior towards sugar, majority
of the participants who were diagnosed with DM and HT were in pre-
contemplation stage with 55.5% and 46.4% respectively, while for those

diagnosed with CVD, majority were in action stage with 55.6%. This may suggest

93

that the diagnosis of those participants with DM and HT did not influence their

dietary behavior towards sugar.

In terms of the age, majority of the participants in the pre-contemplation
stage were aged 50’s while majority of the participants in the action stage were
aged 60’s with 63.0% and 42.5% respectively. Majority of the participants who
were mothers and children were both in pre-contemplation stage with 58.4% and
45.0% correspondingly, while most of the participants who were grandmothers
were in action stage with 48.7%. For the educational. attainment, majority of the
Participants who were college graduates and college undergraduates were both in

pre-contemplation stage with 41.7% and 76.7% respectively.

In terms of the participant’s dietary habits towards sugar, it was shown
that majority of the participants who add sugar in food preparation and
consumption were in pre-contemplation stage which is in contrast with
participants who do not add sugar in food preparation and consumption who were
in action stage with 75.4% and 64.8% respectively. More than half of the
participants (65.2%) who said them and their HH members like sweet foods were
in pre-contemplation stage while 64.5% of the participants who said they do not
prefer sweet foods, but their other HH members do were in action stage. Most of
the participants who consume sweet foods everyday/almost everyday were in pre-
contemplation stage while majority of the participants who consume sweet foods

few times a month were in action stage with 93.6% and 80.0% correspondingly.

94

Factors related to affordability were also observed. Majority (62.2%) of
the participants who were below the poverty threshold were in pre-contemplation
stage, while 40.4% of the participants above the poverty threshold were in action
stage. In terms of HHs average food daily expenses, majority of the participants
above and below the food threshold were both in pre-contemplation stage with
71.6% and 45.1% respectively. This may indicate the influence of allocated

budget for the HH’s food expenses to their dietary behavior towards sugar.

Most of the participants who were supported by their other HH members
in terms of sugar were in pre-contemplation stage with 44.6%. This may suggest
that the support of other HH members do not affect their dietary behavior towards

sugar.

In terms of hindering and facilitating factors, majority of the participants
who find it more affordable to buy sweet foods and beverages as a hindrance in
consuming sugar within the recommended limit were in pre-contemplation stage
with 82.7%. Likewise, 71.0% of the participants who find sweet foods and
beverages easy to avail were also in pre-contemplation stage. Contrarily, 95.7% of
the participants who find it difficult to access sweet foods and beverages as
facilitating factor were in action stage. Moreover, 51.1% of the participants in
pre-contemplation stage found knowledge on the disadvantages of sugar as a

facilitating factor.

Table 13, Factors affecting readiness to change in sugar intake

Variable

NCD diagnosis
DM diagnosed
CVD diagnosed

HT diagnosed

50’s

60's

Position in HH

Mother

Grandmother

Child

Educational attainment
College grad

College undergrad
Preference of sweet food

Own and HH both prefer

Readiness to Change — Sugar

Action

No. (%)

40 (27.40)
20 (55.56)
57 (37.68)

1 (33.3)
8 (22.2)
11 (23.4)
21 (25.9)
34 (42.5)

51 (28.8)
18 (48.7)

6 (30.0)

47 (37.0)
9(15.0)

26 (16.2)

Intention

No. (%)

25 (17.12)
3 (8.33)
22 (15.94)

2 (66.7)
9 (25.0)
5 (10.6)
9 (11.1)
16 (20.0)

28 (14.7)

8 (21.6)

5 (25.0)

27(21.3)
5(8.2)

30 (18.6)

Pre-
contemplation
No. (%)

81 (55.48)
13 (36.11)
64 (46.38)

0 (0.0)

19 (52.8)
31 (66.0)
51 (63.0)
30 (37.50)

111 (58.4)
11 29.7)

9 (45.0)

53 (41.7)
46 (76.7)

105 (65.2)

Table 13. Continuation...

Variable

Does not prefer but other HH
members do

‘Add sugar/sweeteners in food
preparation & consumption

Frequency of consumption
Everyday/almost

2-3x per month

Poverty threshold

Below threshold

Above threshold

Support of other HH members
Food threshold

Below threshold

Above threshold

Hindering factors
Affordability

Availability

Facilitating factors
Accessibility

Knowledge on disadvantages

Readiness to Change — Sugar

Action Intention Pree
contemplation

No. (%) No. (%) No. (%)
40 (645) 60.1) 16 (25.8)
7 (44.9) 28 (19.7) 107 (75.4)
00.0) 3 (6.4) 44 (93.6)
36 (80.0) 4(8.9) Sq.)
35 (23.7) 21 (14.2) 92 (62.2)
40 (40.4) 20 (20.2) 39 (39.4)
67 (36.4) 35 (19.0) 82 (44.6)
12.(16.2) 9 (12.2) 53 (71.6)
63 (36.4) 32(18.5) 78 (45.1)
66.1) 1111.2) 81 (82.7)
16 (9.9) 31(19.1) 115 (71.0)
45 (95.7) 12.1) 121)

70 (31.7) 38 (17.2) 113 (51.1)


97

2.5. Oil
2.5.1. Intake of oil

Based on AHA, the recommended daily intake of oil for adult women is <
15g or < 3tsp. More than half (61.1%) of the participants reported to consuming
fried/fatty food over the recommended limit. There were 39.3% of the participants
who found it affordable to purchase fried/fatty foods which influenced their intake
of it to be over the recommended limit. In addition, availability of fried/fatty
products also affected their intake wherein 59.9% of the participants find it
always available to them. In terms of preference, only 33.2% of the participants
reported that they like fried/fatty foods which is less than those participants who

dislike it with 66.8%.

Most of the participants (47.0%) uses vegetable oil as the main oil they
use for cooking. There were 19.0% who reported eating fatty/fried foods daily,
2.0% who consumes processed food daily, and 0.4% who consumes fast food
daily. For the support of HH members, 73.7% of the participants reported that

their HH members support them in changing their dietary behavior towards sugar.

Figure 11. Intake of oil

Table 14, Household food environment in terms of oil intake.

Variable No. Pereent (%)
Reason for over the limit intake

Affordability 7 393
Likeness (Own and/or HH members) 82 33.2
Availability 7 59.9
Type of oil frequently used

Vegetable 116 47.0
Palm 61 24.7
Coconut 44 178
Laurie 4 5.7

Canola 12 49

98

Table 14. Continuation...

Variable

Frequency of consumption
Everyday/almost everyday
Few times a week

Few times a month
Never/almost never
Preference

Participant and HH both prefer

Participants prefer but not all other HH

members

Participant does not prefer but other HH

members do

Participant and HH both do not prefer

Support of household

Stages of change

No.

47
120
68
12

68

144

21
182

99

Percent (%)

19.0
48.6
27.5
49

27.5

5.7

58.3

85
73.7

For readiness to change dietary behavior in terms of oil, most of the

participants are still in the pre-contemplation stage with 43.3%. Moreover, there

are 17.8% in the intention stage, and 38.9% are already in the action stage.

100

Figure 12. Stages of readiness to change in terms of oil intake

2.5.3. Relationship of other factors with the participant’s readiness in

changing their dictary behavior towards oil

For the readiness to change their dietary behavior towards oil, half of the
participants who were diagnosed with DM were in pre-contemplation stage, while
for those diagnosed with CVD and HT, majority were in action stage with 83.3%
and 47.8% respectively. This may indicate that for those participants diagnosed
with CVD and HT, their diagnosis may have influenced their dietary behavior

towards oil.

Regarding the age of the participants, majority of the participants aged
50°s were in precontemplation stage with 53.1% while more than half of the
participants aged 60°s were in action stage with 61.3%. For the position in HH,

majority of the participants who were mothers and children were both in pre-

101

contemplation stage with 48.4% and 45.0% respectively, while most of the
participants who were grandmothers were in action stage with 78.4%. In terms of
educational attainment, majority of the participants who were college
undergraduates were in pre-contemplation while majority of the participants who

were college graduates were in action stage with 63.3% and 48.0% respectively.

For the participant’s dietary habits towards oil such as preference and
frequency of consumption, it was found that almost three-fourths of the
participants who said them and their HII members like fried/fatty foods were in
pre-contemplation stage with 73.5%, while 45.8% of the participants who said
they do not prefer fried/fatty foods, but their other HH members do were in action
stage. Most of the participants who consume fried/fatty food everyday/almost
every day were in pre-contemplation stage while majority of the participants who
consume fried/fatty food a few times a month were in action stage with 87.2%

and 77.9% correspondingly.

Factors related to affordability such as HH’s estimated total monthly

income and HH’s average daily food expenses were also observed with their

relationship with stages of readiness to change in terms of oil. Majority (58.8%)
of the participants who were below the poverty threshold were in  pre-
contemplation stage as opposed to the majority of the participants above the

poverty threshold with 57.6% in action stage. In terms of HHs average food daily

expenses, most (68.9%) of the participants below the food threshold were in pre-

102

contemplation stage, while most (47.4%) of the participants above the food

threshold were in action stage.

Most of the participants who were supported by their other HH members
in terms of oil were in action stage with 47.3%. This may indicate that the support

of other HH members may have an effect to their dietary behavior towards oil.

For the hindering and facilitating factors for readiness to change dietary
behavior towards oil, majority of the participants who find it more affordable to
buy fatty/fried foods as a hindrance in consuming oil within the recommended
limit were in pre-contemplation stage with 77.3%. Likewise, 62.8% of the
participants who find fatty/fried foods easy to avail were also in pre-
contemplation stage. Contrarily, 94.7% of the participants who find it difficult to
access fatty/fried foods as facilitating factor were in action stage. Furthermore,
35.9% of the participants in pre-contemplation stage found knowledge on the

disadvantages of oil as a facilitating factor.

Table 15. Factors affecting readiness to change in oil intake

Variable

NCD diagnosis
DM diagnosed
CVD diagnosed

HT diagnosed

Position in HH

Mother

Grandmother

Child

Educational attainment
College grad

College undergrad

Re

Action

No. (%)

50 (34.3)
30 (83.3)
66 (47.8)

4 (22.2)
16 (47.1)
9 (16.4)
2125.9)
49 (61.3)

60 (31.6)
29 (78.4)
735.0)

61 (48.0)
14 23.3)

Intention

No. (%)

23. (15.8)
2(5.6)
24 (17.4)

4(22.2)
4 (11.8)
12 (21.8)
1721.0)
12 (15.0)

38 (20.0)
2(5.4)
4 (20.0)

26 (20.5)
8 (13.3)

103

iness to Change — Oil

Pre-
contemplation
No. (%)

73 (50.0)
4(11.1)
48 (34.8)

10 (55.6)
1441.2)
34 (61.8)
43 (53.1)
19 23.8)

92 (48.4)
6 (16.2)
9 (45.0)

40 (31.5)
38 (63.3)

Table 15. Continuation.

Variable

Preference of

ty/fried food
Own and HH both prefer

Does not prefer but other HH
members do

Frequency of consumption
Everyday/almost

Few times per month
Support of other HH members
Poverty threshold

Below threshold

Above threshold

Food threshold

Below threshold

Above threshold

Hindering factors
Affordability

Availability

Facilitating factors
Accessibility

Knowledge on disadvantages

104

Readiness to Change — Oil

6 (8.8)

66 (45.8)

0 (0.0)
53 (77.9)
86 (47.3)

39 (26.4)
57 (57.6)

14 (18.9)
82 (47.4)

11 (11.3)
23 (15.5)

54 (94.7)
93 (45.2)

Intention

No. (%)

12(17.7)
31 (21.5)

6 (12.8)
10 (14.7)
34(18.7)

22.(14.9)
22.(22.2)

9 (12.2)
35 (20.2)

1113)
32 (21.6)

3 (53)
39 (18.9)

Pre-
contemplation
No. (%)

50 (73.5)
47 (32.6)

41 (87.2)
5(7.4)
62 (34.1)

87 (58.8)
20 (20.2)

51 (68.9)
56 (32.4)

75 (1.3)
93 (62.8)

00.0)
74 (35.9)


105

Context-specific Factors Influencing Readiness to Change Dietary Behaviors

Majority of the participants’ stages of readiness to change across the dietary
behaviors were found to be in pre-contemplation stage except for one dietary behavior,
which is the consumption of vegetables, wherein majority of the participants were in
action stage (Table 16). The results of the study showed that the participant’s readiness
to change their dietary behaviors could be related with a variety of factors including
presence of disease, characteristics, socio-economic status, dietary habits, and home
environment. Participants with different levels of category related to those factors were

likely to differ in their readiness to change their dietary behaviors.

Table 16. Stages of change of adult women with NCDs regarding the five dietary
behaviors

Fruits Vegetables Salt Sugar Oil
Stage of Change

No. (%) No. (%) No. (%) No. (%) No. (%)
Precontemplation 132 53.44 64 25.91 124 50.20 131 53.04 107 43.32
Intention $2 2105 44 1781 43 1741 41 1660 44 1781

Action 63 25.51 139 56.28 80 32.39 75 30.36 96 38.87

Among the three NCD diagnosis, only DM was observed to have the highest
number of participants in the pre-contemplation stage across all dietary behaviors except
for consumption of vegetables. This result may indicate that those participants did not
consider their DM diagnosis in terms of improving their dietary behavior for fruits, salt,
sugar, and oil. This finding was in line with the study conducted by Jalilian et al. (2019)

which aimed to identify the stages of change of patients with type 2 diabetes. Their

106

results indicated that nearly half of the patients with diabetes were within the pre-
contemplation stage with regards to diet knowledge, eating problems, dietary adherence
barrier, and diet decision making.

For HT, it was observed to have the most number of participants in pre-
contemplation stage for fruits, salt, and sugar, while most number of participants in action
stage for vegetables and oil. This result was different from the result of the study
conducted by Wexler et al. (2008) wherein majority of the adults with hypertension
(39%) were already in action stage specifically for reducing their salt intake. The result of
this study suggests that even if those participants have existing HT diagnosis, it does not
influence them into changing their dietary behaviors in consumption of fruits, salt, and
sugar.

In the case of CVD, majority of the participants were found to be in action stage
across all five dietary behaviors. This indicates that those participants have taken into
consideration their diagnosis into following the recommended guidelines for those dietary
behaviors. This result was in line with the study of Doherty et al. (1998) and Eshah
(2019) which both showed that majority of patients with heart disease were most likely to
be in action to maintenance stage specifically in terms of reducing their consumption of
high-fat foods, and increase in intake of fruits and vegetables.

For the age of the participants was observed to be consistent wherein as the older
the participants, they were mostly in action stage, which complements with the position
in the household which shows that as the participant grows in HH position, they are more

likely to be in action stage and have a healthy dietary behavior. For educational

107

attainment it was also found to be consistent wherein those participants with lesser
educational attainment were most likely to be in pre-contemplation stage while those with
higher educational attainment were most likely to be in action stage, except for the case
of sugar, wherein majority of the participants regardless of educational attainment, were
in pre-contemplation stage. It implies that as participants are more educated, they are
more likely to follow the recommended guidelines for fruits, vegetables, salt, and oil. The
result was in line with Bawadi et al. (2012) wherein their results showed that participants
who are younger and with lower educational attainment where mostly in pre-
contemplation stage. This result was also supported by Bulc et al. (2015), and Prochaska
& Di Clemente (1982) stating that socioeconomic factors including age and educational
attainment are both factors that affects readiness to change.

There is also a consistent trend that can be observed in terms of the participants”
dietary habits including preference and frequency of consumption. Results showed that
the participants’ preference affect their stages of change. In fruits and vegetables,
majority of the participants who answered that them and their other HH members like
eating it were in action stage. Furthermore, in salt, sugar and oil, majority of the
participants who answered that they and their other HH members like eating it were in
pre-contemplation stage. It indicates that preference influences their readiness to change
their dietary behaviors. In terms of frequency, results showed that it also affects their
stages of change. In fruits and vegetables, majority of participants who consume it
frequently were most likely to be in action stage as compared to those with lesser

frequency of consumption. Contrary for salt, sugar, and oil, those participants who

108

consumes it frequently were most likely to be in pre-contemplation stage as compared to
those with lesser frequency of consumption. This suggests that frequency of consumption
influences their readiness to change their dietary behaviors. The two factors complement
each other as one favors more and increases frequency of consumption of fruits and
vegetables, they are more likely to be in action stage, which is the opposite for the case of
salt, sugar, and oil, wherein as they prefer it more and increases frequency of
consumption, they are more likely to be in pre-contemplation stage. This result is in
accordance with the study of Daivadanam et al. (2013) wherein they found that the
preference not only of the participant, but also of other household members, was a key
consideration in the process of dietary decision-making. Both of preference and
frequency of consumption are under the overarching factors which needed to be looked
into first in order to progress in their stage of change.

Also, under overarching factors is the affordability variables including HH’s
estimated total monthly income and average daily food expenses which were categorized
into poverty threshold and food threshold. There was a consistent trend for fruits, salt,
sugar, and oil in terms of poverty threshold wherein majority of those below the poverty
threshold were in pre-contemplation stage while majority of those above the poverty
threshold were in action stage. It was not the same case for vegetables wherein majority
for both below and above poverty threshold were in action stage. This may suggest that
the HH monthly income influence their dietary behavior towards consuming vegetables
daily. For the case of food threshold, a trend was found for vegetables, salt, and oil

wherein majority of those below the food threshold were in pre-contemplation stage

109

while majority of those above the food threshold were in action stage. It was not the same
for the case of fruits and sugar, wherein majority for both below and above the food
threshold were in pre-contemplation stage. This may indicate that the price of the
products and the allocated budget for the HH’s food expenses influences the participant’s
dietary behavior towards fruits and sugar. This result was also supported by Bawadi et al.
(2012) wherein their results showed that participants with low family income were more
likely to be in the pre-contemplation stage. Hartline-Grafton (2017) mentioned in his
review that people living in poverty, including those with low income and poor
purchasing power have worse health outcomes and less access to health. In the case of
this study, it is a valid result how these factors greatly influence the readiness to change
dietary behaviors of the participants.

There was a consistent trend in terms of hindering factor for all the dietary
behaviors wherein majority of those who find affordability and availability as a hindrance
were in pre-contemplation stage. This indicates that in all five dietary behaviors, most of
the participants in pre-contemplation stage were very much impeded by affordability and
availability in changing their dietary behaviors and thus delaying the progression of their
stage of change. The result of this study was supported by French et al. (2019) and other
past research stating that the food and beverages procured by households with lower
income were also significantly lower in its overall nutritional quality. This is also backed
by Daivadanam et al. (2014) saying that basic or absolute affordability could be a barrier,

preventing the progression of the participants across the stages of change.

110

For the facilitating factors, there was also a consistent trend in terms for all the
dietary behaviors wherein majority of those who find accessibility as a facilitating factor
were in action stage. Moreover, for those who are in pre-contemplation stage, majority of
them find knowledge on benefits and disadvantages as a facilitating factor in changing
their dietary behaviors. This indicates that providing nutrition education could target the
facilitating factors expressed by the participants in pre-contemplation stage. This result
was supported by Jalilian et al. (2019) stating that planning education interventions based
on improving nutrition/diet knowledge as well as diet decision making with regards to
their diagnosis could be beneficial in progressing their stage of change. This information
could also be used in generating contextualized intervention to improve their readiness to

change.

Household Community as Supporter of Behavior Change

In creating intervention involving the support of the community, Daivadanam et
al. (2013) mentioned that families have often been used as ‘change agents’. Family
members that repel or ridicules the intended behavior change can influence the readiness
to change of the individual. In this study, another factor under HH environment that was
looked into was the support of the HH. Majority of the participants who received support
from their other HH members in terms of vegetables, salt, and oil were in action stage.
Whereas those who received support in terms of fruits and sugar were in
precontemplation stage. This may indicate that the support of other HH members did not

further influence the participant’s readiness in changing its dietary behavior towards fruit

111

and sugar. This may also be because fruits and sugar are usually eaten individually and
not part of a meal. It is also in line with Aggarwal et al. (2010) wherein their results
showed that low social support was a predictor of lack in dietary adherence. The result of
the study was supported by Daivadanam et al. (2018) wherein they stated that food
decision-making dynamics is usually centered around the household since food is a
product that is usually mutually consumed by the members of the household. Thus, there
is greater influence from the family members.

Since the support of the household is under the household environment, it is still
affected by other factors in the household including their household income and
expenses, as well as availability. While there are support from the household members,
there is still a need to address the overarching factors that is serving as a barrier for the

participants to progress in their stage of change.

Strategies to Improve Readiness to Change

In the study conducted by Daivadanam et al. (2018) they created a general
strategy for all the participants and added strategies as the stages of change progressed.
Nutrition counseling with a tailoring approach could be employed in the different stages
of change. Since this study also includes participants with NCDs, it could be included in
providing them appropriate nutrition care plan for their specific disease. Moreover,
behavior counseling could also be an approach. Verheijden (2004) also mentioned the
frame of thinking should be on “what the individuals think about their diets and what

their interest in change is, rather than what they are eating”. Aside from nutrition

112

counseling, social support has also been found as one of the important factors to achieve
valuable change, especially in risk factors for disease. In table 20, adapted from (Bowen
et al., 1994; Prochaska & Velicer, 1997; Prochaska et al., 1992) which was altered to the
stages of change specifically used for this study, the different stages, and processes for

dietary change can be seen.

Table 17. Stages and processes of dietary behavior change in the Stages of Change
Model (Verheijden, 2004)

Stage Process Significance
Precontemplation _ Consciousness raising Tnvolves increased awareness about

the causes, consequences, and cures
for a particular problem behavior

Dramatic relief Initially produces increased
emotional experiences followed by
reduced affect if appropriate action
can be taken

Environmental reevaluation Combines both affective and
cognitive assessments of how the
presence or absence of a habit
affects one’s social environment. It
can also include the awareness that
‘one can serve as a positive or
negative role model for others

Intention Self-evaluation Assessing how lifestyle influences
self, changing self-perception

Self-liberation Ts both the belief that once can
change (re)commitment to act on
that belief, generally known as
willpower


Table 17. Continuation.

Stage Process

Action Counterconditioning

Stimulus control

Contingency management

Helping relationships

Social liberation

113

Significance

Requires the learning of healthier
behaviors that can substitute for
problem behaviors

Removes or counters cues for
unhealthy habits and adds prompts
for healthier alternatives

Provides consequences on taking
steps in a particular direction, both
as reward and as punishments

Combines caring, trust, acceptance,
openness, as well as support for the
healthy behavior change

Requires an increase in social
opportunities or alternatives, beliefs
that environment support change

The processes mentioned in Table 16 could be employed in generating

interventions that is specifically tailored for each stage of change. This could further be

explored in future studies by planning intervention programs with the appropriate goals

and action steps that targets each stages specifically.

114

CHAPTER V

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

Assessment of readiness to change is necessary to be able to set the appropriate
interventions needed and make it successful by identifying the concern areas that needed
to be addressed first. In this study, 274 adult women with NCDs were sampled to assess
their readiness to change their dietary behaviors.

It can be concluded from the study that majority of the adult women with NCDs
were still in pre-contemplation stage for their dietary behaviors towards fruits, salt, sugar,
and oil. On the other hand, majority of the adult women with NCDs were already in
action stage in terms of their dietary behavior towards vegetables.

In term of their NCD diagnosis, having been diagnosed with NCD does not
necessarily influence the adult women in their readiness to change aside from having
been diagnosed with CVD wherein majority were already in the action stage.

Moreover, educational attainment, food preference, and frequency of
consumption were all found to influence the readiness to change of adult women with
NCDs and thus interventions including nutrition counselling and nutrition education
could be explored in touching these areas to help them improve their dietary behavior.

The support of the household community plays a vital role in significantly
influencing the readiness to change dietary behaviors of the participants. This information

could be used in further studies in creating contextualized intervention programs for

115

changing and improving the dietary behaviors of adult women with NCDs to include
strategies that will strengthen the awareness and involvement of other household
members and thus increase their support.

Moreover, purchasing power is one of the most driving factors that affects their
readiness to change. Since affordability and availability were both the majority hindering
factors for those in precontemplation stage, it can be noted that these factors needed to be

addressed first when creating a contextualized intervention program for them.

RECOMMENDATIONS

The study showed that assessing the readiness to change dietary behaviors of
adult women with NCDs can have a significant effect in designing the appropriate
programs and intervention in changing their dietary behaviors.

Moreover, community involvement in increasing awareness on how to consume
nutritious food without spending so much could be employed, strategies such as backyard
gardening could be one of the examples. The results of this study could be used in
creating contextualized intervention with the appropriate goals and action steps for the

different stages of change of each participant.

116

LITERATURE CITED

Aggarwal, B., Liao, M., Allegrante, J. P., & Mosca, L. (2010). Low Social Support Level
is Associated with Non-Adherence to Diet at 1 Year in the Family Intervention Trial
for Heart Health (FIT Heart). Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior, 42(6),
380-388. https://doi.org/10.1016/j,jneb.2009.08.006

Agodi, A., Maugeri, A., Kunzova, S., Sochor, O., Bauerova, H., Kiacova, N., Barchitta,
M., & Vinciguerra, M. (2018). Association of dietary patterns with metabolic
syndrome: Results from the kardiovize brno 2030 study. Nutrients, 10(7).
https://doi.org/10.3390/nu1 0070898

Ajzen, I. (1991). The Theory of Planned Behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human
Deceision Processes, 50(2), 179-211.

Alissa, E. M., & Ferns, G. A. (2017). Dietary fruits and vegetables and cardiovascular
diseases risk. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 57(9), 1950-1962.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2015.1040487

Arcellana, A. E., & Jimeno, C. (2020). Challenges and opportunities for diabetes care in
the philippines in the time of the covid-19 pandemic. Journal of the ASEAN
Federation of Endocrine Societies, 35(1), 35-57.
https://doi.org/10.15605/jafes.035.01.04

Amett, D. K., Blumenthal, R. S., Albert, M. A., Buroker, A. B., Himmelfarb, C. D.,
Goldberger, Z. D., Hahn, E. J., Khera, A., Lloyd-Jones, D., McEvoy, J. W., Michos,
E. D., Miedema, M. D., Mufioz, D., Smith, S. C., Virani, S. S., Williams, K. A.,
Yeboah, J., & Ziaeian, B. (2019). 2019 ACC/AHA Prevention Guidelines, Made
Simple: A report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines Writing Committee.
American College of Cardiology.

Bawadi, H. A., Banks, A. D., Ammari, F., Tayyem, R. F., & Jebreen, S. (2012). Stage of
change of 6 health-related behaviors among patients with type 2 diabetes. Primary
Care Diabetes, 6(4), 319-327. https://doi.org/10.1016/j,ped.2012.07.003

Bielland, M., Hausken, S. E. S., Sleddens, E. F. C., Andersen, L. F., Lie, H. C., Finset,
A., Maes, L., Melbye, E. L., Glavin, K., Hanssen-Bauer, M. W., & Lien, N. (2014).
Development of family and dietary habits questionnaires: The assessment of family
processes, dietary habits and adolescents’ impulsiveness in Norwegian adolescents
and their parents. /nfernational Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical
Activity, 11(1), 1-13. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12966-014-0130-z

Bowen, D. J., Meischke, H., & Tomoyasu, N. (1994). Preliminary evaluation of the
processes of changing to a low-fat diet. Health Education Research, 91), 85-94.

117

hutps://doi.org/10.1093/her/9.1.85

Brouwer, A. M., & Mosack, K. E, (2015). Nutrition & Food Science Article information :
Nutrition & Food Science, 45(1), 39-53.

Bul, M., Svab, 1., & Godycki-Cwirko, M. (2015). Factors that affect readiness to change
lifestyle: A 22-country survey from primary care. European Journal of General
Practice, 21(1), 33-38. https://doi.org/10.3109/13814788.2014.912269

Busetto, L., Luijkx, K., Huizing, A., & Vrijhoef, B. (2015). Implementation of integrated
care for diabetes mellitus type 2 by two Dutch care groups: A case study. BMC
Family Practice, 16(1), 1-10. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12875-015-0320-z.

Charan, J., & Biswas, T. (2013). How to calculate sample size for different study designs
in medical research? Indian Journal of Psychological Medicine, 35(2), 121-126.
hutps://doi.org/10.4103/0253-7176.116232

Chevance, G., Caudroit, J., Romain, A. J., & Boiché, J. (2017). The adoption of physical
activity and eating behaviors among persons with obesity and in the general
population: the role of implicit attitudes within the Theory of Planned Behavior.
Psychology, Health and Medicine, 22(3), 319-324.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13548506.2016.1159705

Cho, N. H., Kirigia, J., Mbanya, J. C., Ogurstova, K., Guariguata, L., Rathmann, W.,
Roglic, G., Forouhi, N., Dajani, R., Esteghamati, A., Boyko, E., Hambleton, I, de
Morais Neto, O. L., Montoya, P. A., Joshi, S., Chan, J., Shaw, J., Samuels, T. A.,
Pavkov, M., & Reja, A. (2017). IDF Diabetes Atlas 8th ed. In International Diabetes
Foundation (8th ed.). https://doi.org/http://dx.doi. org/10.1016/S0140-
6736(16)31679-8.

Chuproski, P., Tsupa, P. A., Fujimori, E., Ribeiro, R. P. P., & de Mello, D. F. (2012).
Eating behaviors and the social status of families of malnourished children, Revista
Da Escola de Enfermagem, 46(1), 52-59. hitps://doi.org/10.1590/S0080-
62342012000100007

Daivadanam, M., Ravindran, T. K. S., Thankappan, K. R., Sarma, P. S., & Wahlstrém, R.
(2016). Development of a tool to stage households’ readiness to change dietary
behaviours in Kerala, India. PLoS ONE, 11(11), \-13.
https://doi.org/10.1371 journal. pone.0165599

Daivadanam, M., Wahistrom, R., Ravindran, T. K. S., Sarma, P. S., Sivasankaran, S., &
Thankappan, K. R. (2013). Design and methodology of a community-based
clusterrandomized controlled trial for dietary behaviour change in rural Kerala.
Global Health Action, 6(1), 1-13. https://doi.org/10.3402/gha. v6i0.20993

Daivadanam, M., Wahlstrom, R., Ravindran, T. K. S., Sarma, P. S., Sivasankaran, S., &
Thankappan, K. R. (2018). Changing household dietary behaviours through

118

community-based networks : A pragmatic cluster randomized controlled trial in rural
Kerala , India, PLoS ONE, 13(8), 1-26.
https://doi.org/10.1371 /journal.pone.0201877

Daivadanam, M., Wahlstrém, R., Ravindran, T. S., Thankappan, K., & Ramanathan, M.
(2014). Conceptual model for dietary behaviour change at household level: A “best-
fit” qualitative study using primary data. BMC Public Health, 14(1), 1-12.
https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-14-574

De Vet, E., De Nooijer, J., De Vries, N. K., & Brug, J. (2008). Do the transtheoretical
processes of change predict transitions in stages of change for fruit intake? Health
Education and Behavior, 35(5), 603-618.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1090198 106289570

Deshpande, S., Basil, M. D., & Basil, D. Z. (2009), Factors influencing healthy eating
habits among college students: An application of the health belief model. Health
Marketing Quarterly, 26(2), 145-164. https://doi.org/10.1080/073596808026 19834

DOH. (2018a). DOH: 1 of every 3 Filipinos dies from Non-communicable diseases.
Inquirer.Net. https://newsinfo.inquirer.ne/992298/doh-1-of-3-filipinos-die-from-
non-communicable-diseases

DOH. (2018b). The 2018 Philippine Health Statistics. In Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health EPIDEMIOLOGY BUREAU Manila.
https://www.doh. gov. ph/sites/default/files/publications/2018 Philippine Health
Statistics.pdf

Doherty, S. C., Steptoe, A., Rink, E., Kendrick, T., & Hilton, S. (1998). Readiness to
change health behaviours among patients at high risk of cardiovascular disease.
European Journal of Cardiovascular Prevention & Rehabilitation, 5(3), 147-153.
https://doi.org/10.1177/174182679800500302

DOST-FNRI. (2014). Pinggang Pinoy-Adult.

DOST-FNRI. (2016). The Philippine Nutrition Facts and Figures 2015; Clinical and
Health Survey. http://enutrition.fnri.dost.gov.ph/site/preview.php?xx=
uploads/2015_CLINICAL_AND_HEALTH_SURVEY.pdf

Eshah, N. F. (2019). Readiness for Behavior Change in Patients Living with Ischemic
Heart Disease. Journal of Nursing Research, 27(6), \-8.
https://doi.org/10.1097/jnr.0000000000000336

FAO. (2016). Influencing food environments for healthy diets. In Food and Agriculture
Organization. https://doi.org/10.1006/nimg.2001.1006

Fisher, E. B., Fitzgibbon, M. L., Glasgow, R. E., Haire-Joshu, D., Hayman, L. L., Kaplan,
R. M., Nanney, M. S., & Ockene, J. K. (2011). Behavior matters. American Journal

119

of Preventive Medicine, 40(5), €15-€30.
https://doi.org/10.1016/).amepre.2010.12.031

French, S. A., Tangney, C. C., Crane, M. M., Wang, Y., & Appelhans, B. M. (2019).
Nutrition quality of food purchases varies by household income: The SHoPPER
study. BMC Public Health, 19(1), \-7. hutps://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-019-6546-2

Gerage, A. M., Benedetti, T. R. B., Cavalcante, B. R., Farah, B. Q., & Ritti-Dias, R. M.
(2020). Efficacy of a behavior change program on cardiovascular parameters in
patients with hypertension: a randomized controlled trial. Einstein (Sao Paulo,
Brazil), 18, €AQ5227. https://doi.org/10.31744/einstein_journal/2020A05227

Glanz, K., & Bishop, D. B. (2010). The role of behavioral science theory in development
and implementation of public health interventions. Annual Review of Public Health,
31, 399-418. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.publhealth.012809. 103604

Glanz, K., Rimer, B. K., & Viswanath, K. (2015a). Health Behavior: Theory, Research,
and Practice (Sth ed.). Jossey-Bass.

Glanz, K., Rimer, B., & Viswanath, K. (2015b). The Scope of Health Behavior. In Health
behavior: theory, research, and practice (Sth ed.). Jossey-Bass.

Gochman, D. S. (1997). Health behavior research: Definitions and Diversity. In
Handbook of health behavior research: Vol. I. Personal and Social Determinants.
Plenum Press.

Haase, A. M., Wardle, J., Ph, D., Haase, A. M., Ph, D.
B. (2016). Gender Differences in Food Choice : The Contribution of Health Beliefs
and Dieting Gender Differences in Food Choice : The Contribution of Health Beliefs
and Dieting. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 27(2), 107-116.
https://doi.org/10.1207/s15324796abm2702

, Steptoe, A., Phil, D., & Med, A.

Han, H., Gabriel, K. P., & Kohl, H. W. (2017). Application of the transtheoretical model
to sedentary behaviors and its association with physical activity status. PLoS ONE,
12(4), 1-13. https://doi.org/1 0.137 1/journal.pone.0176330

Hartline-Grafton, H. (2017). The Impact of Poverty, Food Insecurity, and Poor Nutrition
on Health and Well-Being. Washington, DC. Food Research & Action Center,
7(December), 1-14.

Horwath, C. C. (1999). Applying the transtheoretical model to eating behaviour change:
challenges and opportunities. Nutrition Research Reviews, 12(2), 281-317.
https://doi.org/10.1079/095442299 108728965

Horwath, C. C., Schembre, S. M., Motl, R. W., Dishman, R. K., & Nigg, C. R. (2013).
Does the transtheoretical model of behavior change provide a useful basis for
interventions to promote fruit and vegetable consumption? American Journal of

120

Health Promotion, 27(6), 351-357. https://doi.org/10.4278/ajhp. 1 10516-QUAN-201

Howley, C. (2012). Readiness for Change. \CF Interntional
hitps://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltex/ED535400.pd!"

IDF. (2020). IDF Western Pacific Members: The Philippines. hitps://idt org/our-
network/regions-members/western-pacific/members/I 16-the-philippines.html

Jalilian, H., Pezeshki, M. Z., Janati, A., Najafipour, F., Imani, A., Zozani, M. A., &
Khodayari Zarnaq, R. (2019). Readiness for diet change and its association with diet
knowledge and skills, diet decision making and diet barriers in type 2 diabetic
patients. Diabetes and Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research and Reviews, 13(5),
2933-2938. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dsx.2019.07.065

Kaldo, V., Richards, J., & Andersson, G. (2006). Tinnitus Stages of Change
Questionnaire: Psychometric development and validation. Psychology, Health and
Medicine, 11(4), 483-497. https://doi.org/10.1080/13548500600726674

Kegler, M. C., Alcantara, I., Veluswamy, J. K., Haardérfer, R., Hotz, J. A., & Glanz, K.
(2012). Results from an intervention to improve rural home food and physical
activity environments. Progress in Community Health Partnerships: Research,
Education, and Action, 6(3), 265-277. htips://doi.org/10. 1353/epr .2012.0042

Kim, H.-S., Ahn, J., & Jae-Kyung, N. (2012). Applying the health belief model to college
students’ health behavior. Nutrition Research and Practice, 6(6), 551-558.
https://doi.org/10.4162/nrp.2012.6.6.551

Kim, H.C., & Oh, S. M. (2013). Noncommunicable diseases: Current status of major
modifiable risk factors in Korea, Journal of Preventive Medicine and Public Health,
46(4), 165-172. https://doi.org/10.396 l/jpmph.2013.46.4.165

Kjeldsen, S. E. (2018). Hypertension and cardiovascular risk: General aspects.
Pharmacological Research, 129, 95-99. https://doi.org/10.1016/).phrs.2017.1 1,003

Knight, H., Stetson, B., Krishnasamy, S., & Mokshagundam, S. P. (2015). Diet self-
‘management and readiness to change in underserved adults with type 2 diabetes.
Primary Care Diabetes, 9(3), 219-225. https://doi.org/10.1016/}.ped.2014.09.007

LaMonte, W. W. (2018). The Transtheoretical Model (Stages of Change). Behavioral
Change Models. http://sphweb.bume.bu.edu/otlt/MPH-
Modules/SB/BehavioralChangeTheories/BehavioralChangeTheories6.html

Livi, S., Zeri, F., & Baroni, R. (2017). Health beliefs affect the correct replacement of
daily disposable contact lenses: Predicting compliance with the Health Belief Model
and the Theory of Planned Behaviour. Contact Lens and Anterior Eye, 40(1), 25-32.
hups://doi.org/10.1016/).clae.2016.09.003


121

Lozano, R., Naghavi, M., Foreman, K.. Lim, S., Shibuya, K., Aboyans, V., Abraham, J.,
Adair, T., Aggarwal, R., Ahn, S. Y., AlMazroa, M. A., Alvarado, M., Anderson, H.
R., Anderson, L. M., Andrews, K. G., Atkinson, C., Baddour, L. M., Barker-Collo,
S., Bartels, D. H., ... Murray, C. J. L. (2012). Global and regional mortality from
235 causes of death for 20 age groups in 1990 and 2010: A systematic analysis for
the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. The Lancet, 380(9859), 2095-2128.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61728-0

Mahan, L. K., & Escott-Stump, S, (2008). Krause’s, Food and Nutrition Therapy (12th
ed.), Saunders Elsevier.

McEachan, R. R. C., Conner, M., Taylor, N. J., & Lawton, R. J. (2011). Prospective
prediction of health-related behaviours with the theory of planned behaviour: A
meta-analysis. Health Psychology Review, 5(2), 97-144.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2010.521684

Mohammed, S., Islam, S., Purnat, T. D., Thi, N., Phuong, A., & Mwingira, U. (2014).
‘Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs) in.pdf. In Globalization and Health (Vol. 10,
Issue 81, pp. 1-7).

Montano, D. E., & Kasprzyk, D. (2016). Theory of Reasoned Action, Theory of Planned
Behavior, and the Integrated Behavioral Model. In Health Brhavior: Theory,
Research and Practice (Sth ed.). Jossey-Bass.

Moore, J. X., Chaudhary, N., & Akinyemiju, T. (2017). Metabolic syndrome prevalence
by race/ ethnicity and sex in the united states, national health and nutrition
examination survey, 1988-2012. Preventing Chronic Disease, 14(3), 1-16.
https://doi.org/10.5888/pcd1 4.160287

Mundorf, N., Redding, C. A., & Paiva, A. L. (2018). Sustainable transportation attitudes
and health behavior change: Evaluation of a brief stage-targeted video intervention.
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 15(1).
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph1 5010150

Ni Mhurchu, C., Margetts, B. M., & Speller, V. M. (1997). Applying the stages-of-
change model to dietary change. Nurition Reviews, 55(1 1), 10-16.
https://doi.org/10.1111/).1753-4887.1997.tb061 15.x

NIH NHLBI. (2010). Your Guide to Lowering Your Blood Pressure with DASH Diet. In
NIH Publication. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-78665-0_5446

Nti, C. A. (2008). Household dietary practices and family nutritional status in rural
Ghana. Nutrition Research and Practice, 2(1), 35.
hups://doi.org/10.4162/nrp.2008.2.1.35

Nutricia. (n.d.). What is Disease-Related Malnutrition?
hitp://www.nutricia.ie/articles/what_is_disease-related_malnutrition#


122

Padma, V. (2014). DASH Diet in Preventing Hypertension, Advances in Biological
Research, 8(2), 94-96. https://doi.org/10.5829/idosi.abr.2014.8.2.8272

Pallazola, V. A., Davis, D. M., Whelton, S. P., Cardoso, R., Latina, J. M., Michos, E. D.,
Sarkar, S., Blumenthal, R. S., Arnett, D. K., Stone, N. J., & Welty, F. K. (2019), A
Clinician’s Guide to Healthy Eating for Cardiovascular Disease Prevention. Mayo
Clinic Proceedings: Innovations, Quality & Outcomes, 3(3), 251-267.
hitps://doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocpiqo.2019.05.001

Parkerson, G. R., Connis, R. T., Broadhead, W. E., Patrick, D. L., Taylor, T. R., & Tse,
C.-K. J. (1993). Disease-specific versus generic measurement of health-related
quality of life in insulin dependent diabetic patients.pdf. Medical Care, 31(7), 629-
637.

Pellettiere, V. (2006). Organization Self-Assessment to Determine the Readiness and
Risk for a Planned Change. Organization Development Journal, 24(4).
hitps://web.s.ebscohost.com/abstract?direct=true&profile=ehost&scope=site&authty
pe=crawler&jml=08896402é&asa=Y & AN=24234 1698h=RQI7aSInXI | brRLPFWM
8rLDFGs5Z8wFZe%2FZyO%2BtwkGMxkeT%2FjPx2al 8FpC6gOCnuEm%2B9X
%2BoROZV%2FK|2PUF4FZg%3D%3D&crl=c&resultNs=AdminWebAu

Petrie, J. R., Guzik, T. J., & Touyz, R. M. (2018). Diabetes, Hypertension, and
Cardiovascular Disease: Clinical Insights and Vascular Mechanisms. Canadian
Journal of Cardiology, 34(5), 575-584. hitps://doi.org/10.1016/j.cjca.2017.12.005

Phillips, R., & Pittman, R. H. (2009). An Introduction to Community Development.
Routledge.

Pinlac, P. A. V., Castillo, E. C., Guevarra, J. P., Escartin, I. C., Caluag, E. I., Granada, C.
N., Tagunicar, L. B., Banda, A. D., Go, J. J. L., Kim, J. K., Sy, C. A. S., MacEda, A.
A., & Gloriani, N. G. (2015). The status of non-communicable disease prevention
and control in the philippines: A systematic review. Acta Medica Philippina, 493),
19-26.

Pirouznia, M. (2000). The correlation between nutrition knowledge and eating behavior
in an american school: The role of ethnicity. Nutrition and Health, 14(2), 89-107.
https://doi.org/10.1177/026010600001400202

Povey, R. (1999). A critical examination of the application of the Transtheoretical
Model’s stages of change to dietary behaviours. Health Education Research, 14(5),
641-651. https://doi.org/10.1093/her/14.5.641

Prochaska, J. O., & Di Clemente, C. C. (1982). Transtheoretical therapy: Toward a more
integrative model of change. Psychotherapy, 19(3), 276-288.
https://doi.org/10.1037/h0088437

Prochaska, James O., Redding, C. A., & Ever, K. E. (2015). The Transtheoretical Model

123

and Stages of Change. In Health Brhavior: Theory, Research and Practice (5th ed.).
Jossey-Bass.

Riddell, R. V., Roisland, M. T., & Jenssen, J. I. (2017). Change Readiness Factors
influencing employees’ readiness for change within an organisation: A systematic
review. https://uia. brage.unit.no/uia-
xmlui/bitstream/handle/11250/2452955/Riddell%2C Rebecca Victoria og
Roisland%2C Maren Tofte.pdf?sequence=I &isAllowed=y

Rimer, B. K., & Brewer, N. T. (2015). Introduction to Health Behavior Theories That
Focus on Individuals. In Health Behavior: Theory, Research, and Practice (Sth ed.).
Jossey-Bass.

Rodriguez, M. A., Friedberg, J. P., DiGiovanni, A., Wang, B., Wylie-Rosett, J., Hyoung,
S., & Natarajan, S. (2019). A tailored behavioral intervention to promote adherence
to the DASH diet. American Journal of Health Behavior, 43(4), 659-670.
https://doi.org/10.5993/AJHB.43.4.1

Ronis, D. L. (1992). Conditional health threats: health beliefs, decisions, and behaviors
among adults. Health Psychology : Official Journal of the Division of Health
Psychology, American Psychological Association, 11(2), 127-134.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-6133.11.2.127

Saklayen, M. G. (2018). The Global Epidemic of the Metabolic Syndrome. Curr
Hypertens Rep., 20(2), 2-12.

Shakiba, E., Shahabadi, S., Hazavehei, S. M. M., Saeidi, M. R., Marzbani, B., Bashiriyan,
S., Karami, M., & Hashemi, S. Z. (2018). Efficacy of transtheoretical model on
preventive nutritional behaviors of cardiovascular diseases: A randomized controlled
twial, Journal of Mazandaran University of Medical Sciences, 28(163), 24-37.

Sheeran, P. (2002). Intention—Behavior Relations: A Conceptual and Empirical Review.
European Review of Social Psychology, 12(1), 1-36.
huips://doi.org/10.1080/14792772143000003

Skinner, C. S., Tiro, J. & Champion, V. L. (2015). The Health Belief Model. In Health
Brhavior: Theory, Research and Practice (5th ed.). Jossey-Bass.

Takahashi, Y., Sasaki, S., Okubo, S., Hayashi, M., & Tsugane, S, (2006). Maintenance of
a low-sodium, high-carotene and -vitamin C diet after a 1-year dietary intervention:
The Hiraka Dietary Intervention Follow-up Study. Preventive Medicine, 43(1), 14
19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ypmed.2006.03.023

Talatappeh, D. H., Tavakoli, H. R., Najarkolaei, R. F., Moghadam, D. A., & Khoshdel,
A. (2012). Knowledge, beliefs and behavior of food consumption among students of
military university: The application of health belief model (HBM). Journal of
Military Medicine, 14(3), 206-213.

124

Udogadi, N. S., Onyenibe, N. S., & Abdullahi, M. K. (2019). Dietary Management of
Diabetes Mellitus with Focus on Nigeria. International Journal of Diabetes
Research, (May), 26-32. https://doi.org/10.17554/).issn.2414-2409.2019.02.14

Verheijden, M. W. (2004). Nutrition counselling in general practice: the Stages of
Change Model. In Nutrition counselling in general practice: the stages of change
model.

Walinga, J. (2008). Toward a theory of change readiness: The roles of appraisal, focus,
and perceived control. In Journal of Applied Behavioral Science (Vol. 44, Issue 3).
hitps://doi.org/10.1177/00218863083 18967

Wallerstein, N., Minkler, M., Carter-Edwards, L., Avila, M., & Sanchez, V. (2015).
Improving Health through Community Engagement, Community Organization, and
Community Building, In Health Brhavior: Theory, Research and Practice (Sth ed.).

Wexler, R., Feldman, D., Larson, D., Sinnott, L. T., Jones, L. A., & Miner, J. (2008).
Adoption of exercise and readiness to change differ between whites and African-
Americans with hypertension: A report from the Ohio state University Primary Care
Practice-Based Research Network (OSU-PCPBRN). Journal of the American Board
of Family Medicine, 21(4), 358-360. https://doi.org/10.3122/jabfm.2008.04.070175

White, S. C., Agurto, I., & Araguas, N. (2006), Promoting healthy behaviors to prevent
chronic disease in Panama and Trinidad & Tobago: Results of the women as agents
of change project. Journal of Community Health, 31(5), 413-429.
hutps://doi.org/10.1007/s10900-006-9022-8

WHO. (n.d.). Diabetes. World Health Organization. https://www.who.in/health-
topics/diabetes#tab=tab_1

WHO. (2003). Diet, Nutrition, and te Prevention of Chronic Diseases.

WHO. (2010). Global status report on noncommunicable diseases. In World Health
Organization (Vol. 53, Issue 9). https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO978 1 107415324.004

WHO. (2016). What is Malnutrition? https://www.who.inV/features/qa/malnutrition/en/

WHO. (2017). Cardiovascular Diseases (CVDs). World Health Organization.
https://www.who.inVen/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/cardiovascular-diseases-(cvds)

WHO. (2018). Noncommunicable diseases. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-
sheets/detail/noncommunicable-diseases

WHO, (2019). Prevention and Control of Noncommunicable Diseases in the Philippines.
The Case for Investment.

Williams, R., Colagiuri, S., Almutairi, R., Montoya, P. A., Basit, A., Beran, D.

125

Besancon, S., Bommer, C., Borgnakke, W., Boyko, E., Bright, D., Chan, J.,
Dahlquist, G., Divakar, H., Esteghamati, A., Forouhi, N., Franco, L., Gregg, E.,
Guariguata, L., ... Zhang, P. (2019). IDF Diabetes Atlas 9h ed. (9th ed.).
International Diabetes Federation.

Zare, M., Tarighat-Esfanjani, A., Rafraf, M., Shaghaghi, A., Asghari-Jafarabadi, M., &
Shamshiri, M. (2020). The barriers and facilitators of self-management among
adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus: A trans theoretical model (ttm)-based mixed
method study in Iran. Diabetes, Metabolic Syndrome and Obesity: Targets and
Therapy, 13, 2687-2699. https://doi.org/10.2147/DMSO.S230083

Zoeliner, J., Estabrooks, P. A., Davy, B. M., Chen, Y. C. Y., & You, W. (2012).
Exploring the Theory of Planned Behavior to Explain Sugar-sweetened Beverage
Consumption. Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior, 44(2), 172-177.
https://doi.org/10.1016/,jneb.201 1.06.010

APPENDICES

126

127
APPENDIX A. Algorithm for identification of stage of change

Table 17. Algorithm components and identification of stage of change of the adult women staging tool

Components incorporated in the staging algorithm to Relevant theme addressed by Relevant stage identified for
assess household stage of change ‘the component? the tool

|. Estimation of consumption

«Daily intake of F/V (Yes, No) Self-evaluation Yes=A

HH consumption of S/S/O: within limits (WL) or Self-evaluation WL=A
outsides

11. Staging questions

‘Willingness to make changes (Yes, No) Perceived response No=P.

‘Time frame for change: unsure Time frame for change P

Time frame for change: immediate Time frame for change fl

‘Level of confidence to make changes Efficacy 1-3=P,4-5=1
(five-point Likert scale)

Level of stability on making changes Perceived response 4-3=P,4-5=1
(five-point Likert scale)

7Althemes were derived from the resulls of a modified framework analysis carried out on primary qualitative data (Daivadanam et
al. BMC Public Health 2014), except ‘time frame for change’, which was based on existing staging tools (TTM)

® The stage corresponding to components in sections | and Il relate to FVSSO, while section Ill relates to the overall stage of
change. Only the responses that are leading o a staging decision are indicated in tis table.

© Assessment was done using a tabular chart which indicated the recommended levels of consumption for SSO, modified for the
local context from the NGF, WHO and AHA.


APPENDIX B. Screening Questionnaire

Name of Respondent:

Date of Collection:

Borangay/ Address Age:
SCREENING FORM

‘Are you diagnosed with the following disease/s?

* Diabetes Mellitus oYes aNo
ifyes,

Can you specify what type?

© Type 1 Diabetes

0 Type 2 Diabetes

0 Gestational Diabetes
0 Do not know

Can you specify the year you were diagnosed?

(Year)

Are you taking prescribed medication/s?

10 Yes, prescribed and taking medication
Yes, prescribed but not taking medication
© Not prescribed and not taking any
medication

g Others,

* Heart Disease

oYes ONo

ifyes,

Can you specify what type?

© Coronary Heart Disease
a Ischemic Heart Disease
a Rheumatic Heart Disease
a Others, pls specify

0 Do not know

Can you specify the year you were diagnosed?

(Year)

Are you taking prescribed medication?

© Yes, prescribed and taking medication

0 Yes, prescribed but not taking medication
© Not prescribed and not taking any
medication

0 Others,

* Hypertension

ayes No

ifyes,

Can you specify the year you were diagnosed?

(Year)

Are you taking prescribed medication?

© Yes, prescribed and taking medication
1 Yes, prescribed but not taking medication
© Not prescribed and not taking any
medication

a Others,

Thank You!

128

129
APPENDIX C. Readiness to Change Questionnaire

Date of Collection:
Name of Respondent:

Borangay/ Address Sex: Female
Please answer the following questions accordingly.
‘A. Respondent's information
1, What is your age?
2. What is your position in the household?
1 ~ Mother 4~ Child
2- Grandmother 5 - Others, specify
3- Aunt
3. Are you pregnant?
1-Yes 2-No
4. What is your marital status?
1 Married 2 -Divorced, Separated, or Widowed 3 - Single
4. What is your highest educational attainment?
1 = Postgraduate 4~ Some college 7 = Others, specify.
2~ College graduate 5 -High school graduate
3 = Vocational 6 ~ Some high school

8. Household Information

5. What is the type of your household?
1- Nuclear 2 - Extended family 3 - Single Parent 4- Alone

6. How many members do you have in your household?

7. How many household members are earning?

8. What is the occupation of the main income earner in the household?
1-Paid employment (regular) 2 ~ Paid employment (irregular) 3 - Own business

‘9, What is your estimated monthly family income?

10, What is your average daily food expenditure?

11. Is there a household member with NCD?
1- No NCDs in HH member 2 At least one HH member has NCD

If answer is 2: who is/are this HH member/s?
= What type of NCD/s do they have?
PART 2 — READINESS TO CHANGE
Please answer the following questions accordingly.

A.1 Estimation of Intake of Fruits and Vegetables (FV) -for the past month

11s the intake of fruits daily? 1-Yes__2-No

2.s the intake of vegetables daily? 1-Yes2-No

2 Estimation of Consumption of Salt, Sugar and Oil (SSO) -for the past month

3.18 your daily consumption of salt within (WL) or over (OL) the recommended levels?
1- WL 2-OL

[Recommended levels per person: (as per WHO) | <5gor< 1 tsp /day


7s your daily consumption of sugar within (WL) or over (OL) the recommended levels?

1. WL

2-0

{ Recommended levels per person: (as per AHA)

Women: < 25 g or <6 tsp / day

5. Is your monthly consumption of oil within (WL) or over (OL) the recommended levels?

1-WL

2-OL

[Recommended levels per person: (as per AHA)

< 15g or<3 tsp /day

B, Staging Questions

if FV consumption is daily and SSO intake is within recommended levels, stage = A

ifotherwise,

6. Are you willing to make a change?

= Yes, 2= No

Fruits

Vegetables

Salt

Sugar

Oil

Ifprevious answer is No, stage = P
fotherwise,

7. Are you able to make a change? 1 = Yes, 2= No

Fruits

Vegetables

Salt

Sugar

Oil

2

If previous answer is No, stage
otherwise,

7. When do you think you will start to change? 1 = Immediately, 2 = Not sure when

Fruits

Vegetables

Salt

Oil

130

ifprevious answer is unsure when, stage = P

otherwise,

8, How confident are you on making the changes?

1 2 3 4 5
Not confident at all Slightly confident | Somewhat confident: Fairly confident Completely
confident

Ifanswer 1-3, FV stage = P; if 4-5, FV stage
Fruits
Vegetables
Salt
Sugar
Oil

9. Rate your stability on making the changes. (given events such as parties, fiestas, etc.)

1 2 3 4 $
Not stable at all Slightly stable Somewhat stable Fairly stable Completely stable

answer 1-3, FV stage = P; if 4-5, FV stage =1

Fruits

Vegetables

Salt

Sugar

Oil

* Stage of Change for the different dietary behaviors:

* Overall stage of change:

Fruits

Vegetables

Salt

Sugar

Oil

131

132
APPENDIX D. Readiness to Change factors Questionnaire
PART 3 — FACTORS AFFECTING READINESS TO CHANGE

A. Current eating behavior

1. Do you always have a fruit at home? if yes, do you consume it? Do each of the household
members consume it?

2. If not, why?

3. Do you always prepare meals with vegetables? If yes, do you consume it? Do each of the
household members consume it?

4. It not, why?

5. What type of salt do you usually use in the household?

6. Are you fond in eating chips, instant noodles, and any other salty foods? How about other
members of your household?

7. How often do you usually consume salty foods? How about other members of your household?

8. What type of sugar do you usually use in the household?

9. Do you usually add sugar in preparation of drinks such as coffee, milk, juice, etc.?

10. Do you use any sugar alternatives in the household?

11. Are you fond in consuming sweet foods and beverages such as instant coffees, soft drinks, etc.?
How about other members of your household?

12. How often do you usually consume sweet foods? How about other members of your household?

13. What type of oil do you usually use in the household?

14. Are you fond in consuming fried foods? How about other members of your household?

15. How often do you usually consume fatty/fried foods? How about other members of your
household?

16. Are you fond in consuming processed foods? How about other members of your household?

17. How often do you usually consume processed foods? How about other members of your
household?

18. Are you fond in consuming fast foods? How about other members of your household?

19. How often do you usually consume fast foods? How about other members of your household?

B. After the first part of the interview, give them general feedback regarding the dietary
recommendations for the FVSSO

1. Five servings of fruits and vegetables daily (400g per capita)

4.

133
Salt consumption: < 5 g or < 1 tsp /day ; use of iodized salt is recommended
Sugar consumption: < 25 g or < 6 tsp / day ; brown sugar contains more minerals but not
necessarily better than white sugar

Oil consumption: < 15 g or < 3 tsp /day ; use of plant-based oil is better but not necessary

C. Assess readiness to change. Ask: given the information provided for them, are they interested in

making changes towards their dietary behaviors?

eNO ew N

Ifinterested, why do you think you need to change your dietary behaviors?
If not interested, why?

‘Among the five dietary behaviors, where do you think you could make changes first?
Which changes do you consider easy?

Which changes do you consider difficult?

Do you think you will get support from your household in making these changes?
What are the factors that could facilitate in making these changes?

What are the factors that could hinder in making these changes?

APPENDIX E. Food Frequency Questionnaire

Name of Respondent:

Date of Collection:

Borangay/ Address Sex: Female
FOOD FREQUENCY QUESTIONNAIRE:
Please check the frequency a food item is consumed.
Food item Reference/ Frequency of Consumption (Per Week)
Standard Portion | Once or | 30r4 | 50r6| 6+ | Never/ almost
Twice_| times | times | times never
GREEN LEAFY VEGETABLES
Kangkong, pechay, malunggay | % cup cooked/
leaves, saluyot leaves, etc. cup raw
OTHER VEGETABLES AND TUBERS RICH IN VITAMIN A.
Carrots, Squash, Yellow % cup cooked/
Camote, etc cup raw
OTHER VEGETABLES
Eggplant, sitaw, ampalaya, etc. | % cup cooked/
cup raw
CANNED OR PICKLED VEGETABLES
‘Any vegetables that was woup
canned, salted, pickled

FRUITS RICH IN VITAMIN A.

Ripe mango, papaya, bayabas, | 1 pc/slice
melon, etc

OTHER FRUITS:

Banana, guyabano, star apple, | 1 pc/slice
santol, jackfruit, etc

PROCESSED FRUITS
‘Any fruit that was dried, %eup
canned, pickled, juiced

EGG

Chicken egg, duck, quail, etc | 1 pc
PROCESSED EGG

Salted Egg ipe
Balut Ape

PROCESSED FISH &OTHER SEAFOODS

dried, daing, tinapa, alamang, | 2 tbsp

aligue, ete
Canned fish pe
FATS & ONS

Butter tsp
Margarine 1 tsp
‘Cooking oil Lisp.
Coconut milk Lisp

Chicken oil (e.g. Mang nasal) | 1 tsp

Salad Dressing Ltsp

134

Food item Reference/ Frequency of Consumption (Per Week)

Standard Portion | “Once or | 30r4 | Soré| 6+ | Never/ almost
Twice | times | times | times never

Mayonnaise isp

Sandwich spread 1tsp

Peanut butter 1tsp

Gravy Ltsp

FATS & OILS ABSORBED IN FOOD.

Fried pork, chicken, fish mb size

Fried egg Ipe

Fried hotdog/ham, ete 1pe

Banana cue, Camote cue, turon_| pe

French Fries 1 serving, 30g

Fried lumpia Ape

Fried fish ball, squid ball, pe

kikiam, kwek kwek, calamares

Fried egg plant Be

SUGAR & SWEETS

Table sugar i tbsp

Jams/jellies/preserves 1tsp

Candy 1 pe

Chocolate Ipc

‘SUGAR-SWEETENED BEVERAGES

Soft drinks (regular, not sugar- | 1 cup

free)

‘Sweetened coffee/tea (milk tea, | 1 cup

iced coffee)

Sweetened juice (canned, tetra_| 1 cup

pack)

Powdered fruit juice eup

Chocolate drinks 1eup

Energy drinks cup

135

