
UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS

Master of Science in Plant Breeding

ARLENE P. RIOGELON

QTL PYRAMIDING FOR ABIOTIC STRESS TOLERANCE IN ‘IR64’ RICE

TERESITA H. BORROMEO JOHN DAMIEN PLATTEN
Chair Co-chair
Date:
This thesis can be made available to the general public YES
This thesis can be accessed only after consultation with the author and NO

thesis adviser

This thesis can be accessed only by those bound by confidentiality NO
agreement
ARLENE P.RIOGELON
|
Bhirmes

TERESITA H. BORROMEO JOHN DAMIEN PLATTEN

QTL PYRAMIDING FOR ABIOTIC STRESS TOLERANCE IN ‘IR64’ RICE

ARLENE P. RIOGELON

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF THE GRADUATE SCHOOL,
UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE
DEGREE OF

MASTER OF SCIENCE
(Plant breeding)

June 2018

DOST-STII LIBRARY

NA A
STI-19-1078

The thesis attached hereto, entitled “QTL Pyramiding for Abiotic Stress Tolerance in
‘IR64’ Rice”, prepared and submitted by ARLENE P. RIOGELON in partial
fulfillment of the the requirements for the degree of MASTER OF SCIENCE (PLANT

BREEDING), is hereby accepted

[i larrmpra 7

TERESITA H. BORROMEO JOHN DAMIEN PLATTEN
Chair, Advisory Committee Co-chair, Advisory Committee
S Sued o/s
[rrgg dks es
MA. GENALEEN Q. DIAZ JOSE E. HERNANDEZ
Member, Advisory Committee Member, Advisory Committee
5 Qane 201” d

Accepted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of MASTER OF

SCIENCE (PLANT BREEDING)

EDNA A KOUILAR

Director, Institute of Crop Science

Date Signed

by

JOSE V. CAMACHO, JR
Dean, Graduate School

Date Signed~

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

The author is a faculty at the University of Souhtern Mindanao, where she also took her
B.S. in Agriculture major in Plant breeding and Genetics, minor in Plant Pathology, in 2010. After
graduation, she was blessed to land a job at Poineer Hi-bred Philippines, a leading hybrid seed
company, (2010-2013). Her short-time experience in the private sector encouraged her to advance
her knowledge in plant breeding and led her to pursue a Master’s degree in the University of the
Philippines Los Bafios. She took Plant breeding as major and molecular biology and biotechnology
as cognate, with scholarship grant from DOST-ASTHRDP. She was also an MS affiliate at the
International Rice Research institute were she conducted her master’s thesis. Her current interest
is on leadership not only in the academe but as well in the community.
She was the youngest of all the ever supporting thirteen children of Mr. Ricarte S.

Riogelon and Mrs. Petronila M. Riogelon.

ARLENE P. RIOGELON

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The author would like to first, give back the Honor, Glory, adoration and
thanksgiving to God, Lord Almighty, for making all things in her MS journey possible,
for how He had orchestrated things in every moment and in every way, for the wisdom and
strength, provisions and above all, for His overflowing Grace which enabled her to do
things beyond her strength and capability. She would also like to extend her heartfelt thanks
to the following individuals and institutions whom and which God used as an instrument
to make this work done.

First, my academic advisers, Prof. Teresita H. Borromeo, Dr. Ma. Genaleen Q.
Diaz, Dr. Jose E. Hernandez, for their encouragement, guidance, kindness and patience
since the beginning of my graduate program and throughout the conduct of the study. The
International Rice Research Institute, became an instrument to make this study possible
through the invaluable contributions of her IRRI advisers, Dr. Jong Hyoun Chin, and Dr.
John Damien Platten. The MBAST team and GSL staffs extended assistance during the
conduct of her study, and also, to Sir James and Ma’am Platten who also willingfully
extended assistance during her lab works at the physiology laboratory.

To the DOST-ASTHRDP, for the scholarship grant which enabled her to sustain
financial needs since the beginning of the graduate program.

To her Spiritual family, for all the prayers, not only during the conduct of her study
but also in the times of hardships and challenges she encountered. To her Spiritual mothers
from Luzon to Mindanao, Ms. Jecelyn Espano, Mrs. Helen Grace Dalida and Mrs.
Rhenalie T. Bello, for keeping her to always get back to what is essential and indispensable
in life, and to all her spiritual sibs who became her prayer wariors, to Mt. Sinai, Gerizem
and Esther ladies whom God used to deepen and strengthen her relationship with her Lord
Christ Jesus.

To her spiritual sibs, Zennith Arnejo, Joan Bangoy, Japoy and the USM-PBG
dept., for compassion in lending her computers and charger, a very indespensable gadget
to make this manuscript done.

To her ever dearest family- her ever loving parents and siblings-so many to
mention, for their prayers, support, understanding and for never giving up in all
circumstances.

To all, whom the Lord God Almighty used to make this endeavor a success, thank
you. -And finally, the author would like to publicly share the biblical citation of the whole
study: Jeremiah 17:7-8. To God be all the Glory!

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TITLE PAGE

APPROVAL PAGE
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LIST OF TABLES

LIST OF FIGURES

LIST OF APPENDIX TABLE
LIST OF APPENDIX FIGURE
ABSTRACT
INTRODUCTION

Time And Place Of The Study
REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

Abiotic Stresses in Rice
Soil Salinity
Anaerobic Germination
Complete Submergence

Genetic Solutions to Abiotic Stress Tolerance
Tolerance To Salinity
Tolerance to Anaerobic Germination
Tolerance to Complete Submergence

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Plant Materials
Molecular markers

Genotypic Screening for Multiple-QTLAbiotic Stress Tolerance

DNA Extraction
DNA Quantification and Quality Check.
PCR Amplification.

Phenotypic Screening for Abiotic Stress Tolerance

Screening for Salinity Tolerance.

PAGE

viii

xii
xiii

12
14

18
18
20

20
21
21
24

24

Na* Test
Screening for Tolerance to Anaerobic Germination
Screening for Submergence Tolerance.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Monogenic Expression of the QTLs Across Abiotic Stress Conditions

Anaerobic Germination
Submergence Stress

Salinity Stress

Effects on Tiller Count and Length

Digenic Interactions of the QTLs Across Abiotic Stress Conditions

Anaerobic Germination
Submergence Stress

Salinity Stress

Na* Content

Effects on Tiller Length and Tiller

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
RECOMMENDATION
LITERATURE CITED
APPENDICES

vi

PAGE

26
26
27
27

27

TABLE

LIST OF TABLES

Profiles of the 12 SSR primers used for genotyping of the multiple-
QTL F2 NILs derived from QTL pyramiding of eight QTLs for
abiotic stress tolerance in IR64 background.

PCR Profiles of the 12 SSR primers used for genotyping of the
multiple-QTL F2 NILs derived from QTL pyramiding of the eight
QTLs for abiotic stress tolerance in IR64 background.

Standard Evaluation System (SES) for visual scoring of salt injury
at seedling stage (IRRI, 2002).

vii

PAGE

19

22

24

FIGURE

LIST OF FIGURES

Mean survival (%) of the F: IR64-NILs contrasting at the AG/,
Sub1, Saltol and qDTY4.lafter 22 days of submergence during
germination. Values are means and vertical bars represent + SE.
Probability values are based on a Student’s T-test.

Mean survival (%) of F4 IR64-NILs contrasting at AG/, Sub/,
Saltol and gDTY4.1 after 19 days of complete submergence and 14
days of recovery. Values are means and vertical bars represent +
SE. Probability values are based on a Student’s T-test.

Mean salinity scores of F; IR64-NILs contrasting at AG/, and
qDTY4.1 for 29 days of salinization in 100 mM NaCl

Means of tiller length and tiller count of F; IR64-NILs contrasting
at AG/, Subl, Saltol, qDTY4.1 at 15 days after transplanting in
Yoshida’s nutrient media prior to salinization during seedling stage
(a) Mean tiller length(mm) (b) Mean tiller count. Vertical bars
represent + SE. Probability values are based on a Student’s T-test.

Mean survival (%) of Fs IR64-NILs contrasting at six digenic loci
namely, AG/J- Sub], AGI- Saltol, AGI-qDTY4.1, Sub1-Saltol,
Subl-qDTY4.1, Saltol-qgDTY4.1, after 22 days of submergence
during germination. Vertical bars represent + SE.

Mean survival (%) of Fs IR64-NILs contrasting at six digenic loci
namely, Subl-AGI , Sub]- Saltol, Subl-qgDTY4.1, AG1-Saltol,
AGI-qDTY4.1 and Saltol-gDTY4.1 after 19 days of complete
submergence and 14 days of recovery. Vertical bars represent + SE.

Mean Salinity injury scores of F; IR64-NILs at Saltol-qDTY4.1
digenic loci for 29 days of salinization in 100 mM NaCl

Mean Salinity injury scores of F3 IR64-NILs at AG/-qDTY4. at
digenic loci for 29 days of salinization in 100 mM NaCl

viii

PAGE

27

29

30

32

34

36

38

40

FIGURE

10

Mean Salinity injury scores of F3 IR64-NILs at Sub/-gDTY4.1
digenic loci for 29 days of salinization in 100 mM NaCl

Mean Salinity injury scores of F; IR64-NILs at Saltol-AG1 digenic
loci for 29 days of salinization in 100 mM NaCl

Mean Salinity injury scores of F; IR64-NILs at Sa/tol-Sub/ digenic
loci for 29 days of salinization in 100 mM NaCl

Means of tiller length and tiller count of F; IR64-NILs at six-
digenic loci namely Saltol- qDTY4.1, AGI-qDTY4.1, Subl-
qDTY4.1, AGI-Saltol and Sub1-Saltol , Sub1-AG1 at 15 days after
transplanting in Yoshida’s nutrient media prior to salinization
during seedling stage (a) Mean tiller length(mm) (b) Mean tiller
count. Vertical bars represent + SE.

PAGE

40

42

42

44

APPENDIX
TABLE

1

LIST OF APPENDIX TABLE

Genotype Data of the selected 78 F, IR64-NILs homozygous at
any two-three loci but contrast at any single locus

T-test of mean survival (%) of the F4 IR64-NILs contrasting at the
AGI, Sub1, Saltol and qDTY4.lafter 22 days of submergence
during germination

T-test of mean survival (%) of the F, IR64-NILs contrasting at the
AGI, Subl, Saltol and qDTY4.] after 19 days of complete
submergence and 14 days of recovery

T-test of mean salinity scores of the of the F3; IR64-NILs
contrasting at the AG/, and gD7Y4.1 for 29 days of salinization in
100 mM NaCl

T-test of Na content (mmol/gDW) in F3 IR64-NILs contrasting at
the AG/, Sub/, Saltol and gDTY4.1 during salinization period

T-test of the tiller length and count of F; IR64-NILs contrsting at
AGI, Subl, Saltol, qDTY4.1 at 15 days after transplanting in
Yoshida’s nutrient media prior to salinization during seedling
stage (6.1) Mean tiller length(mm) (6.2) Mean tiller count

T-test of the mean survival (%) of F4 IR64-NILs contrasting at six
digenic loci namely, AG/- Sub], AGI- Saltol, Ag1-qgDTY4.1, Sub1-
Saltol, Subl-qDTY4.1, Saltol-qDTY4.1, after 22 days of
submergence during germination

T-test of mean survival (%) of the F4 IR64-NILs contrasting at six
digenic loci namely, Sub-AG/ , Sub/- Saltol, Subl-qgDTY4.1, AGI-
Saltol, AGI-qDTY4.1 and Saltol-qgDTY4.1 after 19 days of
complete submergence and 14 days of recovery

T-test of mean salinity injury scores of the F; IR64-NILs at six
digenic loci namely; Saltol-gDTY4.1(9.1), AGI-qDTY4.1(9.2),
Sub1-qDTY4.1 (9.3), Saltol-AG1(9.4), Saltol-Sub1(9.5) and AGI-
Sub1 (9.6) for 29 days of salinization in 100 mM NaCl

PAGE

60

62

63

64

65

65

66

68

69

APPENDIX
TABLE

10

T-test of Na* content (mmol/gDW) in F3 IR64-NILs at six-digenic
loci namely Saltol-qgDTY4.1, AGI-qgDTY4.1, Subl-qgDTY4.1, AGI-
Saltol, Sub]-Saltol and Sub]-AG] during salinization period

T-test of the tiller length and count of F; IR64-NILs at six-digenic
loci namely Saltol- qDTY4.1, AG1-qgDTY4.1, Subl-qDTY4.1, AGI-
Saltol, Sub1-Saltol and Sub1-AG/ at 15 days after transplanting in
Yoshida’s nutrient media prior to salinization during seedling stage
(11.1) Mean tiller length(mm) (11.2) Mean tiller count

xi

PAGE

72

72

LIST OF APPENDIX FIGURE

APPENDIX PAGE
FIGURE
1 QTL pyramiding scheme for the eight major QTLs for abiotic 74

stress tolerance in IR64 Background (MBAST, IRRI)

xii

ABSTRACT

ARLENE P. RIOGELON. University of the Philippines Los Bafios, June 2018. QTL

PYRAMIDING FOR ABIOTIC STRESS TOLERANCE IN ‘IR64’ RICE

Major Professors: Prof. Teresita H. Borromeo

Dr. John Damien Platten

Monogenic expression and digenic interactions of abiotic stress tolerance QTLs pyramided
in the mega variety ‘IR64' were evaluated. Five F2 populations of IR64-NILs produced, which
numbered to a total of 827 plants were genotyped using SSR markers. A total of 78 F2 genotypes
which were homozygous [+] at any two or three, but homozygous [-] at any single locus of these
loci, were selected for phenotypic screening under anaerobic germination, submergence and
salinity stress. Evaluation of monogenic expression and digenic interactions of these QTLS was
limited only to four major QTLs namely, AGI, Sub], Saltol and qDTY4.1.

AGI improved tolerance to anaerobic germination. It was compatible with Sub land Saltol
under both submergence and salinity stress, and was also compatible with qDTY4.1 under
anaerobic germination and submergence stress. It surmounted the negative effect of Saltol[+] under
aerobic germination but it was inferior to the negative effect of qDTY4.1 [+] under salinity stress.
It reduced tiller length and count. It still reduced tiller length and count with Sub1[+] and Saltol[+],
and further reduced these traits with qDTY4.1 [+]. Sub1 significantly improved submergence
tolerance. It was compatible with Saltol[+] under submergence and salinity, and with qDTY4.1[+]
under anaerobic germination and submergence. It reduced tolerance to anaerobic germination and
further reduced tolerance with Saltol[+] allele. In addition, it was inferior to the negative effect of

qDTY4.1[+] under salinity but it surmounted the negative effect of qDTY4.1 in tiller length and

xiii

count. Saltol improved tolerance to salinity, but reduced tolerance to anaerobic
germination. It was compatible with qDTY4.1 under anaerobic germination and submergence and
surmounted the negative effect of qDTY4.1 in salinity tolerance, tiller length and tiller count.
qDTY4.1, was compatible with AGI, Subl and Saltol under anaerobic germination and
submergence stress. It still reduced tolerance to salinity with AG1[+] and Sub1[+] but was inferior
to the tolerance effect of the major QTL, Saltol under salinity stress. It reduced tiller length and
count and further reduced these traits with AG1[+] allele. However, Sub1[+] and Saltol[+] alleles

surmounted this effect.

xiv

INTRODUCTION

Rice holds the leading position in maintaining food security. As world populations
continuously grow, rice consumption is also expected to rise particularly in countries where sole
dependence to rice has been observed. Due to its increasing demand, about 40 % more rice produce
has been estimated to meet the demand of the growing populations by 2030 (Kush, 2005).
Therefore, production must grow substantially to meet the demand for rice.

However, environmental constraints are currently being encountered in rice farming all
over the world. External factors which negatively affect plant growth and development, also known
as abiotic stresses are the most harmful factors to attaining higher crop productivity worldwide
(Witcombe et al., 2008; Singh et al., 2010). Of these are, drought, salinity, floods, high temperatures
and mineral deficiencies that negatively affect plant growth and crop yield (Onaga and Wydra,
2016). Drought alone affects 45% of the agricultural lands (Onaga and Wydra, 2016), salinity
account for 20% of the irrigated agricultural lands (Negrao et al., 2011) and 16% is affected by
flash floods (Colmer and Pedersen, 2008). Furthermore, irregular weather patterns including more
frequent and lengthy storms have been recently experienced in many areas worldwide (Shi et al.,
2007; Jongman et al., 2014). These erratic changes have been attributed to climate change. As a
result, warming, drought, floods and storm events have been also expected to become even more
frequent and severe in the years to come (Wassmann et al ., 2009; Onaga and Wydra, 2016).
Moreover, arable lands have been also believed to decrease through time. In fact, some cultivated
areas have already reached their sustainable limits (Foley et al. 2011). Therefore, abiotic stresses
ultimately limit rice productivity by limiting the land available for farming and disturbing plant
processes for growth and productivity through availability of plant requirement in deficiencies or

excess. In addition, they could possibly occur imultaneously than single stress (Singh et al., 2010).

2

Genetic improvement offers the most feasible and promising strategy to improve tolerance
to abiotic stress. A first important step is to identify major quantitative trait loci (QTLs) for the
target abiotic stress tolerance and efficiently transfer them to the existing high yielding varieties
also called “mega varieties”. Some levels of success have already been achieved in identifying
major QTLs conferring abiotic stress tolerance such those for drought (qD7Y2.2 and gDTY4.1),
salinity (Salto), anaerobic germination (AG/), complete submergence (Sub/), P deficiency (pup!),
high temperature (gHTSF4. 1) and rice tungro disease (TSV1). Several introgressions of these QTLs
have also been successfully made through marker assisted selection (MAS) with the aid of closely
linked molecular markers.

Simple sequence repeat or SSR markers have been considered as the markers of choice for
plant breeding (Gupta and Varshney, 2000). SSRs have been widely use in marker assisted
backcrossing (MABC) for abiotic stress tolerance. The success of MABC has already resulted in
significant improvements in the level of tolerance and some agronomic traits in a number of known
varieties. Of these, is the well -known, “mega” variety IR64 from the Philippines.

To date, only few of the major QTLs for abiotic stress tolerance have been combined or
pyramided in a single genotype. “QTL pyramiding is the process that assemble many genes that
work well together and, for a specific trait, assemble the alleles with similar effects from different
loci” (Xu, 1997). However, abiotic stresses are often complex quantitative traits controlled by
complex adaptive mechanisms (Roy et al., 2011). To date, QTL interactions in multiple abiotic
stress tolerant varieties have not yet been fully established. Understanding the effect of each major
QTL or multiple major QTLs in a single genotype would effectively aid in the efficient
development of varieties with multiple abiotic stress tolerance to circumvent multiple abiotic
stresses in rice.

Generally, this study was conducted to select for multiple abiotic stress-tolerant near

3

isogenic lines (NILs) in IR64 background, as potential donors in breeding for multiple abiotic stress
tolerance in rice. Specifically, it aimed to evaluate the monogenic expression and digenic
interactions of the major QTLs for abiotic stress tolerance namely, Saltol, AG] and Sub/ through
the following:
1, Phenotype a set of multiple-QTL near isogenic lines contrasting at the Salto! locus
under salinity stress during seedling stage.
2. Phenotype a set of multiple-QTL near isogenic lines contrasting at the AG/ locus under
anaerobic conditions during germination stage.
3. Phenotype a set of multiple-QTL near isogenic lines contrasting at the Sub/ locus under
complete submergence during seedling stage.
4. Identify changes on particular traits as affected by the expression and interaction of the

major QTLs for abiotic stress toleranc

Time And Place Of The Study

This study was conducted at the Genotyping Services Laboratory (GSL) and screen houses

of the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) from January 2015 to October 2017

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

Abiotic Stresses in Rice

Abiotic stress is defined as “the negative impact of non-living factors on living organisms
in a specific environment.” (Onaga and Wydra, 2011). Abiotic stresses are the major threat and the
most harmful factors to attaining higher crop productivity, worldwide (Witcombe et al., 2008;
Singh et al., 2010). Despite being semi aquatic in nature, rice is still sensitive to flooding at different
stages of its growth. Of the major cereals, it is the only crop with seeds capable of germination
under water (Ella and Setter 1999; Magneschi and Perata 2009; Angaji et al., 2010). But most
genotypes could not withstand anaerobic germination (Angaji et al., 2010). Mackill et al. (2012)
classified flood stress into four types depending on plant traits and varietal types. These include the
following: a) flooding during germination (anaerobic germination/AG which result in submergence
before germination); b) flash flood (results to complete submergence up to weeks); c) stagnant
flooding (medium deep flooding which results in flooding for more than two weeks or several
months); d) deeper stagnant flooding (results in flooding to depths of above 50 cm or more, for
deepwater or floating rice). Rice is also the most sensitive to salinity among the cereals and its
response to abiotic stresses varies with genotype, growth stage, duration and extent of the stress
(Maas and Hoffman 1977; Flowers and Yeo, 1981; Jackson and Ram 2003; Sarkar et al 200:Fukao

and Bailey-Serres, 2008; Das et al., 2009)

Soil Salinity

“Salinity is the presence of sufficient concentrations of soluble salts in the soil to reduce
normal crop growth.” (Singh and Flowers, 2010). It is measured in terms of the electrical
conductivity (EC) of a soil extract. When the EC reach 4.0 deci-Siemens per meter (4 dS/m) which
is also equivalent to approximately 40 mM NaCl, the soil is then considered saline (Chinnusamy et
al., 2005; Eynard et al., 2005). A salinity threshold of as low as 3 dSm-1 has been reported
enough to reduce yield (Maas and Hoffman 1977). Soil salinity can be further ascribed to two salts
— calcium (Ca) and sodium (Na) but the most common are chloride and sulfate of sodium (Singh
and Flowers, 2010). NaCl is the most soluble and abundant and therefore a major contributing
factor in soil salinity (Tiirkan and Demiral, 2009). In rice, soil salinity is next to drought in both
extent and gravity (Singh et al., 2010; Ahmadi and Fotokian 2011). In coastal regions where rice is
the major food for consumption, salinity stress is commonly a major threat (Thomson et al., 2010).
Even in inland areas, salt accumulation is becoming a serious issue as a consequence of irrigation
mismanagement and the use of poor-quality irrigation water (Rengasamy, 2002; Ismail et al., 2007;
Rahman et al., 2016). In addition, intrusions of brackish water at dry season and at the start of the
wet season is another source of soil salinity that hinders crop productivity (Thomson et al., 2010).
Soil salinity has already affected more than 900 million ha or approximately 20% of agricultural
land (Negrao et al., 2011; Rahman et al., 2016). Although salinity affects a relatively low
percentage (<10%) of the total rice area in the Philippines, Bangladesh, India, and Indonesia, a
significant increase in rice production could possibly be attained when rice varieties are tolerant to

salinity (Alpuerto et al., 2009).

Anaerobic Germination

6

Direct seeding is becoming popular in many rice growing areas worldwide. Due to its
economic incentives (Pandey and Velasco, 2002; Angaji et al., 2010) direct seeding method has
already accounted 20 % of the rice area in Asia (Dawe, 2005). Labor shortage and high cost of
labor in manual transplanting (Pandey and Velasco, 2002), effective weed control method (Tuong
et al., 2000; Angaji et al., 2010), earlier crop maturity of seven to ten days and higher tolerance of
the crop to water deficit (Pandey and Velasco, 2002) and its potential for crop intensification are
the driving forces in the shift to direct seeding in rice. However, its potential for crop intensification
has not been fully realized, because during germination, rice is sensitive to flooding for a long
period of time. Although, rice has the ability to germinate under water (Ella and Setter 1999; Ismail
et al., 2009; Magneschi and Perata, 2009), most cultivars could not withstand flooding when it
occur unexpectedly just after seeding (Ismail et al., 2009; Angaji et al., 2010). Unexpected flash
floods and shallow flooding resulting from heavy rains in combination with the unleveled soils

result in reduced germination and poor crop establishment (Ismail et al., 2009; Angaji et al., 2010).

Complete Submergence

Flooding is a major abiotic stress particularly in rainfed lowland areas. Bailey-Serres et al.
(2012) describe “flooding” as an inundation by water of all or part of a plant, and “submergence”
when most or all aerial tissue is under the water. Among the types of flood stress in rice (Mackill
et al., 2010), flash flood or complete submergence is considered the most common but most
damaging (Ismail et al., 2012) and most important yield limiting factor of rice production in South
and South East Asia (Jena and Mackill 2008; Collard et al., 2013; Singh et al., 2013). Over 15
million hectares of rain-fed lowland rice areas in South and Southeast Asia is regularly being
affected by submergence stress (Neeraja et al., 2007).

Flash flood results in complete submergence of the entire plant. However, most cultivars

7

cannot withstand complete submergence in a matter of few days of submergence (Xu et al., 2006:
Bailey-Serres et al. 2010). Complete submergence can pose a complex stress. During
submergence, diffusion of oxygen and carbon dioxide are reduce by 10,000-fold, and that
availability of light is also limited for photosynthesis (Fukao and Bailey-Serries, 2008). In addition,
the extent of damage resulting from complete submergence is highly dependent to environmental

conditions particularly to flood water conditions (Das et al., 2009; Kirk et al., 2014).

Genetic Solutions to Abiotic Stress Tolerance

Tolerance To Salinity

Mechanism of sodium (NA*) uptake and assimilation. Salinity is physiologically and
genetically, a complex abiotic stress. It affects the major physiological processes in the plant
resulting in eventual reduction in growth, development and survival (Carillo et al., 2011).
Mechanisms of salt uptake in rice includes the transport of Na* through either apoplastic (passive
transport) or symplastic (active transport) pathway (Singh and Flowers, 2010). A root bypass-flow
or apoplastic pathway has been reported to contribute a significant part of Na* transport (Yeo et al.,
1987) although Na‘ ions could also be transported into the cell through K* transporters (Blumwald,
2000). In contrast, Cl uptake is generally viewed to take place in symplastic pathway. The main
site of Na* accumulation is the leaf blade rather than roots ( Munns and Tester, 2008). As a result,
Na* concentration in the leaf is used as an indicator of salinity tolerance. Symptoms of stress can
be first observed in the burning of the leaf tip followed by other morphological parameters such as
low tillering, leaf scorching and stunted plant growth, leaf rolling under low RH conditions (Singh

and Flowers, 2010). The rate at which salt reach its toxic levels is variable between genotypes

(Carillo et al., 2011).

Plants are affected by salinity stress in two main ways: water deficit caused by high salt
concentration in the soil and the ion-specific (Na‘ and CI ions) stresses which result from imbalance
K’‘/ Na* ratios in plants (Blumwald, 2000; Munns, 2002). Initial exposure of the plant to salinity
causes water stress or osmotic stress, a condition similar in drought, also called as “physiological
drought” (Turkan and Demiral 2009). It occurs when salt concentration surrounding the roots
reaches the threshold level of 40 mM NaCl or less in rice (Munns and Tester 2008). High salt
concentration around the roots reduces the ability of the plant to take up water and thus reduce
growth, a response also called as the osmotic phase. Growth reduction in consequence to osmotic
stress is expressed in reduced cell expansion and division, and immediate stomatal closure, hence
reduced leaf area and stunted shoot (Munns, 2002). On the other hand, long term exposure to salt
stress causes salt-specific effects that reach to a level in which plant could no longer sustain growth
(Munns, 2002). These effects occur in a slow phase until Na* accumulates in the leaf tissue over
time, a response also called as the ionic phase (Munns and Tester, 2008). It causes death or
premature senescence of the older leaves and thus, reduction in photosynthetic area when salt

concentrations rise to toxic levels (Munns, 2002; Munns and Tester, 2008).

Mechanism of salt tolerance. Salt tolerance is physiologically and genetically, a complex
trait. Salt tolerant rice varieties have been observed to have maintained low Na’ and / or low Na‘
ratio in shoots (Lutts et al., 1995; Gregorio, 1997; Lee et al., 2003; Thomson et al., 2010; Platten
etal., 2013; Barua et al., 2015; Rahman et al., 2016). The ability to maintain this physiological trait
is said to be the key feature of salinity tolerance (Ahmadi and Fotokian, 2011). Various
physiological factors contributing to the complexity of salt tolerance at the vegetative stage have

been reported (Yeo et al., 1990; Menezes-Benavente et al., 2004; Moradi and Ismail 2007; Cotsaftis

9

et al., 2011; Javid et al., 2011). Yeo and Flowers (1986) argued that no single factor controls
resistance (tolerance) and that tolerance is the sum of the component traits which vary in: 1) NaCl
entry via apoplastic pathways; 2) leaf to leaf compartmentalization; and 3) tissue tolerance. In 2012,
Sudharani et al. summarized various possible mechanisms involved in salt tolerance. These include
the following: 1) seedling vigor (tolerance by dilution effect of rapid vegetative growth); 2) initial
entry of salts from roots (by either apoplastic and symplastic pathways as mediated by Na* and K*
transporters); 3) intra-cellular compartmentation (or cellular level of tolerance) which further
includes, (a) ion homeostasis pathway (example, Salt Overly Sensitive or SOS pathways), (b)
synthesis of osmoprotectants (production of organic solutes and being localized in the cytoplasm
while Na* and CI are preferentially sequestered into vacuole, thus turgor in the cell is maintained),
(c) signal pathway — transcription factors (by promoter regions and transcription factors inducing
expression of the stress tolerance genes), (d) stress activated protein pathway (stress responsive
proteins that play protective role during desiccation/salt stress in rice plants); 4) plant level transport
of salt and its compartmentalization which includes (a) compartmentalization of salts from younger
to older leaves and within the leaf (compartmentalization in older leaves, leaf sheath and culm) (b)
more selective uptake into reproductive organ and flag leaf.

Rice is relatively tolerant during germination stage and becomes highly sensitive during
the early seedling stage (1-3 weeks). It restores tolerance during active tillering stage, but becomes
sensitive again during reproductive stage and finally becomes relatively tolerant at maturity stage
(Singh et al., 2008a, as cited by Singh et al., 2010). This order of varying tolerance in different
stages of rice also varies between cultivar (Heenan et al.,1988). Moreover, poor correlation in
tolerance between the seedling and reproductive stage has also been reported (Makihara et al.,
1999). Nonetheless, tolerance to salinity at the seedling stage is an important consideration in

breeding program as it determines crop establishment in saline environment. Due to the

10

complexities of the trait, Munns and Tester (2008), have categorized salt tolerance by plant process
in response to salinity which include (1) tolerance to osmotic stress, (2) Na* exclusion from leaf
blades, and (3) tissue tolerance.

Tolerance to osmotic stress is the ability of the plant to tolerate the physiological drought
resulting from salinity stress (Rajendran et al., 2008). Plants immediately respond to osmotic stress
by stomatal closure and reduced cell expansion in root tips and young leaves. Because of the need
for carbon fixation, it would be an unsustainable mechanism of tolerance (Hasegawa et al., 2000).
Conversely, reduction in response to osmotic stress, hence osmotic tolerance, results to greater leaf
growth and stomatal conductance (Moradi and Ismail, 2007). However, greater stomatal
conductance and the resulting greater leaf growth would be beneficial only when there is enough
water supply (Munns and Tester, 2008)

Salt tolerant plants were known to have exceptional capacity to exclude Na* and CI from
the roots (Garthwaite et al., 2005). Although rice is the most salt sensitive among the cereals, it has
the capability to exclude about 94 % of soil Na* (Munns, 2005 as cited by Singh and Flowers, 2010;
Munns et al., 2006; James et al., 2006). Hence, tolerant genotypes are also considered as good Na*
excluders (Cotsaftis et al., 2012). Likewise, tolerant varieties which have been considered as good
Na* excluders absorbed high amounts of K*, and maintained a low Na*/ K ‘ratio in the shoot (Lee
et al. 2003). In addition, several workers have reported the association between Na’ exclusion and
the low Na* and / or low Na‘/K*“ratios in shoots (Gregorio et al., 1997; Ahmadi and Fotokian, 2011;
Platten et al., 2013; Rahman et al., 2016).

On the other hand, high concentrations of Na‘ that are still found in leaves have been
attributed to intracellular compartmentalization (Munns and Tester 2008). It allows leaf to function
normally by partitioning of Na* within the cells, an adaptive mechanism also called as tissue

tolerance. However, genotypes with the greatest tissue tolerance do not necessarily show an overall

11

phenotypic tolerance (Yeo and Flowers, 1983).

The Saltol (salinity tolerance) QTL. Various physiological mechanisms describing salt
tolerance from large bodies of work only suggest the complexity of the mechanism of salt tolerance.
Apart from characterizing physiological responses, efforts on breeding for salinity tolerance have
also focused on mapping QTLs associated with these various physiological traits. Several major
and minor QTLs associated to salt tolerance have been mapped in different genomic regions such
as those detected in chromosomes 7 (Zhang et al., 1995), 1, 4, 6 and 9 (Koyama et al., 2001) and
the 14 QTLs on chromosome 1 (5 QTLs), 3 (IQTL), 4 (3 QTLs), 5 (2 QTLs), 6 (1 QTL), and 8 (2
QTLs) (Ahmadi and Fotokian, 2011). However, the best known and the most robust QTL was
identified in chromosome 1, known as the Saltol. The initial tagging of the Saltol QTL (Gregorio,
1997) and its subsequent characterization (Bonilla et al., 2002; Lin et al 2004) has led to the
identification of the QTL SKC] in the Salto] region known as Saltol/SKC1. SKC] (qSKC-1) has
accounted 40.1 % of the phenotypic variation for shoot K* concentration. Cloning of the SKC/ has
led to the identification of the gene OsHKT1;5, known to encode an OsHKT-type transporter
responsible for maintaining K*/ Na* homeostasis under salt stress (Ren et al., 2005). HKT1;5 was
known to be responsible for Na* exclusion from photosynthetic tissues (Cotsaftis et al., 2012).
Likewise, Platten et al. (2013) reported a strong association between leaf Na* concentration and an
allele of the previously identified OsHKT1;5. An aromatic allele from O. glaberrima conferred the
highest Na* exclusion suggesting that salinity tolerance in rice can be explained by a particular
OsHKT1;5 allele present in a line. However a number of exceptions to this association were also
noted suggesting an apparent existence of additional effective exclusion mechanism (Platten et al.,
2013; Rahman et al., 2016).

Despite the numerous QTLs and genes identified in the long time quest for salinity

12

tolerance, it still appeared difficult to generalize about the mechanism of tolerance to salinity stress.
As argued earlier, not a single factor controls salt tolerance (Yeo and flowers, 1986). Moreover,
multiple alleles were also detected in the Saltol region even in the most reputed rice accession
Pokalli (Thomson et al., 2010) as well as in other accessions (Rahman et al., 2016). Nonetheless,
Saltol still holds the most important aspect of the salinity tolerance. Other QTLs perhaps control
much smaller portions of the total variance than Salto] and consequently presents a complex

scenario (Platten et al., 2013).

Tolerance to Anaerobic Germination

Rice seeds are capable of germination under flooded condition, a phenomenon called
anaerobic germination. However, most genotypes could not withstand flooding during germination
(Ismail et al., 2009; Angaji et al., 2010). In the absence of oxygen, carbohydrate breakdown shifts
from aerobic to anaerobic pathways (alcohol fermentation). However, energy production in this
process is 18 times less efficient than aerobic carbohydrate breakdown (Ella and Setter, 1999).
Being a semi-aquatic species, rice has developed survival mechanism when flooded during
germination. Observations in growth, anatomical and physiological parameters have revealed the
survival mechanism of the germinating rice under flooded condition. Under low oxygen
concentration (hypoxia), rice coleoptile elongates faster than in normal condition (Alpi and
Beevers, 1983; Ishizawa and Esashi, 1984; Yamauchi et al., 1993; Ella and Setter 1999; Lasanthi-
Kudahettige et al., 2007; Ismail et al., 2009; Magneschi and Perata, 2009). The growing coleoptiles
can elongate at a rate of nearly 1 mm 41 under anaerobic conditions (Magneschi and Perata, 2009;
Narsai et al., 2015). In order to access and transport oxygen to the submerged organs, rice also
develops anatomical adaptive mechanism such as formation of aerynchema tissues (Matsukura et

al., 2000; Colmer and Pedersen, 2008). Aerenchyma are gas-filled spaces formed as an adaptive

13

mechanism in aquatic and semi-aquatic plants. It facilitates gas exchange between the aerial and
submerged parts of the plant. However, coleoptile elongation during anaerobic conditions cannot
be accounted only to oxygen transport through emerged shoots (Magneschi and Perata, 2009).
Physiological bases underlying these growth and anatomical observations have also been reported
in tolerant genotypes. Tolerance to anaerobic germination have been reported to be associated with
an increase rate of alcoholic fermentation (Waters et al., 1991; Setter and Ella 1994), high
carbohydrate supply (Ella and Setter, 1999), better ability to mobilize these stored carbohydrates
(Ismail et al., 2012) and by faster depletion of starch and higher amylase activity for elongation and
plant survival (Ismail et al., 2009). Moreover, the enhancing effect of the phytohormone ethylene
to the rapid coleoptile elongation was also reported (Ishizawa and Esashi, 1988). However, its
promoting effect has been observed only in the later stages of germination, particularly three days
after imbibation, with a substantially greater increase in concentration with time (Ismail et al.,
2009). To better understand and facilitate breeding for tolerance to anaerobic germination, efforts

have also focused on mapping QTLs associated with these survival mechanisms.

The qAG-9-2 known as AGI QTL (Anaerobic Germination). Initially, there have been
only few QTL mapping studies known for tolerance to anaerobic germination (Jiang et al., 2004,
2006; Angaji, 2008). Lack of donors with higher level of tolerance, standard method that meets all
the required test for tolerance and the complexities of the physiological mechanisms involved in
tolerance have been the major constraints in breeding for tolerance to flooding during germination
(Seshu et al., 1988). The identification of the tolerant donor, Khao Hlan On, from which the largest
effect QTL was identified, has paved the way for breeding tolerance to anaerobic germination
(Angaji et al., 2010). Several other QTLs have also been mapped using known tolerant donors
(Septiningsih et al., 2013; Baltazar et al., 2014). The largest effect was mapped on long arm of

chromosome 9, known as the gAG-9-2 designated as AG/ accounting for 33.5 % of the phenotypic

14
variation (Angaji et al., 2010). Recently, gAG-9-2 (AG/) was fine mapped to OsTPP7, a gene that
encodes a trehalose-6-phosphate phosphatase (T6P) known to enhance starch mobilization to drive
embryo germination and coleoptile elongation (Kretzschmar et al., 2015). “OsTPP7 activity may
increase sink strength in proliferating heterotrophic tissues by indicating low sugar availability
through increased T6P turnover, thus enhancing starch mobilization to drive growth kinetics of the
germinating embryo and elongating coleoptile, which consequently enhances anaerobic
germination tolerance.” (Kretzschmar et al. 2015). Uniform germination and seedling
establishment under flooded condition as controlled by AG/, is a key trait for crop intensification
as more farmers adopt direct seeding for rice production. However, AG/ alone does not guarantee
tolerance when submergence occurs at the seedling stage and thus, the need to develop rice varieties

with tolerance to complete submergence in the early vegetative stage is an important consideration.

Tolerance to Complete Submergence

In search for tolerance to floodwater environment, physiological and molecular studies
revealed two survival tactics during vegetative growth stages in rice. First is the low-oxygen
“quiescence” strategy which enables plants to withstand deep floods, and second is the low- oxygen
“escape” strategy which enable them to outgrow flood waters as exhibited by deepwater rice
(Voesenek et al., 2006; Colmer and Voesenek, 2009). “Submergence tolerance” is defined as the
ability of the plant to survive and grow after being completely submerged for several days (10-14
days) (Jackson & Ram, 2003; Xu et al., 2006; Akinwale et al., 2015). In deepwater rice or floating
rice varieties, submergence stress is overcome by fast elongation of stem internodes (Hattori et al.,
2009). These types of rice elongate up to 25 cm per day resulting in very tall and spindly plants at
late vegetative growth (Kende et al., 1998). Consequently these types of rice cultivars suffer from

severe lodging when flood water recedes (Singh et al., 2011). Underwater elongation results in low

15

yield due to the high investment of energy reserves (Bailey-Serres et al., 2010). Conversely, a
restriction in elongation growth is observed in genotypes that have survived complete submergence
up to two weeks (Xu et al., 2006; Singh and Flowers, 2010). As a result, energy reserves are
economized while plants are under submerged condition. Quiescence strategy utilizes stored energy
to resume growth when flood waters have receded (Fukao et al., 2011). This mechanism is useful
in breeding for submergence tolerance because the resulting phenotype protects the plant from
excessive use of energy reserves and thus, plant growth resumes normally like the normal condition

upon desubmergence (Fukao et al., 2006; Bailey-Serres et al., 2010)

The Subl (Submergencel) gene. in contrast to the ongoing quest in finding the genetic
determinants in salinity tolerance, scientific endeavors in breeding for submergence tolerance have
already resulted in the identification, cloning, characterization of the QTL and the gene controlling
the trait (Xu and Mackill, 1996; Xu et al., 2006; Fukao et al., 2006). This large-effect QTL was
mapped on chromosome 9 and was designated as SUB] (SUBMERGENCE]). To further
characterize the SUB] locus, it was isolated from the tolerant landrace Flood Resistant 13A
(FR13A) of eastern India. A cluster of three genes encoding for the three AP2/ERF DNA binding
proteins were further identified in the SUB1 locus, and were designated as Sub1A, Sub1B and
Sub1C (Xu et al., 2006). Based on the amino acid sequence variation, Sub/A has two alleles, Sub]B
and SubIC has 9 and 7 alleles respectively. Sub1B and SubIC were consistently present in all
accession but Sub1A was variable. Gene expression analysis of rice accessions with Sub1A revealed
two alleles within this gene: the strongly submergence-induced Sub/A-1, specific for tolerance and
apoorly submergence-induced Sub/A-2. On the other hand, another allele of the Sub/C, the Sub1C-
1 is also limited to several submergence-tolerant accessions. A distinction between submergence

tolerant accessions with Sub/A-] from those with Sub/C-] was further detected through single

16
nucleotide polymorphism at the MAPK site (Prol186, for intolerant to Ser186, for tolerant).
Furthermore, stable expression of Sub1A-1 was also found to downregulate Sub/C as observed in
transgenic japonica variety, Liaogeng (Ubi:Sub/A-1+). Moreover, an increase in the transcript
levels of the alcohol dehydrogenase gene (adh/) was also observed in tolerant lines, suggesting
positive regulation of Sub/A-/ with acclimation responses. On the other hand, no Sub/B allele was
identified as specific to submergence tolerance. Altogether, the distinction at the allelic level and
gene expression assays, pointed to SubJA-/ allele as the major determinant of submergence
tolerance. Sub/A-1 is enough to provide protection against submergence stress (Neeraja et al.,
2007; Septiningsih et al., 2009).

Fukao and Bailey-Serres (2008) have further elucidated the role of Sub/A and its interplay
with the elongation hormone, gibberellins (GA) and with abscisic acid (ABA), the potent antagonist
of GA. During submergence, physical entrapment of ethylene even at low levels promotes the
expression of Sub1A, which in effect enhances the transcript and protein accumulation of the GA
response repressors SLENDER RICE] (SLR1) and SLR-LIKE1 (SLRL1). Accumulation of the
two GA signaling repressors results in the suppression of the energy-consuming escape response
caused by gibberellins. Furthermore, overexpression of Sub/A reduces protein levels of the GA
repressor SLR1 under prolonged submergence but is still accompanied by the accumulation of
SLRL1. Consequently, lack of Sub1A promotes ethylene-mediated GA responsiveness which
results in rapid shoot elongation.

Sub1A-1 is highly induced in the leaves of 14 to 28-day-old plants (Fukao et al., 2006; Xu
et al., 2006; Fukao and Bailey, 2008), specifically at base of the leaf sheath and in the collar region
acting on suppression of leaf elongation under submergence (Singh , 2010). Although the
quiescence strategy of Sub/A-/] reduces plant height as observed in transgenic plant, submergence

tolerance is still independent of plant height during submergence (Xu et al., 2006; Fukaoand Bailey-

17

Serres, 2008).Conversely, Sub1A-1 is dependent on the levels of its transcript in the node and
internode regions during submergence (Singh et al., 2010). GNS2, a CAPS and gene-based marker
has been used to amplify the specific band linked to Sub/A. It was designed based on a SNP in the
Sub1A gene and has been already used for marker assisted selection for submergence tolerance
(Neeraja et al., 2007). Sub/ provides up to two weeks of protection against submergence stress with
considerable yield benefits (Septiningsih et al., 2009; Mackill et al., 2012). On the other hand, flood
water conditions also contribute a significant part in the survival of the tolerant genotypes. Higher
mortality and more severe damage have been observed with turbid flood waters, more especially
when percent silt increase during submergence. This has been observed even in the most tolerant

cultivar FR13A (Das et al. 2009).

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Plant Materials

Five F2 populations of IR64-NILs derived from QTL pyramiding of eight major QTLs for
abiotic stress tolerance namely AG/, Pup!, Sub, Saltol, RTSV, qHTSF4.1, and the complementary
QTLs qgDTY2.2 and qgDTY4.1, were used as the starting material in the study (Appendix Fig. 1). A
total of 827 F2 IR64-NILs produced from the five populations were then subjected to genotypic
screening. Evaluation of each QTL expression (monogenic expression) and two-QTL interactions
(digenic interactions) was limited only to four major QTLs namely, AG/, Sub/, Saltol and
qDTY4.1. Therefore, only genotypes which were homozygous [+] at any two or three, but
homozygous [-] at any single locus of these loci, were selected for phenotyping. This allowed
contrast of expression at any single locus (monogenic) and of any two-loci interaction (digenic
interaction) among NILs under a specified abiotic stressed condition. Out of 827 F2 IR64-NILs
genotyped, 78 were then selected for phenotypic screening under anaerobic germination,

submergence and salinity stress conditions (Appendix Table 1)

Molecular markers

Genotypic screening of the segregating multiple-QTL IR64 NILs was carried out using
gene-specific (5) and linked SSR markers(5) , CAPS (1), Indel (1) representing AG/, Pup], Sub,
Saltol, RTSV, and qDTY4.1 loci (Table 1). These markers were initially screened and validated

during the early stages of the QTL pyramiding (MBAST, IRRI).

19

Table 1. Profiles of the 12 SSR primers used for genotyping of the multiple-QTL F2 NILs
derived from QTL pyramiding of eight QTLs for abiotic stress tolerance in IR64

background
Primer Target Forward Sequence Reverse Sequence
QTL/Gen
e
Gene-
specific
SKC2a Saltol CTGGAGGGAGCCGACACT GTGGCAGATACACCCATCG
T
K29-1 Pupl ATGGCCAACGGGGTAGAG GTCCAGGTAACCACGAGGAA
(OsPupK2
9-1, Ist
exon)
K46-1 Pup! TGAGATAGCCGTCAAGAT AAGGACCACCATTCCATAGC
(OsPupK4 GCT
6-2)
SC3 SubIC GCTAGTGCAGGGTTGACA CTCTGGCCGTTTCATGGTAT
(SubIC CA
exon)
RSA2 RTSV TITGGCCGGAAAGTCTTG |TGGCAGTGCACCAGCCAAATGG
(UM- GGC
specific)
linked
Sdhups5 AGI GATGCACTCCCTCTGTTGC TCACCTTCTTACCGAACACCA
T
RM3412b Saltol TCATGATGGATCTCTGAG |GGGAGGATGCACTAATCTTTIC
GTG
RM336 RTSV CTTACAGAGAAACGGCAT GCTGGTTTGTTTCAGGTTCG
CG

DTY4.1 gDTY4.1_ +=TGTCCGTCCGTCCTACTTG CGCCGCCATTTCAGTTCAC
(M245,246) TC

DTY4.1 qDTY4.1 CCTGCAAGCCTCCTCTTCC GCCGAGATCCTCCGACGCYATCCA
(M251,M25 GA GTG

2)
CAPS

GnS2 SublA CTTCTTGCTCAACGACAAC TCGATGGGGTCTTGATCTCT

G

InDel
DFR_R2+ AGI LB2: CACCGTTAAAATCGGCCGTTAG
DFR_LB2 CGGCTTCGTCTTCACCTGA

AC


20

Genotypic Screening for Multiple-QTLAbiotic
Stress Tolerance

DNA Extraction

Genomic DNA from individual F2 plants were isolated from the young leaves of about
three to four week-old rice plants using the modified CTAB method originally developed by
Murray and Thompson (1980). Cut leaf tissues were ground using an automated high-throughput
tissue homogenizer (Geno/Grinder 2010) at a rate of 750 rpm for three minutes. About 800 pl of
the 2x CTAB buffer were added to the powdered tissue and mixed thoroughly. The resulting
mixtures were incubated at 65 °C for an hour with agitation of 15 minutes interval to homogenize
the buffer and ground tissue. After incubation, an equal volume of chloroform: isoamyl (24:1 v/v)
was added to the sample followed by thorough shaking at room temperature for 20 minutes. The
supematant was separated by centrifugation at 12,000 rpm for 10 minutes. An aqueous phase of
500 yl was transferred into new sterile 1.5 ml microcentifugetubes using a wide-bore white tip. An
equal volume of cold isopropanol was added to the aqueous phase and were mixed gently. To allow
full precipitation of DNA, the samples were incubated at -20 °C overnight followed by
centrifugation at 12,000 rpm for 10 minutes. The isopropanol was decanted and DNA precipitates
were washed by addition of 70% ethanol (500 11) and centrifugation at 12,000 rpm for five minutes
followed by air drying. The resulting DNA pellet was resuspended in 30-100 pl TE buffer followed
by treatment of 2 4] RNAse (10 mg/ul) at 37 °C for 30 minutes. Finally, the DNAs were stored at

4 °C and were used as the stock DNA.

21

DNA Quantification and Quality Check.

DNA concentration of each sample was determined using Spectrophotometer (Thermo
Scientific NanoDrop 8000) and the DNA quality was assessed by means of 1.0% agarose gel
electrophoresis with Ecodye or SYBR® Safe gel stain and was viewed under UV on a gel photo

documentation system (Alphalmager HP).

PCR Amplification.

Amplification was carried out in a 10.0 pl reaction containing 50 ng/ul of template
DNA, 1 x PCR buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.3, 50 mM KCl) and 1.5 mM MgCh. Final
concentration of the remaining components of a 10.0 yl reaction varied for each of the
markers used in the study. For dNTPs, final concentration ranged from 0.2 - 1.0 mM, for
each of the forward and reverse primers, 0.35 - 1.0 uM and 0.05 - 0.1 U of Tag DNA
polymerase. PCR profiles (Table 2) and the gel components (agarose and polyacrylamide)
were specific to the markers used. Bands were resolvedusing 1.6 - 2.0 % agarose gel or 6

- 8 % PAG and were viewed under UV (Aphalmager HP) for gel documentation.

N
N

ee nnk—

‘OI ui ¢ ‘9 7 uw | ‘9 ZZ s9as Sp ‘DSS 8998 Sp ‘D 6 Se zsuo
, (ooeswy)
‘DOL um ¢ ‘DZ ur | ‘D ZL S998 Sp ‘DSS $998 Sb ‘D 6 of €0S rans
‘DOI Um OL ‘D ZZ ur 1D ZL $998 Sp ‘DSS S998 Sb ‘D b6 of S ‘v6 ®ZOxS
oD 01 unu OL ‘D ZL uw 1D ZL $998 Sb ‘DSS S998 Sb ‘D 6 Of qzIPeW =— 01705
DOr ur ¢ ‘9 ZL uw 1 ‘D7 $998 O€ ‘D 8S S998 O€ ‘D 6 of tVSU
S ‘56
oe
Ok 2 wu § ‘3 ZL S9ISOE‘DZL $998 OE ‘DSS S998 O€ ‘D b6 of ASIN
zS7N
© Dp ung 7 ‘D ZL 98 Of ‘D ZL 9s ‘DOL 988 OF ‘D 56 SE ‘IST
OPzIN
DP ur Z ‘D7 998 OF ‘D ZL 988 O€ ‘0.79 995 OF ‘D 56 SE ‘Spt Ss tL
‘DOr uu Q] ‘D ZZ um | ‘D ZL s9as Sp ‘D 8S soas 0€ ‘D 16 o€ S ‘b6 1-67
© *30 O1 ur QT ‘D ZL um | ‘D ZL $998 Sp ‘D 79 $998 O€ ‘D b6 oe 1-9p dnd
zaT waa
© Db ur ¢ ‘D ZL ur [ ‘D ZL 8998 Sp ‘DSS 8998 Sp ‘D 6 o£ +7 Wid
ssdnyps
eka uri ¢ ‘D ZL ur | ‘DZ $998 Sp ‘D SS Sb‘ b6 of IOV
(suru ‘D0) SATDAD (sur ‘D0)
(90) NOLLNGLXA — (suru ‘90) (saas ‘D0) (soas Do) 410 NOILLVURLVNaAG
FDVAOLS ‘IVNIA NOISNALXG ONIIVANNV NOILVUNLVNAG WaAaWAN IVILINI wIARId _WL0

“punoIdy9eq POY] UI SdUwII]O} SSOSs DHOIGR JOJ STLO 1319
oy) jo Surprameidd TO Woy poausp STIN 7 TLO-odyynus oy Jo SurdAjoued soy pasn srourd YSs Z] Op JO So[YO Ud “Z AGSL

23

Phenotypic Screening for Abiotic Stress Tolerance

Evaluation of the monogenic expression was done by comparing the effect of each allele
(contrasting allele) at each locus. On the other hand, digenic interactions were evaluated by forming
pairwise combinations of these four major QTLs, which resulted in six digenic pairs (digenic-loci)
namely, AGJ-Sub], AGI-Saltol, AGI-qgDTY4.1, Sub1-Saltol, Sub1-Saltol, Subl-qDTY4.1 and
Saltol-qDTY4.1. To further evaluate digenic interactions, another pairwise combinations between
alleles of each locus (interallelic pairs) were made. These resulted in four digenic pairs within each
of the six digenic loci, thus summed up to 24 digenic combinations. Due to the limited F3 seeds
harvest from the selected 78 F2NILs, seed increase was done to produce the needed amount of seeds
(F4) to complete the three experiments. This resulted in phenotypic screening of F; NILs under

salinity stress and F4 NILs under anaerobic germination and submergence stress.

Screening for Salinity Tolerance.

Phenotypic screening for tolerance to salinity stress was done using a standard protocol
under screen house condition (Platten et al., 2013). Fs seeds from the selected genotypes of the F2
multiple-QTL NILs were pregerminated for two to three days at 32 °C in petri dishes lined with
moist paper towels. Healthy seedlings were transplanted in styrofoam floats on de-ionised water.
Only one seedling, including the tolerant (FL478) and susceptible (IR29) checks was sown per hole
in styrofoam floats consisting of 144 holes (12 rows x 12 columns grid,) with columns 1 and 12 as
borders, following a randomized complete block design (RCBD) in four replications. Three days

after transplanting (3 DAT), the de-ionised water was replaced with Yoshida’s solution (Yoshida

24

et al., 1976) which was maintained at pH 5.0. Daily monitoring and maintenance were done by
adjusting the pH of the solution to 5.0 with HCI/KOH daily and replacing it with fresh nutrient
solution for an interval of one day. Seedlings were grown in the screen house facilities until they
reach 4 to 6 leaf stage (growth stage 2-3). Tiller length was gathered 15 days after transplanting in
the Styrofoam in a hydrophonic set up under greenhouse condition. Tiller count was calculated as
the percent number of plants with tiller length of 40> mm. Salinization was imposed by applying
100 mM NaCl (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) in 50-mM increment per day to reduce osmotic shock.
Evaluation of the expression and interaction of each QTL under salinity stress was done by scoring
salinity injury (SES score) as symptom progressed throughout the experiment (Table 3). This was

done in an interval of two-three days and served as data points.

Table 3. Standard Evaluation System (SES) for visual scoring of salt injury at seedling
stage (IRRI, 2002

SES DESCRIPTION Tolerance

1 Normal growth and tillering Very High

Nearly normal growth, some reduction in tillering, some High

leaf whitening and leaf rolling
Growth and tillering reduced, most leaves are whitening
o and rolling, only few are elongating ee
7 Complete cessation of growth, most leaves dried, some Susceptible

plants dying

9 Almost plants dead or dying Very low


25

Na* Test

Leaf samples for the Na* test were taken from the fourth leaf of the individual plants in
four replications. Sampling was done by carefully cutting the leaf using scissors followed by
washing, initially with tap water then twice with deionised water using forceps. Washed samples
were immediately placed in small envelopes for drying in several days at 50 °C and tissue dry
weight was recorded prior to Na* extraction. Na* was extracted in 0.1 M acetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich,
USA, diluted in Nanopure water) at 60 °C until Na* are leached from the leaves and was measured
by atomic absorption spectrophotometer (Perkins Elmer, USA), operating in emission mode. Data

were analyzed using T-test and was performed in microsoft excel.

Screening for Tolerance to Anaerobic
Germination

Phenotypic screening for tolerance to anaerobic germination was done using a modified
protocol from Septiningsih et al. (2013) under screenhouse condition. Seeds of the F, families
harvested from the seed increase of the selected F3 families were placed in oven for three to five
days at 50 °C to break seed dormancy. For phenotypic screening of anaerobic germination, dry
seeds of the F, families harvested from the seed increase of the selected F3 families were directly
sown in small boxes (tip boxes) filled with fine soil and were covered with another layer of 1 cm
of soil. Each box was sown with 20 seeds representing single family and was further transferred to
designated blue trays which served as tanks. Each tray contained 16 boxes representing 14 families
plus the two tolerant (Khao Hlan On) and susceptible (IR42) checks, following RCBD with four
replications. After sowing, the boxes were submerged with 10 cm tap water in the blue trays. To

asses tolerance to anaerobic germination, percent survival was gathered after 21 days of

26

submergence. Data were analyzed using T-test and was performed in Microsoft Excel.

Screening for Submergence Tolerance.

Phenotypic screening for tolerance to complete submergence was done following
the standard protocol currently being used at IRRI (modified from Mackill et al., 1996)
under greenhouse condition. A total of 25-30 pregerminated seeds from the selected F4
families, including the tolerant and susceptible checks (FR13A and IR42, respectively)
were transplanted in rows within plastic trays (20 cm x 15 cm x 10 cm) following a
randomized complete block design (RCBD). Another tray was also planted with
susceptible check alone and was used for sampling during monitoring activities. After 14
days, plant count was gathered and the 14-day old seedlings were completely submerged
to a water depth of 1. 5- 2.0 m in screen house tanks. Daily monitoring was done at ten
days after submergence (10 DAS) until 70-80% damage was observed from the susceptible
check sampled from the tank, an indication to desubmerge the plants. This was based on
the discoloration, softness of the stem and odor of the plant. Percent survival was gathered
by counting the number of the plants that survived at 14" day after de-submergence. Data

were analyzed using T-test and was performed in Microsoft excel.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Monogenic Expression of the QTLs Across
Abiotic Stress Conditions

Anaerobic Germination

Monogenic expression of the QTLs under anaerobic germination showed significant

effects as displayed by the significantly different mean survival (%) of the NILs after 22 days of

submergence during germination (Fig. 1)

60

50

40

30

20

eel

SC ee 4
=
E
*
*
BH
i *
e
ee
=

H

IR4
IR64
AGI[+
AGI[-
Sub! [+
Sub
Sal[+
Sall

Khao Hlan On
qDTy4.1 [+
qDTy4.1

Contrasting Alleles

Figure 1. Mean survival (%) of the F2 IR64-NILs contrasting at the AG/, Sub/,

Saltol and qDTY4. after 22 days of submergence during germination.
Values are means and vertical bars represent + SE. Probability values
are based on a Student’s T-test.

28

Mean survival (%) of Khao Hlan On, the donor for the tolerant allele (AG/[+]), was
expectedly higher than the susceptible check, IR42, which had intolerant allele (AG/[-]) at p< 0.001
(Appendix Table 2). Similarly, survival (%) of NILs which had the AG/[+] allele was also
significantly higher than those which had the AG/[-] allele at p< 0. 01. However, survival (%) of
plants which possessed [+] alleles of the Sub/ and Saltol locus was significantly lower than their
alternative [-] alleles, at p< 0. 01 and p< 0.05, respectively. On the other hand, mean survival (%)
of NILs contrasting alleles at gDTY4.] locus did not show any significant difference under
anaerobic germination. Monogenic expression of the AG/[+] allele improved tolerance to
anaerobic germination in contrast to the Sub/[+] and Saltol[+] alleles which conversely, reduced
tolerance under anaerobic germination. This was shown by the significantly lower survival (%) of
plants possessing these alleles, with a stronger evidence found with the Sub/[+] allele. Apparently,
qDTY4.1 locus had no effect on tolerance to anaerobic germination, as displayed by the comparable

performance of its contrasting alleles under anaerobic germination.

Submergence Stress

Similar to anaerobic germination, survival (%) of FR13A, the donor for the tolerant allele
for submergence (Sub/[+]), was also significantly higher than susceptible check, IR42, which had
the intolerant allele (Sub/[-]) at p< 0.001 (Fig. 2; Appendix Table 3). Likewise, survival (%) of
plants which possessed Sub/ [+] allele was significantly higher than those which had Sub/[-] allele
(p< 0.001), but none of the contrasting alleles at AG/, Saltol and gDTY4.1 showed significant
differences in the survival (%) of plants. Monogenic expression of the SubJ[+] allele improved
tolerance to submergence and that comparable performance of the contrasting allele at AG/, Saltol
and qDTY4.1 implied compatibility under submergence. Although, gD7Y4.1[+] allele had no

statistically significant effect over gDTY4./[-] allele, it is worth noting that it might had positive

29

but minor effect on submergence tolerance (Fig.2).

100

60
50
40 —
30
20 - i

10 |
t
So
=

R42
Sub1[+
Sub1[
AGI[+
AGI
Sall+
Sall-

Mean Survival (%}
xe
° 388
1R64-sub1 anaame eesmrsiees
|
R130 [See ERE
|
*
*
|
1
{

qDTy4.1 [+
qOTy4.1 [-

Contrasting Alleles

Figure 2. Mean survival (%) of Fs IR64-NILs contrasting at AG/, Sub1, Saltol
and gDTY4.1 after 19 days of complete submergence and 14 days of
recovery. Values are means and vertical bars represent + SE.
Probability values are based on a Student’s T-test.

Salinity Stress

Mean salinity scores of FL478-A-1, the donor of tolerant allele for salinity (Saltol[+]) was
expectedly lower than IR29, the susceptible check which had intolerant allele (Saltol[-]) at p< 0.001
(Fig. 3; Appendix Table 4).

30

@— FL478-A-1
@— IR29-1

IR64
@— IR64-Saltol
—©~Saltol[+]
__ —eSaltol[-]
_ @=DTY4.1[+]
—e—DTY4.1[-]

0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30

Days of Salinization

Figure 3. Mean salinity scores of F3 IR64-NILs contrasting at AG/, and
aDTY4.1 for 29 days of salinization in 100 mM NaCl

On the other hand, mean salinity scores of NILs were significantly different at only two
loci specifically, Saltol and gDTY4.1 locus (Appendix Table 4). Sa/tol[+], the QTL with the largest
effect on salinity tolerance by far, displayed a modest effect on salinity tolerance. In some data
points (SES3-5), mean salinity scores of Saltol[+] NILs did not show significant difference with
Sal[-] NILs. However, Saltol[+] NILs maintained back tolerance effect over Saltol[-] NILs for the
rest of the salinization period (Appendix Table 4). Conversely, qDTY4.] had negative effect on
salinity tolerance. The increase in mean salinity scores, as a consequence of the negative effect of
qDTY4.1 [+] allele was consistent throughout the salinization period. This effect was comparable
to having a Saltol[-] allele (Fig.3). On the contrary, absence of the gDTY4.] [+] (or the presence of

qDTY4.1 [-]) resulted in a significantly lower mean salinity scores, which implied enhanced

31

tolerance to salinity stress. Performance of NILs with gDTY4. I[-] allele were even comparable with
Saltol[+] NILs.

Surprisingly, none of the contrasting alleles from four major QTLs influenced Na‘ content
(Appendix Table 5). It is widely known that tolerant lines/varieties have low Na*/K* ratio or low
Na* content (Gregorio, 1997; Lutts et al., 1995; Lee et al., 2003; Thomson et al., 2010; Ahmadi and
Fotokian, 2011; Platten et al., 2013; Barua et al., 2015; Rahman et al., 2016). In the present study,
monogenic expression even at the Saltol locus did not show significant difference in Na* content.
Likewise, no significant changes was also observed even at the gDTY4.] locus which consistently

reduced tolerance to salinity by its plus [+] allele.

Effects on Tiller Count and Length

Significant differences on tiller count and length were observed at gDTY4. ] and AG/ locus
(Fig. 4a and 4b). Both [+] allele of these loci significantly reduced tiller length at p< 0.01 and p<
0.05, respectively (Appendix Table 6.1). Similarly, tiller length was also. negatively affected by
the [+] allele of these loci at p< 0.01 and p< 0.05, respectively (Appendix Table 6.2). Furthermore,
a stronger evidence of this converse effect was found in gDTY4./[+] allele whereas contrasting

alleles at Sub/ and Saltol loci showed no significant differences in tiller length and tiller count.

60
i = t+
50
< : :
zB 40 Tele)
2
iS 30
| =| aK *
= I =H
20
10 — — _ a -
DTY4.1 Saltol AGI Subl
(a) Contrasting Alleles
60% —— a
= TIC]
50%
FE 40% —— Leas oe
e “4% ®t
S:
= 30%
A *
e =H
= 20% =
=
10%
0%
DTY4.1 Saltol AGI Subl
(b)

Contrasting Alleles

Figure 4. Means of tiller length and tiller count of F; IR64-NILs contrasting at

AGI, Subl, Saltol, gDTY4.1 at 15 days after transplanting in
Yoshida’s nutrient media prior to salinization during seedling stage
(a) Mean tiller length(mm) (b) Mean tiller count. Vertical
bars represent + SE. Probability values are based on a Student’s T-
test.

32

33

Digenic Interactions of the QTLs Across
Abiotic Stress Conditions

Anaerobic Germination

Generally, higher survival (%) under anaerobic germination was attained with the presence
of the tolerant allele for anaerobic germination (AG/[+]) (Fig.5). Digenic interactions of AG/ and
Sub1 with Saltol (4G/-Saltol and Sub1-Saltol) showed significant effects on tolerance to anaerobic
germination (Appendix Table 7). As previously discussed, monogenic expression of AG/[+] allele
improved tolerance contrast to Sub] [+] and Saltol[+] alleles which both reduced tolerance to
anaerobic germination (Fig.1 ; Appendix Table 2). Likewise, Survival (%) of plants which
possessed AG] [-] Sal[+] was significantly lower compared to AG/ [-] Salf-] at p< 0.01 (Appendix
Table 7). However, when Saltol[+] allele was paired with the AG/[+] allele, survival (%) of plants
was significantly enhanced. This showed a stronger positive effect of AG/[+] allele over the
negative effect of Salto! [+]. This was displayed by a significantly higher survival (%) AGI[+]
Sal[+] NILs compared to AGI [-] Sal[+] (p< 0.05). This implied negative effect of Sal/+/ allele
under anaerobic germination which was expressed only in the absence of the AG/[+] allele.

Moreover, not only Saltol[+] had negative effect under anaerobic germination, but also the
Sub1[+] allele. Combined effects of [+] alleles from both loci further reduced tolerance to anaerobic
germination. Survival (%) of plants which possessed SubJ[+] Sal[+] was significantly lower
compared to those which had Sub/[-] Sal[-] alleles, at p< 0.01 (Appendix Table 7). This implied
continuous negative effect of both loci on tolerance to anaerobic germination and this effect was

additive.

34

4
4 t

Be it } :

fs 10 4 } Ly lt | | H
5
0

qDTy4.1 [-]

Figure 5. Mean survival (%) of F, IR64-NILs contrasting at six digenic loci
namely, AG/- Sub1, AGI- Saltol, AGI-qgDTY4.1, Sub1-Saltol, Sub1-
qDTY4.1, Saltol-qgDTY4.1, after 22 days of submergence during
germination. Vertical bars represent + SE.

On the other hand, digenic interactions at the Subl-qDTY4.1 and Saltol-qDTY4.1 loci did
not show significant patterns of QTL interaction (Appendix Table 7). However, gDTY4. I[+] allele
seemed to have positive but minor effect on tolerance to anaerobic germination. This was observed
in a seemingly enhanced survival (%) of NILs with digenic pairs involving gDTY4. I[+] with either
SubI{-] or Saltol [-] allele. However, when gDTY4. 1[+] was paired with either Sub1[+] or Saltol
[+] allele, which both had negative effect, survival (%) was seemingly reduced. Although these

were statistically insignificant, these implied positive but minor effect of gDTY4.1[+] allele on

35
tolerance to anaerobic germination, and that this minor effect was surmounted by the negative effect
of Saltol[+] alleles at Saltol-gDTY4.1 and SubI-qgDTY4.1 digenic loci.

Furthermore, digenic interaction of AG] with gDTY4.] showed compatibility under
anaerobic germination. Survival (%) of plants which possessed AGJ[+] qDTy4.1 [-] was
significantly higher compared to AGI[-] qDTy4.1 [+] at p< 0.01. Tolerance to anaerobic
germination was conferred by AG/[+] allele alone. Moreover, digenic interaction at the AG/-Sub1
cannot be defined in the present study, since there was only one family with both AG/[+] Sub1[+]
allele. Although, generally survival (%) of plants with the AG/[+] allele was significantly higher

compare to non-AG/[+] plants.

Submergence Stress

QTL interactions in digenic pairs of the four major QTLs showed significant
tolerance effect controlled mainly by the major QTL for submergence tolerance, Sub/([+]
allele) (Figure 6). Strong evidences of compatibility were found in digenic pairs with
Sub1[+] allele specifically, Sub1-Saltol and Subl-qDTY4.1.

Digenic interaction at the Sub/[+]AG/[+] could not be fully defined in the present
study, since there was only one family with both Sub/[+]AG/[+] alleles. Nonetheless,
Sub1[+] allele showed a highly positive and strong effect on tolerance to submergence as
shown by the performance of plants which possessed Sub/[+] AG/[-] compared to Sub/[-

] AGI[+] (p< 0.01), and to Sub/[-] AG/[-] (p< 0.001).

36

9
9 = i
r') i : | = T
5 6D = .
2 |
2 T |
5 4
a
©
¢ 3
2
a
0 |
i‘)
SEP oS Le PL see Moe eeR ES SESE FeDoug Ges o
aaga 35 5 8 4 q 355 6 4 qd Po) 4
BEGE FSR KH BESF F€S8RH FETE PEPE
qetqt aprrtr LF Ps oapertr PEPE @TFEs
ot a etae 0 eoug PrerPee Bit ge; ©
ee a3 a 3 = 4 0634 Reo (aY-o t|
tanga 322 2 acc fa] 9 ac c o cae
gaigd 3353 fea285 Cy cs Seo
2 oa ic Eos -Got eo
333 3 a + hue COO +etae |]
aaAD aaagds:s eaaea ay ee
| g3o5 8 $454
2285 Saad
a
Digenic loci

Figure 6. Mean survival (%) of Fs IR64-NILs contrasting at six digenic loci namely,
SubI-AGI, Subl- Saltol, Subl-gDTY4.1, AG1-Saltol, AGI-qDTY4.1 and
Saltol-gDTY4.1 after 19 days of complete submergence and 14 days of
recovery. Vertical bars represent + SE.

Apparently, Salto] locus showed no interaction with the Sub/ locus. Survival (%)
of NILs involving Sub/[+] allele within this digenic loci (Sub/[+] Sal[+] and SubJ[+] Sal[-
}) were significantly higher than those which had the Sub/[-] allele (Sub/[-] Sal[+] and
Sub I{-] Sal[-]) (Appendix Table 8). Therefore, tolerance conferred by these digenic pairs
was due to Sub/[+] alone.

Interestingly, gDTY4. J[+] seemed to enhance tolerance to submergence stress. This

was observed in an increasing pattern of tolerance in digenic pairs at Sub/-gDTY4.1 digenic

37
loci (Fig.6). Although, significant positive effects were observed only in digenic pairs with
SubI{+] alleles under submergence stress (Appendix Table 8), a similar effect was also
observed with gDTY4. I[+] allele at AG/- gDTY4.1 digenic loci. Survival of plants which
possessed both AG/[+] qDTy4.1 [+] was seemingly enhanced under submergence stress.
Although, this was not statistically significant, it was further displayed in digenic pairs
which possessed qDTy4.1 [+] allele at Saltol- qDTy4.1 digenic loci. Survival (%) of plants
with qDTy4.1 [+] allele was relatively higher without regard for the Salto/ allele.
Furthermore Saltol[+]qDTy4.1[-] showed significantly lower survival (%) that
Saltol[+]qDTy4.1[+]. This in turn implied significant enhancing effect by the gDTY4./[+]
allele under submergence stress. Digenic interaction at AG/-Saltol, and AGI-qgDTY4.1 did
not show significant pattern of interaction. In relation to anaerobic germination, gDTY4.1

[+] allele may also had positive and even additive effect on submergence tolerance.

Salinity Stress

Significant QTL interactions among digenic loci were observed in digenic pairs involving
qDTY4.1 locus. While gDTY4.1 seemed to have promising effect on tolerance to both anaerobic
germination and submergence stress, it negatively affected salinity tolerance. Digenic interaction
at Saltol-qgDTY4.1 showed a significantly opposing effect on salinity tolerance. Positive effect by
the Saltol[+] and negative effect by (DT Y4.[+] allele were displayed by the consistently significant
lower mean salinity scores of Saltol[+]qDTY4. I[-] NILs compared to Saltol{-]qDTY4.1[+] allele

(Fig.7; Appendix Table 9.1).

38

—®— Sal[+]
qDTY4.1[+]
—e— Sal[+]

B qDTY4.1[-]

S

J

wa

is —o—Sal[-]

a qDTY4.1[+]
is + —e— Sal[-]
10 qDTY4.1[-]
0.5
0.0

0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30
Days to salinization

Figure 7. Mean Salinity injury scores of F; IR64-NILs at Saltol-gDTY4.1 digenic loci
for 29 days of salinization in 100 mM NaCl.

As discussed earlier, monogenic expression of gDTY4.][+] allele, consistently reduced
tolerance to salinity stress (Fig.3; Appendix Table 4). This negative effect of qDTY4. 1[+] allele
was further confirmed by the consistently significant higher mean salinity scores of Saltol[-
]qDTY4.1[+] compared to Saltol[-]qgDTY4.1[-]. However, this effect was surmounted by the
Saltol[+] allele at Saltol[+]qDTY4. 1[+] digenic loci. Statistical result between these digenic pairs
still showed the stronger effect of Saltol[+]over gDTY4. 1[+] allele. This interaction was displayed
by a significantly lower mean salinity score of Saltol[+]qDTY4.I{+] compared to Saltol[-
]gDTY4. [+] NILs. With these, Saltol[+] allele remained to be the controlling QTL for salinity

tolerance whereas qDTY4.1[+] allele reduced tolerance to salinity only in the absence of the

39

Saltol[+) allele and the former had stronger positive effect over the latter under salinity stress.
Similarly, QTL interaction at AGI-qDTY4.1 digenic loci showed significant interaction in
an opposite direction. This was consistently displayed by a significantly higher mean salinity injury
score of AG/[-] qDTy4.1 [+] NILs compared to AG/[+] qDTy4.1 [-] (Fig. 8; Appendix Table 9.2).
The significant difference in effect, by gDTY4.] was significant only at the first week of
salinization period (SES 1-2) as displayed by the significantly higher mean salinity scores of AG/[-
] qDTy4.1 [+] compared to AG/[-] qDTy4.1 [-] NILs. Furthermore, this was also significantly
manifested even in the presence of AG/[+] allele, showing a stronger effect of qDTy4.1 [+] than
AGI[+]. Likewise, this took place only at the early days of salinization period (SES1-3). This
implied negative but minor effect of gDTY4.1[+] at AGI-qDTY4.1, as it manifest only at early
stage of salinization period. Moreover, AG/[+] has seemingly enhance tolerance to salinity stress,
as it consistently maintained lower mean salinity score than any of the digenic pairs at AGJ-
qDTY4.1. However, this was not statistically significant as displayed by the comparable
performance of AGI[+]qDTY4. 1[-] and AG/[-]qgDTY4. 1[-] NILs. (Fig.8). Digenic interactions at
SubI-qDTY4.1 was similar to AGI-gDTY4.1, except that negative effect of gDTY4.] was not
expressed in the presence of Sub/[+] allele at the first week of salinization period. This implied
stronger effect of SubI[+] because it surmounted the negative effect of gDTY4.1[+] (Fig.9 ;

Appendix 9.3).

9.0
Be —o—AGI[+]
75 qDTy4.1 [+]
7.0
65
S 60 —e— AGI[+]
5 5.5 qDTy4.1 [-]
a Be
nm Es
B40 ©—AGI[-]
3.5 qDTy4.1 [+]
3.0
2.5
ae —e~AGIL-]
Aan qDTy4.1 [-]
0.5
0.0

0 3 6 9) 12 15 18 21 24 27 30

Days to salinization

Figure 8. Mean Salinity injury scores of F; IR64-NILs at AGI-qDTY4. digenic
loci for 29 days of salinization in 100 mM NaCl

9.0
85
8.0
75
7.0
65
6.0
55
5.0
45
4.0
35
3.0
25

2.0
15 —®— Subi[-]

10 qDTy4.1 [-]
05
0.0

0 3 6 9 12 15 18 «21 24 #27 «130

—®— Sub1[+]
qDTy4.1 [+]

—e—Sub1[+]
qDTy4.1 [-]

—e—Sub1[-]
qDTy4.1 [+]

SES Scores

Days to salinization

Figure 9. Mean Salinity injury scores of F3 IR64-NILs at Subl-qDTY4.1
digenic loci for 29 days of salinization in 100 mM NaCl

40

41

On the other hand, digenic interaction at Saltol-AG/ displayed tolerance effect controlled
by the major QTL, Saltol[+] allele, which in turn showed compatibility effect with AG/[+] (Fig. 10;
Appendix Table 9.4). Furthermore, Saltol[+] allele also controlled tolerance at Saltol-Sub/ digenic
loci. This was displayed by the significantly lower mean salinity scores of Saltol[+]Sub1[+]
compared to Saltol[-]Sub/[-] NILs, Saltol[+]Sub1{-] compared to Saltol[-]Sub1[+] and to Saltol[-
]Sub1[-] NILs ( Fig. 11; Appendix Table 9.5). Furthermore, the significant difference between the
performance of Saltol[+]Sub1[-] and Saltol[-]Sub 1[+] NILs, was not considered as a negative effect
by SubJ[+] allele. This was confirmed by the comparable performance of Saltol[-]Sub1[+] to
Saltol{-]Sub1[-] ( Appendix Table 9.5). This difference was due to the greater effect of Saltol[+]

allele as the major QTL for salinity tolerance.

Na* Content

As discussed earlier, Na* content was not affected by the monogenic expression of the
QTLs (Appendix Table 5) under salinity stress. Similarly, even significant QTL interactions also
did not affect Na* content. Therefore, salinity tolerance displayed by the expression of each QTL
and their interaction at digenic loci could not be indicated by Na‘ content in the present study

(Appendix Table 10).

42

SES Scores

—o-Sall[+]
AGI[+]

—®—Sal|[+]
AGI[-]

—e—Sall-]
AGI[+]

—eSall-]
AGI[-]

0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 «#30

Days to Salinization

Figure 10. Mean Salinity injury scores of F3 IR64-NILs at Saltol-AGI digenic

loci for 29 days of salinization in 100 mM NaCl.

SES Score

—o— Sal[+]

Sub[+]

—e— Sal[+]

Sub[-]

—e-— Sal[-]

Sub[+]

0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27

—e— Sal[-]
Sub[-]

30

Days to salinization

Figure 11. Mean Salinity injury scores of F; IR64-NILs at Saltol-Sub1 digenic

loci for 29 days of salinization in 100 mM NaCl

43

Effects on Tiller Length and Tiller

As previously discussed, monogenic expression of AG/[+] and gDT7Y4.1[+], with a
stronger evidence found with gDTY4. 1 [+] (p< 0.01), reduced tiller length and count (Figure 4a &
4b; Appendix Table 6.1 & 6.2). In effect, digenic interaction between these loci further reduced
tiller length and count at seedling stage. The combined effects of this digenic loci were displayed
by a much significantly lower means in plants which possessed AG/[+]qD7Y4.1[+] compared to
AGI[-]qDTY4.I{-] at p< 0.001 (Fig. 12a & 12b; Appendix Table 11.1 & 11.2). A stronger evidence
of reduction in these traits was still displayed with gD7Y4. J[+] digenic pairs, a similar effect with
its monogenic expression (Fig. 4; Appendix Table 6.1 & 6.2). However, Saltol[+] allele surmounted
this effect in its interaction with gD7Y4. I[+] allele. This was displayed by a significantly lower
means of both tiller length and tiller count in Saltol[+]qDTY4.1 [+] compared to Saltol{-|gDTY4.1
[+] NILs at p< 0.05 and p< 0.01, respectively. Furthermore, digenic interactions at Sub]-qDTY4.1
was similar to that at Saltol-qDTY4.1.

On the other hand, AG/[+] allele showed a negative stronger effect than qDTY4.1[+] in
tiller length and count in its digenic interaction with Saltol. With AG1, reduction in these traits was
still manifested even in the presence of Saltol[+] allele, contrast to Saltol-qgDTY4.1 digenic
interaction, in which Salto! surmounted the negative effect of gDTY4.1[+] allele. Furthermore,
digenic interaction at Saltol-Sub1 did not show significant pattern of QTL interaction. For AGJ-
Sub], digenic interactions could not be defined in the present study, since there was only one family
with both plus [+] alleles of these loci. Nonetheless, AG/[+] allele showed negative effect on tiller
length and count as displayed by the a significantly lower means of these traits in AG/[+]Sub/[-]

compared to AGJ[-]Sub/[-] NILs.

44

Ey

8

(a

Mean Tiller length
&

eH

R%

0%

30%

Tiller count (40>mm)

§

g

0%

10%

(b)

0%

eH

°Hr

"HH

Salto AGI —SaltolSUB1 Saltol- qDTy4.1 AGI-SUB1 AGI-qDTY4.1 SUB1-qDTY41

sTAt4

|

®HH

aT: Tt I
LJ ' °HH
| | 1 |
HH

Saltol AGI —SaltohSUB1 = Saltol qDTy4.1 AG1-SUB1 AG1-qDTY41 SUBI-qDTY4.1

Digenic Loci

Figure 12. Means of tiller length and tiller count of F3 IR64-NILs at six-digenic

loci namely Saltol- gDTY4.1, AGI-qDTY4.1, Subl-qDTY4.1, AGI-
Saltol and Sub1-Saltol , Sub1-AG1 at 15 days after transplanting in
Yoshida’s nutrient media prior to salinization during seedling stage
(a) Mean tiller length(mm) (b) Mean tiller count. Vertical bars
represent + SE.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

Pyramiding multiple tolerance to abiotic stress in a superior genetic background would
substantially provide greater increase in productivity and overcome loss due to uncontrollable
external factors affecting yield. To effectively and efficiently develop such a variety, it is important
to understand the effect of each QTL or multiple major QTLs pyramided in a single genotype. This
study was carried out to evaluate the monogenic expression and digenic interactions of the major
QTLs for abiotic stress tolerance in a background of an agronomically superior genotype, IR64, a
mega variety from the Philippines. Previous attempt to pyramid multiple-QTL ( 8-QTLs) for abiotic
stress tolerance in this background has already been made (MBAS, IRRI) and was used as the
materials for this study. Five F2 populations of IR64-NILs produced which numbered to a total of
827 plants were genotyped using gene-specific (5) and linked SSR markers (5), CAPS (1) and Indel
(1) markers. PCR based markers such as SSR plays an immense role in detecting and selecting
introgressed QTLs for the target traits in the homozygous condition.

Evaluation of monogenic expression and digenic interactions was limited only to four
major QTLs namely, AG/, Sub/, Saltol and gDTY4.1. A total of 78 F2 genotypes which were
homozygous [+] at any two or three, but homozygous [-] at any single locus of these loci, were
selected for phenotyping. This allowed contrast of expression at any single locus (monogenic
expression) and of QTL interaction at any two homozygous (+ or -) (digeni interaction) among
NILs under specified abiotic stressed condition. Evaluation of the monogenic expression was done
by comparing the effect of each allele (contrasting allele) in each locus. On the other hand, digenic
interactions were evaluated by forming pairwise combinations of these four major QTLs, which

resulted in six digenic-loci namely, AG/-Sub1, AGI-Saltol, AGI-qDTY4.1, Sub1-Saltol, Sub1

46

Saltol, Subl1-qDTY4.1 and Saltol-gDTY4.1. To further evaluate digenic interactions, another
pairwise combinations between alleles of each locus (interallelic pairs) were made within a digenic
loci. These resulted in four digenic pairs within each of the six digenic loci, thus summed up to 24
digenic combinations .In order to evaluate monogenic expression and digenic interactions of the
four QTLs in the selected genotypes, phenotypic screening for tolerance was conducted under
anaerobic germination, submergence and salinity stress conditions. Survival (%) of plants was
gathered after 22 days of submergence in a 10 cm water depth during germination and 14 days of
recovery from 19 days of submergence in 1.5-2.0 m water depth, for the screening of tolerance to
anaerobic germination and submergence stress, respectively. Mean salinity injury scores were also
gathered using the Standard Evaluation System (SES) for salinity in an interval of 2-3 days to
evaluate QTL interactions during the salinization period. In addition, Na content which is an
indicator of salinity tolerance, and important traits such as tiller length and count at the seedling
stage were also gathered to evaluate changes attributed to the abiotic stress QTLs.

Monogenic expression of QTLs under anaerobic germination showed significant
improvement in tolerance by the AG/[+] allele whereas both Sub/(+] and Saltol[+] allele had
contrasting effect. Furthermore, contrasting alleles at gDTY4.] did not show significant difference
under anaerobic germination. Likewise, Sub/[+] allele also significantly improved tolerance to
submergence stress. Contrasting alleles at AG/, Saltol and qDTY4.1] did not show any significant
difference on submergence tolerance, which implied compatibility of theses alleles under
submergence stress. Under salinity stress, Saltol[+] allele showed a modest effect on tolerance
under salinity stress since at some data points Saltol[+] (SES3-5) showed comparable effect with
Saltol{-] NILs. Conversely gDTY4. [+] consistently reduced salinity tolerance. Furthermore, none
of the QTL showed significant effect on Na* content during salinization. Monogenic expression

even at the Salto locus did not show significant difference in Na* content. Likewise, no significant

47
changes was also observed even at the gDTY4.] locus which consistently reduced tolerance to
salinity by its plus [+] allele. On the other hand, tiller length and tiller count were significantly
reduced by either AG/[+] or qDTY4.1 [+] allele, with a stronger evidence found with gDTY4.] [+].

Digenic interaction of QTLs under anaerobic germination showed that Saltol/[+] allele still
had negative effect on anaerobic germination but only in the absence of AG/[+] allele. The latter
showed stronger positive effect over Saltol[+] allele. Since Sub1[+] had also negative effect on
tolerance to anaerobic germination, digenic interaction with Saltol[+] allele further reduced
survival (%) of plants under anaerobic germination. Under submergence stress, Sub1[+] allele was
the overall controlling allele for submergence tolerance. Digenic interaction involving Sub/[+]
showed compatibility except with AG/ locus, which was undefined since there was only one family
with both [+] allele of the two loci. Furthermore, gDTY4.][+] enhanced survival (%) with Saltol[+]
alllele under submergence.

On the other hand, significant digenic interactions under salinity stress were observed in
digenic pairs involving Saltol or gDTY4.]. Overall tolerance effect displayed under salinity stress
was controlled mainly by the Saltol[+] allele. gDTY4. 1[+] allele had negative effect under salinity,
but Saltol[+] allele surmounted this effect. Negative effect of qDTY4.1 was expressed only in the
absence of Saltol allele. AG/[+] allele displayed positive (enhancing) effect under salinity.
However, digenic interaction with gDTY4. [+] allele reduced salinity tolerance ,but only at early
days of the salinization period. Digenic interactions at Sub]-qDTY4. 1 was similar to AGI-qDTY4.1,
except that negative effect of gDTY4.1 was not expressed in the presence of Sub/[+] allele at the
first week of salinization period.

Moreover, Saltol{+] allele controlled the overall tolerance effect in digenic interactions
with the other three loci namely, gDTY4.] AGI, Sub]. In addition, the strong positive effect of

Saltol[+] was further enhanced by Sub/[+] allele. In relation to anaerobic germination, gDTY4.1

48

[+] allele may also had positive and even additive effect on submergence tolerance. On the other
hand, tiller length and tiller count were also negatively affected by gDTY4. I[+], and also by AG/[+]
alleles. Digenic interaction between these loci further reduced tiller length and count at seedling
stage. However, Saltol[+] and Sub1[+] alleles surmounted the negative effect of qDTY4.1[+] on
these traits. On the other hand, converse effect of AG1[+] still manifested even in the presence of
Saltol[+] allele. AG1[+]Saltol[+] interaction still resulted in reduced tiller length and tiller count.
In conclusion, pyramiding multiple QTLs in a superior genotype, IR64, is possible through
marker assisted selection using selected SSR markers. However, phenotypic screening of the
multiple-QTL IR64-NILs revealed complexities in the expression and interaction (digenic) of these

loci on tolerance to abiotic stress.

RECOMMENDATION

Monogenic expression and digenic interaction with qgD7Y4.] showed a statistically
insignificant yet interesting pattern. Monogenic expression of the locus seemingly had positive but
minor effect on tolerance to anaerobic germination. However, digenic interaction of the locus with
SubI[+] and Saltol[+] which both had negative effect under anaerobic germination, nullify this
effect. As in the case of anaerobic germination, gDTY4.] [+] allele may have positive and even
additive effect on submergence tolerance.

Moreover, digenic interaction at AG/-Sub] was not defined in the present study since there
was only one family which possessed both AG/[+]Sub1[+] allele.

Altogether, these underscore further investigation.

LITERATURE CITED

AHMADI J, FOTOKIAN MH. 2011. Identification and mapping of quantitative trait loci
associated with salinity tolerance in rice (Oryza sativa) using SSR markers. Iranian
Journal of Biotechnology 9(1), pp.21-30.

AKINWALE MG, AKINYELE BO, ODIYI AC, OSEKITA OS, GREGORIO G.2015.
Inheritance of Submergence Tolerance in Lowland Rice Variety.2015. Donnish
Journal of Agricultural Research 2(9) pp. 077-080

ALPI A, BEEVERS H. 1983. Effects of O2 concentration on rice seedlings. Plant
Physiology. 71(1):30-4.

ALPUERTO VL, NORTON GW, ALWANG J, ISMAIL AM. 2009. Economic impact
analysis of marker-assisted breeding for tolerance to salinity and phosphorous
deficiency in rice. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy.31(4):779-92.

ANGAJI SA, SEPTININGSIH EM, MACKILL DJ, ISMAIL AM. 2010. QTLs associated
with tolerance of flooding during germination in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Euphytica
172(2):159-68.

ANGAJI SA. 2008. Mapping QTLs for submergence tolerance during germination in rice.
African Journal of Biotechnology. 7(15):2551-8.

BALTAZAR MD, IGNACIO JC, THOMSON MJ, ISMAIL AM, MENDIORO MS,
SEPTININGSIH EM. 2014. QTL mapping for tolerance of anaerobic germination
from IR64 and the aus landrace Nanhi using SNP genotyping. Euphytica.
197(2):251-60.

BARUA, RAJESH, MARJORIE DE OCAMPO, JAMES EGDANE, ABDELBAGI M.
ISMAIL, SATYEN M. 2015. Phenotyping rice (Oryza sativa L.) genotypes for
physiological traits associated with tolerance of salinity at seedling stage Scientia
Agriculturae 12(3): 156-162.

BAILEY-SERRES J, FUKAO T, RONALD P, ISMAIL A, HEUER S, MACKILL D.
2010. Submergence tolerant rice: SUB1’s journcy from landrace to modern
cultivar. Rice (2-3):138-47

BAILEY-SERRES J, LEE SC, BRINTON E. 2012. Waterproofing crops: effective
flooding survival strategies. Plant Physiology 160(4):1698-709

51

BLUMWALD E. 2000. Sodium transport and salt tolerance in plants. Current opinion in
cell biology (4):431-4.

BONILLA P, DVORAK J, MACKILL D, DEAL K, GREGORIO G. 2002. RFLP and
SSLP mapping of salinity tolerance genes in chromosome 1 of rice (Oryza sativa
L.) using recombinant inbred lines. Philipp. Agric. Sci. 85(1): 68-76

CARILLO P, ANNUNZIATA MG, PONTECORVO G, FUGGI A, WOODROW P. 2011.
Salinity Stress and Salt Tolerance, Abiotic Stress in Plants Mechanisms and
Adaptations, Prof. Arun Shanker (Ed.), InTech, DOI: 10.5772/22331.

CHINNUSAMY V, JAGENDORF A, ZHU JK. 2005. Understanding and improving salt
tolerance in plants. Crop Science 45(2):437-48.

COLLARD BC, SEPTININGSIH EM, DAS SR, CARANDANG JJ, SANCHEZ D, KATO
Y, YE G, REDDY JN, SINGH US, AULA K, VENUPRASAD R. 2013.
Developing new flood-tolerant varieties at the International Rice Research
Institute (IRRI). SABRAO Journal of Breeding & Genetics 45 (1) 42-56

COLMER TD, PEDERSEN O. Oxygen dynamics in submerged rice (Oryza sativa). New
Phytologist. 2008 Apr 1;178(2):326-34.

COLMER TD, VOESENEK LA. 2009. Flooding tolerance: suites of plant traits in
variable environments. Functional Plant Biology 36(8):665-81.

COTSAFTIS O, PLETT D, JOHNSON AA, WALIA H, WILSON C, ISMAIL AM,
CLOSE TJ, TESTER M, BAUMANN U. 2011. Root-specific transcript profiling
of contrasting rice genotypes in response to salinity stress. Molecular Plant
4(1):25-41.

COTSAFTIS O, PLETT D, SHIRLEY N, TESTER M, HRMOVA M. 2012. A two-staged
model of Nat exclusion in rice explained by 3D modeling of HKT transporters and
alternative splicing. PLoS One 7(7):e39865.

DAS KK, PANDA D, SARKAR RK, REDDY JN, ISMAIL AM. 2009. Submergence
tolerance in relation to variable floodwater conditions in rice. Environmental and
Experimental Botany 66(3):425-34.

DAWE D. 2005. Increasing water productivity in rice-based systems in Asia—past trends,
current problems, and future prospects. Plant Production Science 8(3):221-30.

ELLA ES, SETTER TL. 1999. Importance of seed carbohydrates in rice seedling
establishment under anoxia. InVI Symposium on Stand Establishment and ISHS
Seed Symposium 504 (pp. 209-218).

52

EYNARD A, LAL R, WIEBE K. 2005. Crop Response in Salt-Affected Soils. Journal of
Sustainable Agriculture 27:1.

FLOWERS TJ, YEO AR. 1981. Variability in the resistance of sodium chloride salinity
within rice (Oryza sativa L.) varieties. New Phytologist 88(2):363-73.

FOLEY JA, RAMANKUTTY N, BRAUMAN KA, CASSIDY ES, GERBER JS,
JOHNSTON M, MUELLER ND, O’CONNELL C, RAY DK, WEST PC,
BALZER C. 2011. Solutions for a cultivated planet. Nature 478(7369):337-42.

FUKAO T, XU K, RONALD PC, BAILEY-SERRES J. 2006. A variable cluster of
ethylene response factor—like genes regulates metabolic and developmental
acclimation responses to submergence in rice. The Plant Cell 18(8):2021-34.

FUKAO T, BAILEY-SERRES J. 2008. Submergence tolerance conferred by Sub/A is
mediated by SLR1 and SLRL1 restriction of gibberellin responses in rice.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105(43):16814-9.

FUKAO T, BAILEY-SERRES J. 2008. Ethylene—a key regulator of submergence
responses in rice. Plant Science 175(1):43-51.

FUKAO T, YEUNG E, BAILEY-SERRES J. 2011. The submergence tolerance regulator
SUBI1A mediates crosstalk between submergence and drought tolerance in rice.
The Plant Cell 23(1):412-27.

GARTHWAITE AJ, VON BOTHMER R, COLMER TD. 2005. Salt tolerance in wild
Hordeum species is associated with restricted entry of Na+ and Cl- into the shoots.
Journal of Experimental Botany 56(419):2365-78.

GREGORIO, G.B., D. SENADHIRA and R.D. MENDOZA. 1997. Screening rice for
salinity tolerance, IRRI Discussion paper Series No.22. International Rice Research
Institute, Los Bafios. Laguna, Philippines. p. 30.

GREGORIO, G.B. 1997. Tagging salinity tolerance genes in rice using amplified fragment
length polymorphism. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, University of the
Philippines Los Bafios. Laguna, Philippines. 118 pp.

GUPTA PK, VARSHNEY RK. 2000. The development and use of microsatellite markers
for genetics and plant breeding with emphasis on bread wheat. Euphytica 113:163-
185.

HASEGAWA PM, BRESSAN RA, ZHU JK, BOHNERT HJ. 2000. Plant cellular and
molecular responses to high salinity. Annual review of plant biology 51(1):463-99.

53

HATTORI Y, NAGAI K, FURUKAWA S, SONG XJ, KAWANO R, SAKAKIBARA H,
WU J, MATSUMOTO T, YOSHIMURA A, KITANO H, MATSUOKA M. 2009.
The ethylene response factors SNORKEL1 and SNORKEL? allow rice to adapt to
deep water. Nature 460(7258): 1026-30.

HEENAN DP, LEWIN LG, MCCAFFERY DW. 1988. Salinity tolerance in rice varieties
at different growth stages. Australian journal of experimental agriculture.
28(3):343-9.

IRRI: STANDARD EVALUATION SYSTEM FOR RICE (SES). 2002. Manila
International Rice Research Institute;
http://www.knowledgebank irri.org/images/docs/rice-standard-evaluation-
system.pdf

ISHIZAWA K, ESASHI Y. 1984. Gaseous factors involved in the enhanced elongation of
rice coleoptiles under water. Plant, Cell & Environment. 7(4):239-45.

ISHIZAWA K, ESASHI Y. 1988. Action mechanism of ethylene in the control of sugar
translocation in relation to rice coleoptile growth I. sucrose metabolism. Plant and
cell physiology 29(1):131-41.

ISMAIL AM, HEUER S, THOMSON MJ, WISSUWA M. 2007. Genetic and genomic
approaches to develop rice germplasm for problem soils. Plant molecular biology
65(4):547-70.

ISMAIL AM, ELLA ES, VERGARA GV, MACKILL DJ. 2009. Mechanisms associated
with tolerance to flooding during germination and early seedling growth in rice
(Oryza sativa). Annals of Botany 103(2):197-209.

ISMAIL AM, JOHNSON DE, ELLA ES, VERGARA GV, BALTAZAR AM. 2012.
Adaptation to flooding during emergence and seedling growth in rice and weeds,
and implications for crop establishment. AoB Plants. 2012 Jan 1;2012:pls019.

JACKSON MB, RAM PC. 2003. Physiological and molecular basis of susceptibility and
tolerance of rice plants to complete submergence. Annals of Botany. 91(2):227-41.

JAMES RA, MUNNS R, VON CAEMMERER S, TREJO C, MILLER C, CONDON
TA.2006. Photosynthetic capacity is related to the cellular and subcellular
partitioning of Nat, K+ and Cl-in salt-affected barley and durum wheat. Plant,
Cell & Environment.29(12):2185-97.

JAVID MG, SOROOSHZADEH A, MORADI F, SANAVY SA, ALLAHDADI I. 2011.
The role of phytohormones in alleviating salt stress in crop plants. Australian
Journal of Crop Science. 2011. 5(6):726.

54

JENA KK, MACKILL DJ. 2008. Molecular Markers and Their Use in Marker-Assisted
Selection in Rice. CROP SCIENCE 48:1266-76.

JIANG L, HOU MY, WANG CM, WAN JM. 2004. Quantitative trait loci and epistatic
analysis of seed anoxia germinability in rice (Oryza sativa). Rice Science 11:238-
44,

JIANG L, LIU S, HOU M, TANG J, CHEN L, ZHAI H, WAN J. 2006. Analysis of QTLs
for seed low temperature germinability and anoxia germinability in rice (Oryza
sativa L.). Field crops research 98(1):68-75.

JONGMAN B, KOKS EE, HUSBY TG, WARD PJ. 2014. Increasing flood exposure in
the Netherlands: implications for risk financing. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci
14:1245-55.

KENDE H, VAN DER KNAAP E, CHO HT. 1998. Deepwater Rice: A Model Plant to
Study Stem Elongation. Plant Physiol 118:1105-10.

KHUSH GS. 2005. What it will take to Feed 5.0 Billion Rice consumers in 2030. Plant
Molecular Biology.59: 1-6.

KIRK GJ, GREENWAY H, ATWELL BJ, ISMAIL AM, COLMER TD. 2014. Adaptation
of Rice to Flooded Soils. In A Progress in Botany 75.:215.-253. Retrieved June 6,
2017. https://books. google.com. ph/

KOYAMA ML, LEVESLEY A, KOEBNER RM, FLOWERS TJ, YEO AR. 2001.
Quantitative trait loci for component physiological traits determining salt tolerance
in rice. Plant Physiology 125(1):406-22.

KRETZSCHMAR T, PELAYO MA, TRIJATMIKO KR, GABUNADA LF, ALAM R,
JIMENEZ R, MENDIORO MS, SLAMET-LOEDIN JH, SREENIVASULU N,
BAILEY-SERRES J, ISMAIL AM. 2015. A trehalose-6-phosphate phosphatase
enhances anaerobic germination tolerance in rice. Nature plants 1:15124.

LASANTHI-KUDAHETTIGE R, MAGNESCHI L, LORETI E, GONZALI S, LICAUSI
F, NOVI G, BERETTA O, VITULLI F, ALPI A, PERATA P. 2007. Transcript
profiling of the anoxic rice coleoptile. Plant physiology 144(1):218-31.

LEE KS, CHOI WY, KO JC, KIM TS, GREGORIO GB. 2003. Salinity tolerance of
japonica and indica rice (Oryza sativa L.) at the seedling stage. Planta 216(6):1043-
6.

55

LIN HX, ZHU MZ, YANO M, GAO JP, LIANG ZW, SU WA, HU XH, REN ZH, CHAO
DY. 2004. QTLs for Na and K uptake of the shoots and roots controlling rice salt
tolerance. Theor Appl Genet 108:253-60.

LUTTS S, KINET JM, BOUHARMONT J. 1995. Changes in plant response to NaCl
during development of rice (Oryza sativa L.) varieties differing in salinity
resistance. Journal of Experimental Botany 46(12): 1843-52.

MAAS EV, HOFFMAN GJ. 1977. Crop salt tolerance\-current assessment. Journal of the
irrigation and drainage division 103(2):115-34.

MACKILL DJ, COFFMAN WR, GARRITY DP. 1996. Rainfed lowland rice
improvement, International Rice Research Institute, P.O. Box 933, Manila,
Philippines. 242 p.

MACKILL DJ, ISMAIL AM, PAMPLONA AM, SANCHEZ DL, CARANDANG JJ,
SEPTININGSIH EM. 2010. Stress tolerant rice varieties for adaptation to a
changing climate. Crop, Environment and Bioinformatics 7:250-9.

MACKILL DJ, ISMAIL AM, SINGH US, Labios RV, Paris TR. 2012. Development and
Rapid Adoption of Submergence-Tolerant (Sub/) Rice Varieties. In: Advances in
agronomy. 115:299. Retrieved June 1 2017 from https://books. google.com. ph

MAGNESCHI L, PERATA P. 2009. Rice germination and seedling growth in the absence
of oxygen. Annals of Botany 103(2):181-96.

MAKIHARA D, TSUDA M, MORITA M, HIRAI Y, KURODA T. 1999. Effect of salinity
on the growth and development of rice (Oryza sativa L.) varieties. Japanese Journal
of Tropical Agriculture 43(4):285-94.

MATSUKURA C, KAWAI M, TOYOFUKU K, BARRERO RA, UCHIMIYA H,
YAMAGUCHI J. 2000. Transverse vein differentiation associated with gas space
formation-fate of the middle cell layer in leaf sheath development of rice. Annals
of Botany 85(1):19-27.

MENEZES-BENAVENTE L, TELXEIRA FK, KAMEI CL, MARGIS-PINHEIRO M.
2004. Salt stress induces altered expression of genes encoding antioxidant enzymes
in seedlings of a Brazilian indica rice (Oryza sativa L.). Plant Science 166(2):323-
31.

MORADI F, ISMAIL AM. 2007. Responses of photosynthesis, chlorophyll fluorescence
and ROS-scavenging systems to salt stress during seedling and reproductive stages
in rice. Annals of Botany 99(6):1161-73.

56

MUNNS R. SALINITY, GROWTH AND PHYTOHORMONES. 2002. In Salinity:
Environment-Plants-Molecules.pp.271-290.Retrieved:June6 2017,
https://books.google.com.ph 2017.https://books.google.com.ph

MUNNS R. 2005. Genes and salt tolerance: bringing them together. New phytologist
167(3):645-63.

MUNNS R, JAMES RA, LAUCHLI A. 2006. Approaches to increasing the salt tolerance
of wheat and other cereals. Journal of Experimental Botany 57(5):1025-43.

MUNNS R, TESTER M. 2008. Mechanisms of salinity tolerance. Annual Review of Plant
Biology 59: 651-681.

MURRAY MG, THOMPSON WF. 1980. Rapid isolation of high molecular weight plant
DNA. Nucleic acids research 8(19):4321-6.

NARSAI R, EDWARDS JM, ROBERTS TH, WHELAN J, JOSS GH, ATWELL BJ.
2015. Mechanisms of growth and patterns of gene expression in oxygen-deprived
rice coleoptiles. The Plant Journal 82:25-40.

NEGRAO S, ALMADANIM C, PIRES I, MCNALLY KL, OLIVEIRA MM. 2011. Use
of EcoTILLING to identify natural allelic variants of rice candidate genes involved
in salinity tolerance. Plant Genetic Resources 9(02):300-4.

NEERAJA CN, MAGHIRANG-RODRIGUEZ R, PAMPLONA A, HEUER S,
COLLARD BC, SEPTININGSIH EM, VERGARA G, SANCHEZ D, XU K,
ISMAIL AM, MACKILL DJ. 2007. A marker-assisted backcross approach for
developing submergence-tolerant rice cultivars. Theoretical and Applied Genetics
115(6):767-76.

ONAGA G., WYDRA K. 2016. “Advances in plant tolerance to abiotic stresses,” in Plant
Genomics, ed. Abdurakhmonov I. Y., editor. (Rijeka: InTech; ) 10.5772/64350. p.
167

PANDEY S, VELASCO L. 2002. Economics of direct seeding in Asia: patterns of
adoption and research priorities. Pandey S, Mortimer M, Wade L, Tuong TP, Lopez
K, B Hardy, editors. Direct seeding: research strategies and opportunities. Los
Bafios (Philippines): International Rice Research Institute. p.3-14.

PLATTEN JD, EGDANE JA, ISMAIL AM. 2013. Salinity tolerance, Na+ exclusion and
allele mining of HKT1; 5 in Oryza sativa and O. glaberrima: many sources, many
genes, one mechanism?. BMC plant biology 13(1):32

57

RAHMAN MA, THOMSON MJ, DE OCAMPO M, EGDANE J, ISMAIL AM. 2016.
Exploring novel genetic sources of salinity tolerance in rice through molecular and
physiological characterization. Annals of botany 117(6):1083-97.

RAJENDRAN K, TESTER M, ROY SJ. 2008. Quantifying the three main components of
salinity tolerance in cereals. Plant, Cell and Environment 32:237-49.

REN ZH, GAO JP, LI LG, CAI XL, HUANG W, CHAO DY, ZHU MZ, WANG ZY,
LUAN S, LIN HX. 2005. A rice quantitative trait locus for salt tolerance encodes a
sodium transporter. Nature genetics. 37(10):1141-6.

RENGASAMY P. 2002. Transient salinity and subsoil constraints to dryland farming in
Australian sodic soils: an overview. Australian journal of experimental agriculture
42(3):351-61.

ROY SJ, TUCKER EJ, TESTER M. 2011. Genetic analysis of abiotic stress tolerance in
crops. Current Opinion in Plant Biology 14:232-9.

SARKAR RK, REDDY JN, SHARMA SG, ISMAIL AM. 2006. Physiological basis of
submergence tolerance in rice and implications for crop improvement. Current
Science. 10:899-906.

SEPTININGSIH EM, PAMPLONA AM, SANCHEZ DL, NEERAJA CN, VERGARA
GV, HEUER S ISMAIL AM, MACKILL DJ. 2009. Development of submergence
tolerant rice cultivars: the Sub/ locus and beyond. Ann Bot 103:151-160

SEPTININGSIH EM, IGNACIO JCI, SENDON PMD, SANCHEZ DL, ISMAIL AM,
MACKILL DJ. 2013. QTL mapping and confirmation for tolerance of anaerobic
conditions during germination derived from the rice landrace Ma-Zhan Red. Theor.
Appl. Genet. 126: 1357-1366.

SESHU DV, KRISHNASAMY V, SIDDIQUE SB. 1988. Seed vigor in rice. In: Rice seed
health. Manila (Philippines): International Rice Research Institute, pp 315-329

SETTER TL, ELLA ES. 1994. Relationship between coleoptile elongation and alcoholic
fermentation in rice exposed to anoxia. I. Importance of treatment conditions and
different tissues. Annals of Botany 74(3):265-71

SHI Y, SHEN Y, KANG E, LI D, DING Y, ZHANG G, HU R. 2007. Recent and future
climate change in northwest China. Climatic change 80(3):379-93.

SINGH RK, GREGORIO GB, ISMAIL AM. 2008a. Breeding rice varieties with tolerance
to salt stress. J Indian Soc Coastal Agric Res 26:16-21

58

SINGH N, DANG TT, VERGARA GV, PANDEY DM, SANCHEZ D, NEERAJA CN,
SEPTININGSIH EM, MENDIORO M, TECSON-MENDOZA EM, ISMAIL AM,
MACKILL DJ. 2010. Molecular marker survey and expression analyses of the rice
submergence-tolerance gene SUB1A. Theoretical and Applied Genetics
121(8):1441-53.

SINGH, R. K., AND T. J. FLOWERS, 2010: The physiology and molecular biology of the
effects of salinity on rice. In: M. Pessarakli, ed. Handbook of Plant and Crop
Stress, pp. 901-942. Taylor and Francis, Boca Raton, FL, USA.

SINGH S, MACKILL DJ, ISMAIL AM. 2011. Toleranceoflonger-termpartial stagnant
flooding is independent of the SUB1 locus in rice. Field Crops Research 121:311—
32

SINGH US, DAR MH, SINGH S, ZAIDI NW, BARI MA, MACKILL DJ, COLLARD
BC, SINGH VN, SINGH JP, REDDY JN, SINGH RK. 2013. Field performance,
dissemination, impact and tracking of submergence tolerant (Sub1) rice varieties in
South Asia. SABRAO Journal of Breeding & Genetics. 2013 Mar 1;45(1).

SUDHARANI M, REDDY PR, JAYALAKSHMI V. 2012. A Comprehensive Review On
“Genetic Components Of Salinity Tolerance In Rice (Oryza Sativa L.)”. Int J Appl
Biol Pharm Technol. 3:312-22.

THOMSON MJ, DE OCAMPO M, EGDANE J, RAHMAN MA, SAJISE AG,
ADORADA DL, TUMIMBANG- RAIZ E, BLUMWALD E, SERAJ ZI, SINGH
RK, GREGORIO GB. 2010. Characterizing the Salto! quantitative trait locus for
salinity tolerance in rice. Rice 3(2-3):148-60

TUONG TP, PABLICO PP, YAMAUCHI M, CONFESOR R, MOODY K. 2000.
Increasing water productivity and weed suppression of wet seeded rice: effect of
water management and rice genotypes. Experimental Agriculture 36(01):71-89

TURKAN I, DEMIRAL T. 2009. Recent developments in understanding salinity tolerance.
EnviromMental and Experimental Botany 67(1):2-9.

VOESENEK LA, COLMER TD, PIERIK R, MILLENAAR FF, PEETERS AJ. 2006. How
plants cope with complete submergence. New phytologist 170(2):213-26.

WATERS I, MORRELL S, GREENWAY H, COLMER TD. 1991. Effects of anoxia on
wheat seedlings II. Influence of O2 supply prior to anoxia on tolerance to anoxia,
alcoholic fermentation, and sugar levels. Journal of Experimental Botany
42(11):1437-47.

WASSMANN R, JAGADISH SV, SUMFLETH K, PATHAK H, HOWELL G, ISMAIL
A, SERRAJ R, REDONA E, SINGH RK, HEUER S. 2009. Regional vulnerability

59

of climate change impacts on Asian rice production and scope for adaptation.
Advances in Agronomy 102:91-133.

WITCOMBE JR, HOLLINGTON PA, HOWARTH CJ, READER S, STEELE KA. 2008.
Breeding for abiotic stresses for sustainable agriculture. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 363(1492):703-16.

XU K, MACKILL DJ. 1996. A major locus for submergence tolerance mapped on rice
chromosome 9. Molecular Breeding 2(3):219-24

XU Y, 1997. Quantitative trait loci: In A Separating, pyramiding, and cloning. Plant Breed.
Rev. 15:85-139. [ebookview]. Retrieved June 3 2017.https://books. google.com. ph/

XU K, XU X, FUKAO T, CANLAS P, MAGHIRANG-RODRIGUEZ R, HEUER S,
ISMAIL AM, BAILEY-SERRES J, RONALD PC, MACKILL DJ. 2006. Sub/A is
an ethylene-response-factor-like gene that confers submergence tolerance to rice.
Nature 442(7103):705-8.

YAMAUCHI M, AGUILAR AM, VAUGHAN DA, SESHU DV. 1993. Rice (Oryza sativa
L.) germplasm suitable for direct sowing under flooded soil surface. Euphytica.
67(3):177-84.

YEO AR, FLOWERS TJ. 1983. Varietal differences in the toxicity of sodium ions in rice
leaves. Physiologia Plantarum 59(2):189-195.

YEO AR, FLOWERS TJ. 1986. Salinity Resistance in Rice (Oryza sativa L.) And a
Pyramiding Approach to Breeding Varieties for Saline Soils. Australian Journal of
Plant Physiology 13(1):161-73.

Yeo AR, Yeo ME, Flowers TJ. 1987. The contribution of an apoplastic pathway to sodium
uptake by rice roots in saline conditions. Journal of Experimental Botany
38(7):1141-53.

YEO AR, YEO ME, FLOWERS SA, FLOWERS TJ. 1990. Screening of rice (Oryza sativa
L.) genotypes for physiological characters contributing to salinity resistance, and
their relationship to overall performance. TAG Theoretical and Applied Genetics
79(3):377-84.

YOSHIDA S, FORNO DA, COCK JH, GOMEZ KA. 1976. Laboratory manual for
physiological studies of rice. Los Ban4os (Philippines): International Rice
Research Institute.

ZHANG GY, GUO Y, CHEN SL, CHEN SY. 1995. RFLP tagging of a salt tolerance gene
in rice. Plant Science 110(2):227-34.

APPENDICES

Appendix Table 1. Genotype of the selected 78 F. IR64-NILs homozygous at any two-
three loci but contrast at any single locus

ID AGI Subl Saltol qDTY4.1

+

6Q_10B-15 +
6Q_10B-20
6Q_10B-21 :
6Q_10B-22 +
6Q_10B-26
6Q_10B-31
6Q_10B-32 -
6Q_10B-36
6Q_10B-38
6Q_10B-46
6Q_10B-8 + 5 -
6Q_17A-14 - - +
6Q_17A-22 - - -
6Q_17A-51 - - -
6Q_17A-73 - - -
6Q_17A-88 - -
6Q_17A-92
6Q 23A-14
6Q 23A-8

6Q 23B-15
6Q 23B-23
6Q 23B-28
6Q _23B-32
6Q 23B-41
6Q 23B-46
6Q 23B-47
6Q 23B-48
6Q 23B-55
6Q 23B-7

6Q_23B-9

6Q_5A-12

6Q_9A-12

6Q _9A-18

+O +
+e
+

' ++
' '
t++emsee

+ +5
++

+

+
'
++etteeeUOUTo+GCcrcoecror+ocr:

me m+ O+r+tt+Oo+om+s
+ '
++ +

oof
++
a”)


Appendix Table 1. Continued...

ID AGI Subl Saltol qDTY4.1
6Q_9A-20 5 E + :
6Q 9A-23 : + .
6Q 9A-27 : - -
6Q_9A-29 - . +
6Q_9A-30 - . .
6Q_9A-31 - + +
6Q 9A-32 : : .
6Q_9A-33 5 - -
6Q_9A-35 - - -
6Q_9A-36 - - -
6Q 9A-43 z - .
6Q 9A-45 - : .
6Q 9A-46 - - =
6Q_9A-58 - - -
6Q 9A-68 5
6Q_9A-69 -
6Q 9A-71 :
6Q 9A-73 5 c
6Q 9A-75 5
6Q 9A-77 5 + -
6Q 9A-79 5 a .
6Q_9A-87 - -
6Q_9A-89 : +
6Q 9A-9 = + e
6Q_9A-94 5 + +
6Q_9A-95 5 : +
6Q 9B-11 ; + +
6Q_10A-56 + - -
6Q 9B-15 : . +
6Q 9B-19 c - -
6Q_9B-36 c
6Q 9B-37 -
6Q 98-40 5
6Q 9B-42 :
6Q_ 9B-46 - .
6Q_9B-50 E
6Q 9B-51 :
6Q 9B-54 -

num re

t+ + +
nm moo oe + + Oo

+

=

+ + + 4+
+ + .
“m+ Ds ae ee

m+ m+ Ome

++
++

62

Appendix Table 1. Continued...

D AGI Subl Saltol qDTY4.1
6Q_10A-77 - + + -
6Q _9B-61 - + + -
6Q 9B-65 - 5 E H
6Q_9B-67 : : + H
6Q 9B-68 : + + H
6Q_9B-9 - - + H
6Q_ 10B-12 - 5 + -

ns: not siognificant *: significant atp<0.05 **: significant at p< 0.01 ***: significant at p< 0.001

Appendix Table 2. T-test of mean survival (%) of the F, IR64-NILs contrasting at the
AGI, Sub1, Saltol and qDTY4. lafter 22 days of submergence during

germination.
TEST MEAN
TEST SURVIVAL COUN SIGNIFICANC
MATERIAL MATERIALS (%) T SE T-TEST “LEVEL
(22D)

IR42 vsKhao R42 2.083 24 1.039 1.83E-11

Hlan On a
Khao Hlan On 51.739 24 4.273

Khao HlanOn Khao Hlan On 51.739 24 4.273 3.50E-03

vs AGI[+] et
AGI[+] 31.993 15 4.607

AGI [+] vs AGI[+] 31.993 15 4.607 2.08E-03

AGI[-] ”
AGI[-] 14.429 62 1.489

Sub1[+] vs Sub1[+] 12.270 32 1.594 8.17E-03

Sub1[-] eee
Sub1[-] 19.870 51 2.304

Sal[+] vs Sal[-  Sal[+] 13.149 41 1.777 1.21E-02

] *
Sal[-] 20.988 43 2.475

qDTy4.1 [+] qDTy4.1 [+] 18.299 19 4.039 6.41E-01 ns

vs qDTy4.1 [-]
qDTy4.1 [-] 15.890 22 3.14

ES
ns: not siognificant *: significant at p< 0.05 **: significant at p< 0.01 ***: significant at p< 0.001

63

Appendix Table 3. T-test of mean survival (%) of the F, IR64-NILs contrasting at the AG/,
Sub1, Saltol and gDTY4.1 after 19 days of complete submergence and

14 days of recovery.
MEAN

TEST TEST SIGNIFICANCE
MATERIALS MATERIALS Bras COUN on paresTy LEVEL
TR42 vs IR42 2.333 12 1,592  7.782E-14 Lar)
FR13A

FR13A 91.609 12 3.349
FR13A vs FR13A 91.609 12 3.349 5.325E-05 iad
Sub1[+]

Subi[+] 70.674 35 2.843
Subi[+]vs  Subi[+] 70.674 35 2.843 1.869H-08 +e
Sub1[-]

Subl[-] 45318 53 2.916
AGI[+]vs  AGI[+] 52.753 154.835 —0.8504239 ns
AGI[-]

AGI[-] 53.825 -67—s«(2.886
Sal[+]vs  Sal[+] 55.796 = 41.—='s«3.126 0.94519 ns
Sal[-]

Sal[-] 55.462 48 3.703
qDTy4.1 qDTy4.1 62344 ~=—-19-——«5.015 _0.0780689 ns
[+] vs [+]
qDTy4.1 [-]

qDTy4.1[-] 48.747 27 ns

ns: not siognificant *: significant at p< 0.05

**: significant at p< 0.01 ***: significant at p< 0.001

t+
‘oO

100°0 >d ye yueoTyTUTIS | 4 100 >d ye jueogruais :,, 60'0 >d ye jueorsTudIs :, JUBOyTUSOIS Jou ‘su
— nus!

P7VIZ67';0 —ZBPLOZO'O = BPIOLZO'O-—-ZOPISOO'D ~—#S99900'0 7560000: SHEEPHO'D §=—-LOBEI00'0 = »H9ES00'0 [-]oios sa youl
6175660 LLS7EO ~OEBLPEO IIELIONO ILLI961'0 L9TP600'0 ~=—- €6ZSO91'0 -9919S90°0 ELI9I97'0 [+]roupg SA pOUl
OSS 1 —67-AIS'Z—LZ-HON'Z = ST-HOP'S «= ST-ALB'T «= LI-HO6'T 6I-AZZ SIRI CL-ALT'T [-lonps SA 8L¢T4
OC-AZIT = BIAS «= sIZ-HOGT «= ST-HOB'1 = ST-A99'Z_—«GT-ASO'T Ot-AtZ'9 «= TI-AEL «= OIL SE [+]/or70g Sa gLpT4
00°0 00'0 00'0 00'0 00'0 00°0 00'0 100 800 pOUl SA BLP TA
£00 000 00'0 00'0 00'0 00'0 00'0 00'0 0'0 youl SA 67Ul
00°0 00°0 00°0 00°0 00°0 00°0 00°0 00°0 00'0 8Ly 1d SA 67UI
1p90°0 9650'0 6500°0 €810'0 8L10°0 08b0'0 o1£0'0 ZL10°0 zpooo §=— -] 1 FA Gb sa [+] 1 ¢41Gb
71100 ZL00°0 £v£0'0 0zr0'0 0€s0°0 $5800 7610 1S00'0 6000°0 F-] poippg sa [+ ]io1jos:
81150 86170 IbLL0 09%6'0 9759°0 1999'0 9b76'0 L@6E'0 99L'0 E-]rqng sa [+]rqng
e9£e0 v00r'0 Lesz'0 0996'0 86b'0 9L6b'0 z0zZ'0 9671'0 pesto [-]1oVv 84 [+]To¥
67 97 €Z 6 oI rat 6 s z

NOILVZINITVS OL SAVG UMC ER UE A

TORN WE OOT UT UoNezruTes
Jo skep 67 Joy | ¢LG5 pure ‘FOV oy ye SayseHuos STIN-pOU §A OM JO oy Jo sasoos Arayes ueour Jo 3s01-L “py 2192, xIpusddy

65

Appendix Table 5. T-test of Na content (mmol/gDW) in F3 IR64-NILs contrasting at the
AGI, Sub], Saltol and gDTY4.1 during salinization period.

SIGNIFICANC

QTL ALLELE MEAN SE T-TEST RcEVvEr
DTY4.1 [+] 0.596985 0.03892 0.389756 ns

(1 0.547346 (0.041573
Saltol [4] 0.561791 0.022013 0.513785 ns

(1 0.585824 0.029263
AGI [4] 0.513952 0.044062 0.140635 ns

[ 0.589331 0.021685
Sub1 [4] 0.566353 0.020147 0.621904 ns

(J 0.583141 0.027263

ns: not siognificant *: significant at p<0.05 **: significant at p<0.01 ***: significant at p< 0.001

Appendix Table 6. T-test of the tiller length and count of F; IR64-NILs contrsting at AG/,
Sub1, Saltol, qDTY4.1 at 15 days after transplanting in Yoshida’s
nutrient media prior to salinization during seedling stage (6.1) Mean
tiller length(mm) (6.2) Mean tiller count

App. Table 6.1 Mean Tiller Length(mm)

QTL ALLELE etal SE T-TEST SON EVN
DTY4.1 (+) 21.68700765 4.591565 0.004988 bid
(-] 46.962683 1 6.908666
Saltol [+] 36.60031585 4.350794 0.473487 ns
(-] 31.66543788 5.288937
AGI fal 19.2483 1444 5.805166 0.014482 .
(-] 37.92686591 4.213197
Subl lial 35.15885967 4.636508 0.89711 ns
- 34.29075269 4.82262

ns: not siognificant *: significant at p< 0.05  **: significant at p<0.01 _ ***: significant at p< 0.001

66

App. Table 6.2 Mean Tiller Count

MEAN TILLER SIGNIFICANCE
ea COUNT Be LEVEL
DTY4.1 [+] 0.210 0.039 0.004183 Mh
[-] 0.440 0.062
Saltol [4] 0.349 0.037 0.507859 ns
(J 0.307 0.049
AGI [+] 0.195 0.053 0.014148 *
(1 0.366 0.038
Sub1 [+] 0.341 0.043 0.830835 ns
(] 0.328 0.043

ns: not siognificant *: significant at p<0.05  **: significant at p< 0.01 ***: significant at p< 0.001

Appendix Table 7. T-test of the mean survival (%) of F4 IR64-NILs contrasting at six
digenic loci namely, AG/- Sub1, AGI- Saltol, Ag\-qgDTY4.1, Subl-
Saltol, Subl-qgDTY4.1, Saltol-gDTY4.1, after 22 days of submergence
during germination.

COMBINATIO_ DIGENIC PAIR MEAN COUNT SE TIEST T-TEST  SIGNIFIC
NNO SURVIVAL COMBINA ANCE
(%) AT 21D TION LEVEL
AGI[+] #DIV/0
1 Subl[+] 36.91 1 ! lvs2 apivio. n/a
2 AGI [+] Sub1[-] 31.34 13 5.320 1vs3 apivin N/a
3 AGI[-] Sub1[+] 12.02 24 1.552 lvs4 spivio1 n/a
4 AGI[-] Sublf-] 15.95 38 2.203 2vs3 0.0036 **

2vs 4 0.0165 *
3 vs 4 0.1509

1 AGI [+] Sal{+] 29.09 7 5458 1lvs2 0.5654 ns
2 AGI{+] Salf-] 34.54 8 7.436 lvs3 0.0136 *
3 AGI [-] Sal[+] 10.46 30 1363 1lvs4 0.1022 ns
4 AGI[-] Salf-] 18.15 32 2428 2vs3 0.0141 *

2 vs 4 0.0673 ns
3 vs 4 0.0081 **


Apppendix Table 7. Continued...

67

COMBINATIO DIGENIC MEAN COUNT SE TTEST T-TEST SIGNIFIC
NNO PAIR SURVIVAL COMBINA ANCE
(%) AT 21D TION LEVEL
AGI [+] 10.31
1 qDTy4.1 [+] 30.54 6 5 1lvs2 0.5777 ns
AGI[+]
2 qDTy4.1 [-] 37.05 5S 4.144 1lvs3 0.1514 ns
AGI[-] qDTy4.1
3 + 12.82 9 3.034 lvs4 0.0998 ns
AGI [-] qDTy4.1
4 FJ 9.66 17 2.197 2vs3 0.0014 **
2vs 4 0.0009 ***
3 vs 4 0.4123
1 Sub1[+] Sal[+] 10.99 19 2.141 1vs2 0.3322 ns
2 Sub] [+] Salf-] 14.14 13. 2.370 1vs3 0.2534 ns
3 SubI[-] Sal[+] 15.01 22 2.731 1vs4 0.0029 **
4 Sub1[-] Sal[-] 23.55 29 3.362 2vs3 0.8109 ns
2vs4 0.0275 *
3vs4 0.0544 ns
Subl[+]
1 qDTy4.1 [+] 11.52 7 3.336 1lvs2 0.2998 ns
Sub1[+]
2 qDTy4.1 [-] 18.31 6 5.186 1vs3 0.1326 ns
Subl[-]
3 qDTy4.1 [+] 22.26 12 5.904 lvs4 0.6895 ns
Sub1[-]
4 qDTy4.1 [-] 13.61 15 3.932 2vs3 0.623 ns
2vs 4 0.4848 ns
3 vs 4 0.2371 ns
Sal[+] qDTy4.1
1 [+] 12.78 8 5.403 1vs2 0.9218 ns
Sal[+] gDTy4.1
2 - 13.45 13 3.843. 1vs3 0.2403 ns
Sal[-] qDTy4.1
3 [+] 22.31 11 5.660 lvs4 0.3965 ns
Salf-]_ qDTy4.1
4 FJ 19.42 9 5.350 2vs3 0.2113 ns
2vs 4 0.3781 ns
3 vs 4 0.7149 ns

ns: not siognificant *: significant at p< 0.05

**: significant at p< 0.01

***: significant at p< 0.001

68

Appendix Table 8. T-test of mean survival (%) of the F4 IR64-NILs contrasting at six
digenic loci namely, Sub-AG/ , Sub1- Saltol, Subl-qDTY4.1, AGI-
Saltol, AGI-qDTY4.1 and Saltol-gDTY4.1 after 19 days of complete
submergence and 14 days of recovery

MEAN(%)
COMBINATION T-TEST T- SIGNIFICANCE
NO. DIGENICPAIR SURVIVAL = COUNT = SE" COMBINATION TEST LEVEL
1 Subl[+]AGI[+] 26.63 1 #DIVAl Tvs2 #DIV/O0I ns
2 Subl[+JAGI[-] 70.18 27 (2.952 1vs3 #DIViO! ns
3 Subl[-J AGI[+] 53.10 134.909 1vs4 #DIV/O01 ns
4 Subl[-JAGI-] 42.79 403.456 2vs3 0.0071 “
2vs4 0.0000 ave
34 0.0982 ns
1 Subl[+] Sal[+] 68.35 93.914 1vs2 0.3806
2 Sub1[+] Salf-] 73.43 164.162 1w3 0.0001 oe
3 Subl[-] Sal[+] 44.95 2 © 3.355 lvs4 0.0004 ove
4 Subl[-] Salf-] 45.58 314.427 2vs3 0.0000 oe
2vs4 0.0000 oe
3054 0.9106 ns
1 Sublt 7 feted 75.49 7 5.330 1vs2 0.3791 ns
2 SublU*]qDTy4.1 66 94 9 7.735 1vs3 0.0237 .
3 ca) 54.68 12 6451 lvs4 0.0002 one
4 cee a 3761 17 6.688 2vs3 0.2399 ns
2w4 0.0098 co
3ve4 0.0775
1 AGI[+] Sal[+] 4441 1 4.401 1vs2 0.1006 ns
2 AGI[+] Salf-] 60.05 8 7539 1w3 0.0619 ns
3 AGI[-] Sal[+] 56.01 303.743 lvs4 0.2277 ns
4 AGI[-] Salf-] 52.06 374.279 2vs3 0.6408 ns
2vs4 03746 as
354 0.4893 ns
1 AGI uf pital 66.34 6 6.490 1vs2 0.1326 ns
2 AGI vie Ty41 4935 5 7.845 1vs3 0.2777 ns
3 AGH: a 54.14 9 8.584 Lvs4 0.0754 ns
4 AGIF] pepe 48.61 2 © 6.740 2vs3 0.6879 ns
2vs4 0.9442 os

ns: not siognificant

ignificant at p< 0.05

**: significant at p< 0.01

***: significant at p< 0.001

69

100'0 >d 32 queOTUSIS ‘aux

10'0 >d ye yueoyrusis : yy

60'0 >d ye yueoryTUdIs :, JWeOTUDOIs you ‘su

Ls0°0
v8e'0
LOl‘0
vIL0
ce9'0
Ose'0

6¢

6v1'0
8910
L700
ILs'0
LL8°0
c6l'0

110°0
vst oO
0100
L8v'0
£190

1910

€710
cs0'0
800°0
scv0
Ls60
£60'°0

Ivl0
1s0'0
600°0
6LE0
6¢8°0
$400

6b1'0
L00°0
900°0
Is¢0
9160
£800

9110
090'0
0100
8Le0
0vs'0
9¢0'0

$700
OvT'0
1100
vL0'0
8190
6100

cv0'0
9LEO
L700
LL0°0
1LL°0
vv0'0

pSAEg
py SAT
€SAT v E) rr4iab -1ov
py Sat € [+] r¢4iab Fi1ov
€ SAT [4 El rrdiab [+]19¥
Z SA | I [+] 1¢4iab [+]1D¥

IDOT DINADIA

1 ¢41G5-1D¥ 76 1081 “dy

Stl'0 00110 §= 9000 -Ss«O1D|-—«—«CSTO'0-—«“LO'ND—Cé‘“iTO'/O~Sés«éSTO'O = LOOD—Cé«é SA'S
vr60 8420 €S80 1080 L8L0 78r0 0160 960 O80 PSAZ
9000 72000 1000 9000 sI00 8100 0100 000 72000 €SAZ v (11 +416 [-]ws
9€L0 ¥L60 9650 290 LIVO OSL0 ¥6L0 G6LL0 8550 SAT « [+I +416 [-]s
8s10 1010 82400 £00 L500 LI00 6100 L000 6000 €SAI z Flr rata [+]es
1%L0 L940 I€v0 77L0 ~=ES0 = 8080 = Z08'0Ss bBL0— STE = ZSAT 1 (4dr arab [+]rs
67 92 €% 61 91 ZI 6 s z Sa ‘ON
TIdINVS UW ID0OT OINASIA
NOILVZINITVS OL SAVG LSGL-L Ivd

T¢LLGb-j0yng ‘16 2198. ‘ddy

TO®N WU 001 UI UonezruTes
Jo skep 6Z 10} (9'6) 19"S-IDV pun (s'6)1qnS-100S (y 6)IDV-10NPS ‘(€'6) I'-LLGB-19nS (76) 415
“TOV (V0) FA.LC5-10nDS ‘Afoured Yo] oTaeSTp XIs 1 STIN-POI f OY Jo souoos Amfur Ayruryes ueouT Jo 3s9}- “6 91GB], xIpuaddy

70

100'0 >d ze jueOyTUBIS ‘nee 100 >d ye UROYTUBIS :,, S0'O >d ye jueoMTUBIs :, jueoYTUsOIS jou ‘su
OIso §=FISO §6=—€8ZO~=—sL090-—s—«BED'O =—sdTSLO. = LBH'O =OLEEO = TSEOD—s SAE
z10;0 = L000 Ss F100 « 6ZO|O- ss LEO = GOT'0s—s SHED = LID'D-—s-—«B0D10-—s HSAZ
7890 = LLSO0 =0KG0 LOBOS 68D LIB = SOL STL «GI's ESAT
SELO P10 = CLIO |S ZST.0 ZT EZI'0Ss SOTO = $0010 « LODO -—s SAT
€0Ph0 Ilpy0 7SL0 S190 0990 6€50 £90 S70 8270 ESAT
0€90 9290 1690 9bh0 IZEO 810 70 ZSAI

[-/10¥ [Is
[-]19¥ [-]1es
C-Jr5v [+s
[+Jrov [+]

1ID07T DINADIA

NOILVZINITVS OL SAVG

TDV-10N0S ‘y'6 AITeL “‘ddy

100°0 >d ye queoyrasis :x4% 10'0 >d ye yueoyrUdis :,, 60'O >d ye jUROITUsIs :, JULOITUSOIS jou ‘su
Lrv0 = L8T0-~—s«dT8010~=—s EOT'0-=—s F800 =: OOT'0—«éO6000.—s—«*aST00—Ss«GIOO—Cé«é SAE’
sse0 pled LrsO 6590 6750 LIEO 8650 £670 0950 PSAZ
€?0 €r10 Sr00 6500 LE00 O0£00 6h00 L000 S000 £€SAz b El irrdiab [-]rans

1680 L790 Ss60 €€L0 820 vlL€0 9050 82710 78h0 ESAT E) rr4iab [+]rans
[+] 1¢41ab [+]1qns

9L10 =97TO §=—800 = 8h 0 = oST 0 ~—80€ 0 19c0 —v8E 0 IstO  CSAT

IDOT OINADIA

NOLLVZINITVS OL SAVG LSAL-L

T+ALGBI ANS '€'6 A192. ‘ddy

““panunuod *6 a[qeL xipueddy

71

100°0 >d 32 yueoyrusis ‘44% 10°0 >d ye yuwoyTUds :,, 6O'O >d ye jUeOWTUBIS :, JUeOIJTUSOIs jou ‘su

8400 700 9s€0 670 8010 6L€0 160 cLS‘0 SISO pSrE
LLE0 1v0 8ee0 809°0 c6S'0 £90 v8e0 L9EO €L70 =p SAT

6L8°0 L190 Lv9'0 £60 6780 I L9¢'0 LOL'0 9¢°0 ESAT v [-I19ng [-]1D¥
iO/AlG# = iO/AIG# = O/AIG# §=—i0/AIG# §=—i0/AIG# §~=—i/AIG# = iO/AIG# §=— i/AIG# = iO/AIG# =p SAT € [+]rang -J1IO¥
i/AlG# = iO/AIG# = 10/AIG# §~=—iO/AIG = i/AIG# §=—iO/AIG# §=—i/AIG# §=—iO/AIG# = i/AIG# = ¢ SA] Zz [-]rang [+]TO¥
iO/AIG# —i0/AIG# = i0/AI# = iO/AIG# §=—iO/AIG# §~=—i/AIG# = iO/AIG# = i/AIGH = iO/AIGH = Z@SAT I [+]rang (+]1o¥

10] s1u98Iq

WoRBZTUTTES 0) skeq

T9NS-1DV 9°6 1981 ddy

100°0 >d 32 yueoTUSIS ‘44% 10°0 >d ye yuROyTUIS ‘44 $0'0 >d 32 jueOrUI :, JULOIJTUSOIS jou :su
1910 $990 ISTO 720 €LE0 8hhO0 70 60 OED PSAE
4810 = 9ET'0 »=—sOUE'0—«éwBZO—s—«OLETD Ss“ HHO s«OBLO—Ss« ETO = THOS sw SAT

swt00 9710 7200 0£€00 1s00 = PH 0 1910 =©0400 LOOO ESAT
£100 000 €€10 €110 9800 SElO0 2@hz70 000 6000 FHSAT
1000 = 8000 )3=s L0000-——« 8000 =— 00:0 Te00 €200 9000 O00 ESAT
19¢0 69€0 IZe0 16€'0 ILT0 €6b0 ZSAT

[-Jans [-]1~s.
[+Jans [-]1s
[-Jans [+]1s

[+Jang [~]res

IDOT OINADIA

NOILVZINITVS OL SAVG

19NS-101108 56 M1921 “ddy

““panunjuoy *6 a[qeL xipueddy

72

Appendix Table 10. T-test of Na* content (mmol/gDW) in F; IR64-NILs at six-digenic loci
namely Saltol- gDTY4.1, AGI-qDTY4.1, Subl-gDTY4.1, AG1-Saltol,
Sub1-Saltol and Sub1-AG1 during salinization period.

Pair Digenic Saltol- Saltol- Saltol- = AGi- AGI- SUBI-

Statistics No Allele. AGI SUB1 qDTy4.1 SUBI qDTY41 qDTY4.1
1 Ae 0.5470 0.5988 0.5429 0.6039 -~=—«0.5416.~—«0.5470

Average 2 FE] 0.6106 0.6008 0.6222 0.6135 ~—(0.6578~— «0.6316
3 Fy 0.5509 0.5791 0.5272 «0.6049 (0.5861 (0.6063

4 [IL] 0.5525 0.5327 —0,5510_—*0.5390~—0.5734_—_—0.5515

1 FA 0.0564 0.0369 0.0490 wiv! ~—s«:(0.0664 (0.0564

eF 2 FE 0.0276 0.0298 —«0.0431-—«0,0425 0.0609 -~— 0.0170
3 GH 0.0558 0.0568 0.0486 0.0274 ~—(0.0462-—«0.0474

4 (tl 0.0337 0.0324 _0.0931__ 0.0306 0.0519 _—_0.0535

lvs2 0.3372 0.9670 —0.2421.:«swvm_~—Ss«0.2340~—0.1940

Lvs3 0.9613 0.7739 —-0.8230saDIvia! ~=—s«0.5946—s(0.4354

test Lvs 4 0.9354 0.1860 0.9407 #pIvmal ~—s 0.7124 —s(0.9542.
2vs3 0.3622 0.7394 = 0.1599 0.8674 «0.3815 (0.6245

2vs4 0.1876 0.1292 0.5148 0.1684 ~—«0.3228~——«0.1800

3vs4 0.9818 0.4876 (0.8276 0.1145 _—0.8572_—_—0.4533

eee ea aetna tS
ns: not siognificant *: significant at p< 0.05 **: significant at p<0.01  ***: significant at p< 0.001

Appendix Table 11. T-test of the tiller length and count of F; IR64-NILs at six- digenic
loci namely Saltol- gqDTY4.1, AGI-qDTY4.1, Subl-  qDTY4.1, Gl-
Saltol, Sub1-Saltol and Sub1-AG1 at 15 days after transplanting in
Yoshida’s nutrient media prior to salinization during seedling stage
(11.1) Mean tiller length(mm) (11.2) Mean tiller count

App. Table 11.1 Mean Tiller Length (mm)

Pair Digenic Saltol- Saltol- Saltol- AGI- AGI1- SUB1-
Statistics No. Allele AGI SUB1 qDTy4.1 SUB1 qDTY4.1 qDTY4.1
1 AY 26.785 36588 33.958 42.458 8.069 36.220
2 AL 39.266 36612 46.220 18.918 27.260 45.457
Average
3 A 11.712 32896 = 11.870 35.282 21.188 12.439

4 [-J[- 36.540 32.341 48.745 39.716 53.025 51.916

App. Table 11.1 Continued...

ae Pair Digenic  Saltol-  Saltol- Salto. | AGI-AGI- _SUBI-
No. Allele AGI SUB1__qDTy4.1 _ SUB1__qDTY4.1_ qDTY4.1

1 MH 9.123 5514 6.310 #DIV/0! 4.118 7.456

eH 2 He 5304 6.750 7.938 += 6.290 «14.880 9.611
3 FH 6623 8482 4.777 5.848 5.940 3.928

4 tl 6.678 6.928 «15.234 5,902 7.292 8.867

lvs2 0.263 «0.998 -~—S«0.242-—«#DIV/O! 0.291 0.469

lvs3 0.208 0.719 0.015 #DIV/0! 0.095 0.019

test lys4 0.404 ~=—0.634.—=S «0.408 #DIV/O! 0.000 0.194
2vs3 0.005 = 0.735 —=S«0.002-S(0,067 0.724 0.022

2vs4 0.750 0.661 0.888 0,022 0.186 0.631

384 0.016 0.960 _0.071_~—_—0.596 0.003 0.001

ns: not siognificant *: significant at p< 0.05

App. Table 11.2 Mean Tiller count

**: significant at p< 0.01

***: significant at p< 0.001

B

Statisti Pair Digenic Saltol- Saltol- Saltol- AGI- AGI- SUBI-
atistics No Allele AGI SUBI — qDTy4.1_ SUBI_ —qDTY4.1_ qDTY4.1
1 [+][+] 0.263815 0.367849 0.320052 0.416667 0.107237 0.328484
GL] 0.375642 0.331233 0.428927 0.193349 0.253472 0.444203
Average
3 [JE] 0.127165 0.297457 0.121721 0.351771 0.204895 0.134385
4 -l[- 0.35516 0.324465 0.467029 0.374922 0.497568 0.478296
1 (+][+] 0.080038 0.052146 0.051133 #DIV/0! 0.046465 0.065292
SE 2 C-] 0.045139 0.05397 0.068698 0.056352 0.137537 0.09085
3 (-J[+] 0.063983 0.076607 0.0414 0.055147 0.05736 0.035069
4 -J[- 0.062592 0.065368 0.145858 0.052361 0.064268 0.078548
ttest
lvs2 0.251016 0.628419 0.219866 #DIV/0! 0.375119 0.331945

ns: not siognificant *: significant at p< 0.05

**: significant at p< 0.01

***: significant at p< 0.001

74

F1383/F113 F1577/F148

6 8
PLANT #1

PLANT #2

6-8QqL Fl PLANT #2

PLANT #2

Appendix Figure 1. QTL pyramiding scheme for the eight major QTLs for abiotic stress
tolerance in IR64 Background (MBAST, IRRI).

