PABAMEROMONS
IMI BOVE ME NICOL £ OFM
PEE CALL OL Ta AA KC


UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS

Master of Science in Environmental Science

MA, RUSSELL ALVAREZ NATOZA

A TRANSACTIONAL APPROACH FOR THE IMPROVEMENT OF SOLID
WASTE MANAGEMENT: THE CASE OF PILA, LAGUNA, PHILIPPINES.

CARMELITA M. REBANCOS, PhD
Adviser

Date:

This thesis can be made available to the general public.

YES

This thesis can be accessed only after consultation with the author
and thesis adviser.

YES

This thesis can be accessed only by those bound by confidenti:

|

ity | YES

agreement.
MA. aww ‘A. NATOZA

OADorveb.—

CARMELITA M. REBANCOS, PhD


A TRANSACTIONAL APPROACH FOR THE
IMPROVEMENT OF SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT:
THE CASE OF PILA, LAGUNA, PHILIPPINES

MA. RUSSELL ALVAREZ NATOZA

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF THE GRADUATE SCHOOL
UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE
DEGREE OF

MASTER OF SCIENCE

(Environmental Science)

DECEMBER 2016

(An a
STI-17-0815


The thesis attached hereto entitled, “A TRANSACTIONAL APPROACH
FOR THE IMPROVEMENT OF SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT: THE CASE OF
PILA, LAGUNA, PHILIPPINES” prepared and submitted by MA. RUSSELL
ALVAREZ NATOZA in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
MASTER OF SCIENCE (ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE), is hereby accepted.

AG Rovere. 0,95

— ALi Le
REX B. DEMAFELIS HERMI MARIE C. CASTILLO
Member, Guidance Committee Membef, Guidance Committee
(Date Signed) (Date Signed)

CARMELITA M. REBANCOS

Member, Guidance Committee
(Date Signed)

Accepted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of MASTER OF
SCIENCE (ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE)

DECIBEL Poorno-esuava

Dean, School of Environmental Science and Management

(Date Signed)

JOSE V. CAMACHO, JR.
Dean, Graduate School
University of the Philippines Los Barios

(Date Signed)

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

The author is a native of Laguna, bom in Bifian on the 21st of September 1991,
spent 22 years of her life in Sta. Rosa City, and is currently residing in Pita Laguna. She
is the eldest between two children of Marino and Edna. She finished her primary
‘education in Saints Peter and Paul Early Childhood Center in 2004 and had the privilege
to accomplish her secondary at Santa Rosa Science and Technology High School in
2008, The author eared her degree in Bachelor of Science in Development
Communication in 2012 for the University of the Philippines Los Bafios (UPLB) and
graduated cum laude.

‘As a Development Communicator, the author practiced her leamings as a
Research Associate in Chemical Engineering Department of UPLB under the
supervision of Dr. Rex B. Demafelis. As part of the Biofuels team, she became a
contributor of a book on biofuels titled The Philippine Biofuel Industry: Defining Strategic
Directions.

During her undergraduate years, the environmentalist in her was fostered by her
environmental science professors. Consequently, in 2014, she decided to take her
Master's degree in Environmental Science as a scholar of DOST-SEI Accelerated
Science and Technology Human Resource Development Program (ASTHRDP).
Moreover, she was one of the Filipino student-participants in the Japan East Asia
Network of Exchange for Students and Youths (JENESYS) Program under the theme
Infrastructure and Environment Improvement. The author aims to create ripple through
environmental communication to further encourage the country's love for the

environment.

MA. RUSSELL ALVAREZ NATOZA
iii

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The author would like to express her whole-hearted gratitude to the following who
made this success possible:

To DOST-SEI ASTHRDP, for the opportunity to take her masters studies.

To her adviser, Carmelita M. Rebancos, for her undying support and constant
encouragement to begin and eventually finish this research. To the other members of
her advisory committee, Rex B. Demafelis, and Hermilea C. Castillo, for the guidance
and improvement of this study.

To the municipal officials and staff of Pila, for allowing the author to conduct her
research in the municipality, and to the Barangay officials and staffs, especially the
Barangay Health Workers, of Barangay Pansol, Sta. Clara Sur and Pinagbayanan, for
extending their assistance in the data gathering. To all the respondents, who appropriate
some of their time and willingly participated in the survey

To her SESAM professors, for imparting their knowledge on Environmental
Science and holistic approach to life. To the Graduate School staff, SESAM staff,
DEVCOM staff, and CHEM ENG staff for kind assistance and considerations.

To her graduate school classmates and friends Geri, Kyrbi, Jem, Nasser,
Somboun, Kuya Louie, Kuya Delfim, Ate Nica, Ate Jing, and Tita Adel, to name a few,
for accomplishing the hurdles of graduate school with her. To her thesis mates and best
friends, Jessa and Klang, for the sleepless nights together spent for writing or for
chattering, and the constant reminder that it will all be done in God's time.

To her family - Papa Mar, Mama Eds, Baby Rose, and all her dogs (Six, Prince,
Four, Toppo, Alaska, and Tuesday) for the endless love and support, and never-ending
Patience and understanding. And above all, to God, for blessing her with awe-inspiring

individuals and a wonderful life.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHAPTER PAGE
Title Page i
Approval Page ii
Biographical Sketch il
Acknowledgement iv
List of Tables viii
List of Figures x
List of Plates xi
List of Appendices xii
List of Appendix Figures xii
List of Appendix Tables xii
Acronyms xv
Abstract xvi

1 INTRODUCTION 1
Statement of the Problem 5
Research Questions 7
Objectives of the Study 8
Significance of the Study 9
‘Scope and Limitation of the Study 10

" REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE 12
Solid Waste 12
History and Definition 12
Factors Affecting Solid Waste Generation 13

Municipal Solid Waste Generation 14

CHAPTER PAGE

The State of Philippine Solid Waste Management 16
Ecological Solid Waste Management Act of 2000 7
Solid Waste Management Researches in the Philippines 19
Pila Laguna Municipal Profile 2
History 21
Physical Description 22
Socio-Economic Description 22
Solid Waste Generation 26
Transactional Worldview 28
Overview on Transactional Worldview 28
Aspect of Transactional Worldview 34
Social Milieu

Psychological Processes
Physical Environment

Application of Transactional Worldview 35
Theoretical Framework 39
Conceptual Framework a“

i METHODOLOGY 44
Location of Study Site 44
Data Collection Procedure 46
Selection of Respondents 49
Sampling Method Used 49
Research Instruments 51.
Data Analysis 51

Vv RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 52

Aspects of Transactional Analysis 52

vi

CHAPTER

vi

vit

Current Solid Waste Management Practices
Waste Segregation
Recycling and Reusing
Burning of Waste
Waste Disposal
Psychological Processes affecting SWM Practices
Knowledge on Solid Waste Management
Attitude towards Solid Waste Management
Physical Environment of Pila Laguna
Different Landscapes of the Municipality
Solid Waste Management Facilities
Solid Waste Management Ordinances and
Programs
‘Temporal Qualities Affecting Solid Waste Management
History of Municipality's Land Use
History of Solid Waste Management

Understanding Solid Waste Management through
Transactional Analysis

Segregation of Solid Waste
Reducing, recycling, and reusing of waste
Incineration of Waste

Waste Disposal

Recommendation for the Improvement of Solid Waste
Management

Waste Segregation
Reducing, recycling, and reusing
Waste Incineration

Waste Disposal

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH

LITERATURE CITED

vii

PAGE
53

80

100

107
108
110
112
114

116

17
118
120
121

127

133

135

TABLE

10

"1

12

13

14

LIST OF TABLES

Jurisdiction, slope type, and land area of Pila Laguna
Population and Population Density of Pila Laguna
Comparison between interactional worldview and

transactional worldview
Waste Generation per Barangay of Pila Laguna (2013)

Computed Sample Size per Barangay
‘Summary of the respondents’ waste segregation

practices

‘Summary of the respondents’ recycling and reusing
practices

‘Summary of the respondents’ waste incineration
practices

Summary of the respondents’ waste disposal practices
Summary of the respondents’ knowledge on proper solid
waste management

Summary of the respondents’ knowledge on the negative
effect of improper solid waste management

‘Summary of the respondents’ knowledge solid waste
categories

‘Summary of the respondents’ knowledge on laws on
solid waste management

Summary of the respondents’ attitude on solid waste
management

viii

PAGE

23

24

29

46

50

55

58

62

64

66

67

69

70

72

‘Summary of the respondents’ attitude on 3Rs

‘Summary of the respondents’ attitude on incineration of
waste

‘Summary of the respondents’ attitude on waste disposal
‘Summary of the respondents’ attitude on solid waste
management

Schedule of waste collection in the municipality

Ideal solid waste management schemes based on RA
9003, acceptable, and recommended SWM schemes

PAGE

74

75

76

78

90

123

LIST OF FIGURES.

FIGURE PAGE
1 Waste Generation per Region 15
2 Portion of waste generated by the residential and 26

commercial/institutional establishment in Pila Laguna

3 Characterization of Pila's wastes 27

4 Perceived Locust of Causality 32

5 Social Factors that affects compliance with solid waste 34
management adapted from Lizaba (2010)

6 Framework of Transactional worldview proposed by 39
Altman and Rogoff (1987)

7 Conceptual Framework to promote Solid waste 42
management in Pila Laguna adapted from transactional
worldview

8 Map of Pila, Laguna including the three selected 45
barangays

9 Transect Map of Pila 84

10 Population projection and waste generation projection 87

1 Timeline of the municipality's ordinances on solid waste 102

PLATE

10

LIST OF PLATES

A Resident of Pila segregating their waste into categories

Snack wrappers rolled into beads as material for home
décor

Incinerated leaves and plastic wrappers
Piles of wastes lining municipal roads ready for collection

Trash bags, sacks, boxes and plastic bags as residential
waste facility

Unlabeled colored trash cans that lined the municipal
plaza.

Mini dump trucks (white, red, green) that collects waste
across town

Municipal solid waste hauled to the dump truck ready for
transport

Plastic shredder, vermicompost pit, and bioreactor found
in the MRF

Improper Waste Practices in the Municipality of Pila

xi

PAGE

57

61
63
85

88

89

1

93

99

LIST OF APPENDICES

APPENDICES
1 Survey Questionnaire
2 Survey Result Analysis
3 Communication Letters
4 Guide Questions for Key Informant Interview
5 Copy of Municipal Ordinances on Solid Waste
6 Leaflet on SWM from the Municipality
LIST OF APPENDIX FIGURES
FIGURE
1 Spot Map of Barangay Pansol
2 Hand drawn Map of Barangay Sta. Clara Sur

3 Spot Map of Barangay Pinagbayanan

xii

PAGE
143
152
242
248
250
275

PAGE
153
185
212

APPENDIX
TABLE

1

10

"1
12

13

15

16

17

LIST OF APPENDIX TABLES

Sociodemographic Characteristics of Respondents from
Brgy. Pansol

Segregating Practice of Respondents Brgy. Pansol

Recycling or Reusing Practice of Respondents from
Brgy. Pansol

Burning Practices of Respondents from Bray. Pansol
Waste Management of Respondents from Brgy. Pansol

Knowledge on Proper SWM of the Respondents from
Brgy. Pansol

Knowledge on the Negative Effects of Improper SWM of
the Respondents from Bray. Pansol

Knowledge on Classification of Waste of the
Respondents from Brgy. Pansol

Knowledge on RA 9003 of the Respondents from Bray.
Pansol

Knowledge on Municipal Ordinances of the
Respondents from Brgy. Pansol

Attitude on SWMof the Respondents from Bray. Pansol

Sociodemographic Characteristics of Respondents from
Broy. Sta. Clara Sur

Segregating Practice of Respondents from Brgy. Sta
Clara Sur

Recycling or Reusing Practice of Respondents from
Brgy. Sta. Clara Sur

Burning Practice of Respondents from Bray. Sta. Clara
Sur

Waste Management of Respondents from Bray. Sta
Clara Sur

Knowledge on Proper SWM of the Respondents from
Brgy. Sta. Clara Sur

xiii

PAGE

156

159
162

165
167
169

170

172

174

178

181
188

191

193

194

196

197

APPENDIX

TABLE

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

vu

32

33

Knowledge on the Negative Effects of Improper SWM of
the Respondents from Brgy. Sta. Clara Sur

Knowledge on Classification of Waste of the
Respondents from Brgy. Sta. Clara Sur

Knowledge on RA 9003 of the Respondents from Bray.
Sta. Clara Sur

Knowledge on Municipal Ordinances of the
Respondents from Brgy. Sta. Clara Sur

Attitude on SWM of the Respondents from Brgy. Sta.
Clara Sur

Sociodemographic Characteristics of Respondents from
Brgy. Pinagbayanan

Segregating Practice of Respondents from Bray.
Pinagbayanan

Recycling or Reusing Practice of Respondents from
Brgy. Pinagbayanan

Burning Practice of Respondents from Bray.
Pinagbayanan

Waste Management of Respondents from Bray.
Pinagbayanan

Knowledge on Proper SWM of the Respondents from
Brgy. Pinagbayanan

Knowledge on the Negative Effects of Improper SWM of
the Respondents from Bray. Pinagbayanan

Knowledge on Classification of Waste of the
Respondents from Brgy. Pinagbayanan

Knowledge on RA 9003 of the Respondents from Bray.
Pinagbayanan

Knowledge on Municipal Ordinances of the
Respondents from Brgy. Pinagbayanan

Attitude on SWM of the Respondents from
Pinagbayanan

xiv

PAGE

198

200

202

205

208

215

218

220

222

223

225

226

227

230

233

237

ACRONYMS

3Rs Reduce, Reuse, Recycle

AFR Africa

BHW Barangay Health Workers

BNS Barangay Nutrition Scholars

DENR-EMB — Ervronmontal Managemen Bureau nn
EAP East Asia and Pacific

ECA Easter and Central Asia Region

IEC Information, Education, and Communication

Ipc Intergovermmental Panel for Climate Change

Ki Key Informant interview

Lac Latin America and the Caribbean

Leu Local Govemment Unit

MENA Middle East and Central Asia Region

MENRO Municipal Environment and Natural Resources Office
MPDO Municipal Planning and Development Office

MRF Material Recovery Facility

OECD Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
PLOC Perceived Locust of Causality

PSA Philippine Statistics Authority

RA Republic Act

SAR South Asia Region

sw Solid Waste

swM Solid Waste Management

UNEP United Nations Environmental Programme

UN-HABITAT United Nations Human Settlement Programme
wacs Waste Analysis and Characterization System

xv

ABSTRACT

NATOZA, MA. RUSSELL ALVAREZ, University of the Philippines Los Bajios,
December 2016. A Transactional Approach for the Improvement of Solid Waste

Management: The Case of Pila, Laguna, Philippines

Major Professor: Carmelita M. Rebancos, PhD.

A transactional approach was employed to explore the underlying reasons
behind the current solid waste management practices of the municipality of Pila.
As representatives for the upland, urban, and lakeshore communities,
respondents from Pansol, Sta. Clara Sur, Pinagbayanan were surveyed. Also, a
Kil and secondary data analysis were done.

It was found that majority of the respondents declared that they practice
segregation, 3Rs, and are refraining from burning waste. However, some are still
not practicing proper management. Also, their waste disposal practices vary
Consequently, the respondents are knowledgeable on proper waste
Management and laws; and have positive attitude towards proper waste
management. Moreover, it was observed that the history of land use and solid
waste ordinances affect the respondents’ practices. The different landscapes of
Pila, its residential and municipal waste facilities, in connection with their
practices, were also identified.

Therefore, their practices can be explained through the interplay of
psychological processes, physical environment, and temporal qualities. By
understanding these relationships, strategies were formulated to aid the
municipality towards an improved solid waste management. In general,
recommendations address issues on the knowledge and attitude of the
respondents, the improvement of their physical setting, and enactment or

amendment of municipal ordinances.
xvi

CHAPTER!

INTRODUCTION

The environment, in general, serves three fundamental functions. The
environment provides resources necessary for life, is a repository of wastes, and
is a living space (Dunlap and Marshall, 2006). However, based on functional
competition, if the environment is fully used to serve a singular function, this will
then impair its ability to serve its other functions (Dunlap, 2003). Dunlap (2003)
pointed out that there exists a conflict between environment's functions
especially with waste repository and living space. Moreover, waste has a major
effect on the quality of natural resources that the environment provides. Thus, the
growing number of wastes has to be addressed in order to strike a balance
among these three main functions.

Issues on proper solid waste management arise in response to the
growing need to address accumulation of waste. Globally, waste crisis started
alongside industrial revolution when people favored instant and disposable
products (Barles, 2014). In addition, waste increased and was aggravated due to
the growing population (IPCC, 2007). According to the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (2007), in recent years, rate of waste generation have been
increasing especially in developing countries like the Philippines. This can be

attributed to the rapid population growth, economic development, and

urbanization of these countries. Based on the recent studies of Worldbank (2012,
2013), urban solid waste is projected to increase by 70% by 2025. Developing
countries are more likely to carry the burden of waste crisis unless population
growth is addressed, waste reduction efforts are initiated, and consumption
patterns are changed.

Solid waste problem poses risks on both the environment and human
health. One of the most common effects of improper waste disposal is flooding
(Djihad, 1990 as cited by Zoleta-Nantes, 2000). Waste, usually plastics, clogs
drainages and waterways which led to massive flooding especially in urban areas
(Zoleta-Nantes, 2000; UN-HABITAT, 2010; Navarro, 2014). In the Philippines,
typhoons like Sendong and Ondoy were exacerbated due to flooding caused by
trash (Legarda, 2012). Also, waste finds its way to bodies of water and leach in
the soil thus contaminating and compromising the health of both. According to
Carr and Neary (2008) dumping of municipal solid waste in lakes and rivers
ultimately lead to its eutrophication. Aside from this, open dump yards
contaminate groundwater and surface water making it unsuitable for drinking
(Rajkumar, Subramani, & Elango, 2010). Open burning leads to the emission of
carbon dioxide among others and one of the key drivers of climate change
(Weidinmyer, 2014). Furthermore, it pollutes the air, including ashes and debris,
which poses health risks once inhaled (Cuna, 2012). Moreover, landfills, through
decomposition, also emit greenhouse gases, like methane, which is one of the

major contributors to global warming (Tammemagi, 1999). In addition, improper

waste disposal can lead to health risks and loss of lives. Improper waste
disposal, such as direct dumping in waterways and rivers, causes epidemics like
the Black Death in England which took the lives of a quarter of its population
(Tammemagi, 1999). In the Philippines, the 150-feet Payatas dumpsite, due to its
unstable nature along with two incessant typhoons that year, collapsed and took
the lives of hundreds of people (Pagano, 2000; EcoWaste Coalition, 2012)
Various laws were enacted to address issues on solid waste, though not
directly, given the magnitude of its effects and contribution to climate change
(United Nations Environmental Programme, 2009). Moreover, according to
United Nations Environmental Programme (2009), the Philippines is one of the
countries that have stringent environmental laws. In the country, the Ecological
Solid Waste Management Act of 2000 or Republic Act 9003 was promulgated in
order to address these issues with solid waste. The main objectives of the law
are to provide ecological solid waste management program, to create necessary
institutional mechanisms and incentives, to declare certain prohibited acts and
provide penalties, and to appropriate fund to serve its purpose. By implementing
the law, the local government units (LGU, Local Government Code, 1991) were
also tasked to formulate their local ordinances to further strengthen the RA 9003.
Few of these are the banning of the use of plastic bags as implemented in
different municipalities and fostered with campaigns like the Bring Your Own Bag
campaign in Los Bafios Laguna (Los Bafios Municipal Ordinance No. 2008-752;

Basilio, delos Reyes, and Santos, 2016). Another common ordinances are the

prohibition of open burning of wastes as exemplified by the municipality of Pavia,
lloilo (Pavia Municipal Ordinance No. 2015 - 03) and waste segragation and
collection policies like that of Cebu City (Cebu City Ordinance No. 1361).

According Huffman and colleagues (2014), solid waste management,
specifically recycling, is one of simplest form of Environmentally Responsible
Behavior. However, despite of these laws and regulations, compliance with solid
waste management is low (Balisacan, 2013). According to Lizaba (2012), one
important factor that affects compliance is the social aspect aside from the
physical characteristics of the area, administrative, and economic aspect. RA
9003 specifically mentioned that waste generators have to be encouraged to
cooperate in the solid waste management program and self-regulate their solid
waste management practices. Nonetheless, in order to attain compliance, it
indeed entails actual behavior change (Hass, 2015). Moreover, prior to behavior
change is understanding individuals and reason behind their current actions
(Communication for Governance & Accountability Program, n.d.).

One of the promising approaches to explain human behavior, in this case
‘solid waste management, is by understanding behavior's relationship with the
environment through the transactional worldview (Altman and Rogoff, 1987).
According to Altman and Rogoff (1987), transactional world view is a
Psychological world view which tries to describe and understand patterns in an
event or behavior by analyzing its aspects as holistic entities or as a whole.

These aspects include the people, their psychological processes, the physical

environment, and temporal qualities. Based on the study of Werner (2003), the
transactional world view was employed in order to formulate behavior change

programs.

Statement of the Problem

Pila or Pailah Laguna is one of the oldest civilizations in the Philippines.
Its rich history dates back during the Tang Dynasty in 900 A.D. Historically
significant artifacts were unearthed in one of its barangays. With these, the
municipality was recognized as a National Historical Landmark in 2000.
Moreover, in 2002, the San Antonio de Padua Parish Church of Pila, the first
Antonine Church in the Philippines, was proclaimed by the Roman Catholic of
San Pablo as a Diocesan Shrine of St. Anthony. Pila is the only town in the
country which is recognized by the church and the state as a historical site
(Santiago,1997).

Aside from being a historical site, it is also one of the municipalities that
prominently line Laguna de Bay. Based on the accounts of elders, there was a
time that the municipality became totally submerged in water due to weather
calamity. This incident made the Spanish colonization of Pila difficult, thus, the
town was called Bayang Pinagpala (Santiago, 1997)

Currently, Pila is classified as a third class municipality (Pila Laguna

Municipal Profile, 2007). Third class municipalities are those that have average

total revenue of 35 million or more but less than 45 million pesos per annum
(Department of Finance, 2008 as cited by the Philippines Statistics Authority,
n.d.). In spite of being one of the laggard municipalities of Laguna, Pila is
experiencing a trend in residential development since 2002 thus increasing the
population to approximately forty-eight thousand. Moreover, the Philippines’
urbanization trend is taking a southward move towards CALABARZON Region
which includes Laguna (Asian Development Bank, 2014).

Increase in population of Pila would also mean an increase in the number
of waste generated. Currently, Pila is considered a rural municipality which
generates an estimated 0.4 kilograms of waste per capita per day. However, the
increase in population and establishments, or urbanization, in the area could lead
to the increase of waste generation of 1.1 kilograms per day (Worldbank as cited
by Del Barrio, 2015). It is imperative that the municipality address their current
waste problem especially that the municipality is a flood prone area. The LGU of
Pila, in compliance with RA 9003, already has a ten-year Solid Waste
Management Plan as well as ordinances to support the law. However, difficulty is
experienced in the implementation of the law. One of the reasons is that the
people are not fully complying with the ordinances, as iterated by the LGU.
Based on the study of Lizaba (2010), Barangay-level compliance of Pila Laguna
is low. However, underlying reasons for this non-compliance is not yet well

explored. Understanding the reasons behind the constituents’ current solid waste

management practices is necessary for the formulation of an effective solid

waste management program tailor-fitted for the municipality of Pila.

Research Questions

Promoting an effective solid waste management in Pila Laguna was
attained by understanding the underlying reasons for the current solid waste
management practices of its constituents. This was guided by the following
research questions:

1. What is the current solid waste management practices of Pila

constituents?

2. What is the current Knowledge, Attitude, and Perception of Pila

constituents regarding solid waste and its management?

3. What are the available solid management facilities in Pila Laguna?

4. How does the landscape (upland, poblacion, and lakeshore) of Pila

Laguna differ from one another?
5. Whats the history of Pila Laguna?

6. What is the history of the solid waste management of Pila Laguna?

Objectives of the Study

The study aimed to promote effective Solid Waste Management in Pila,
Laguna. Specifically, it aimed to:
1. Describe their current solid waste management practices;
2. Understand the underlying reasons for the constituents’ current solid
waste management practices through transactional analysis by:
a. Identifying their knowledge and attitude toward solid waste and
its management;
b. Describing individual's physical setting; and
c. Identifying the temporal qualities that affects solid waste
management

3. Formulate strategies to further improve Solid Waste Management in

the municipality.

Significance of the Study

At present, environmental degradation is a global crisis. Seeing the
magnitude of its impacts, policy makers are adamant in creating laws and policy
that can at least protect and conserve what is left of the environment. One of the
biggest contributors on its degradation is the increase and improper waste
disposal. To address this, the Philippines enacted R.A. 9003. However, in all
phases of a project or law, the social aspect is almost always neglected. In Pila,
Laguna, LGU is currently implementing solid waste management schemes
including banning the use of plastics and prohibiting open burning. However,
barangay-level compliance is still considered low (Lizaba, 2012).

The study focuses on the social aspect of solid waste management by
understanding underlying reasons for the current solid waste management
Practices and root causes of non-compliance. The study also tests the use of
transactional approach, which views events and behavior holistically, to identify
and understand patterns on solid waste management behavior. Several studies
have been done to identify the knowledge, attitude, and practices of people
fegarding solid waste management. However, this study would like to
comprehensively describe and understand the solid waste management
Practices of Pila constituents.

After identifying patterns and understanding the current solid waste

management practices with the guidance of transactional worldview, the study

10

aims to formulate effective solid waste management strategies tailor-fitted for
Pila, Laguna. Also, the study can aid policy makers and the local government of
Pila to identify gaps that hinder compliance on solid waste management as well
as strategize ways on how to increase it.

The study contributes to the existing researches on solid waste and its
management focusing on social understanding. Also, the study adds to
researches in the field of Environmental Psychology through the use of

transactional approach.

Scope and Limitation of the Study

The locale of the study was solely Pila, Laguna considering its three
distinct landscapes - the upland area, urban area, and coastal area. Dividing the
barangays into different landscapes aided in the description and comparison of
the different waste management practices performed in the areas.
Representative barangay from each landscapes was selected based on their
waste generation. Thus, the barangay that generates the most wastes per
landscape was studied. These are Pansol (upland), Sta. Clara Sur (urban), and
Pinagbayanan (coastal). Residents of each barangay were conveniently
sampled.

The study made use of transactional approach to identify and understand

patterns on their solid waste management schemes. However, instead of

aa)

‘studying all of the aspects of transactional worldview, the study only focused on
the respondents’ current solid waste management practices, specifically on
waste segregation, recycling and reusing, burning of waste, and disposal; their
psychological processes, including their knowledge and attitude towards solid
waste management; the physical settings; such as the different landscapes,
residential, and municipal waste facilities; and Pila’s historical background i.e.
history of land use and previous ordinances on solid waste. This was done
through surveys, key informant interviews, and use of secondary data.

Findings employed qualitative analysis through the identification of
patterns on behavior and narratives. The study only used minimal statistical
measures (e.g. frequency count and percentages) to facilitate discussion.
Moreover, the study was only limited to formulating strategies on solid waste
management based on the findings from the transactional analysis.
Implementation of suggested strategies to promote solid waste management was

not be covered by the study.

CHAPTER Il

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

Solid Waste

History and Definition

Major issues on solid waste may have arose only during the Industrial
Revolution, however problems on waste can be traced back to the prehistoric
days (Barles, 2014). Moreover, description of waste changes along with time.
During the Pre-historic era, waste includes bones, seeds, fruit peels, and the like
when humans are still considered nomads. When humans began to settle, waste
turn into scrap cotton cloths, pieces of woods, broken pots, and ashes. While
from 5000 A.D. to 12000 A.D., metal pieces, plastics, chemicals, and infectious
substances are also considered as wastes. From 12000 A.D. to present, waste
then includes radioactive substances, hazardous substances, junk electronic
equipment aside from the previously mentioned materials (Chandrappa, R. &
Das, D.B., 2012)

Solid waste is defined differently, but generally, it is anything that is
unwanted or damaged thus easily discarded (Cambridge English Dictionary,

Oxford Dictionary). Also, it is something which is cheaper to throw away than to

13

store or reuse. Waste is synonymous to scrap, junk, garbage, or rubbish
(Merriam-Webster Dictionary). According to Hoornweg and Bhada-Tata (2012),
wastes are mere “by-products of a consumer-based lifestyle that generally drive

the world economy”.

Factors Affecting Solid Waste Generation

There are several factors that affects the amount and characteristics of
waste found in a certain area. One of which, according to Hoornweg and Bhada-
Tata (2012), is urbanization and income. According to Worldbank (as cited by Del
Barrio, 2015), higher income residents generates waste of 1.1 to 5 kilograms of
waste per capita per day as compared to lower income residents with 0.4 to 0.6
kilograms of waste per capita per day. Higher income residents usually have the
habit of use-and-throw while those who belong in the lower income commonly
use-and re-use. Other factors include population growth, increase in the number
of manufacturing industries, and technological advancement and modernization.

A growth in population would also mean an increase in solid waste since
it is inevitable that everyone creates waste (Dahiya, 2015). According to
Worldbank (2013), solid waste generated will triple in 2100 along with the global
urban population. Increase with the number of manufacturing industries will also
contribute to the amount and characteristics of waste created. This is coupled

with the quality of goods produced and the efficiency of process being utilized.

14

Furthermore, the more technologically advance or industrialized a country is, the
more waste it produces (Hoornweg, Bhada-Tata, & Kennedy, 2013). It also give
rise to new form of waste like the electronic waste or e-waste (Gaidajis,

Angelakoglou, & Aktsoglou, 2010).

Municipal Solid Waste Generation

Solid waste is commonly divided into four categories. These are
municipal, industrial, agricultural and animal waste, and hazardous wastes.
Municipal solid waste includes waste from residential, commercial and
institutional areas, construction and demolition, and those that are from municipal
services. At times, agricultural waste may be included depending of the nature of
the municipality. According to US Environmental Policy Administration (2008 as
cited by Chandrappa & Das, 2012), municipal solid wastes are usually buried,
burned, recycled, or composted. Composition of municipal solid waste varies due
to several factors. These factors include patterns of lifestyle, seasonal variations,
income of the municipality, as well as the commercial establishments present in
the area.

Currently, global solid waste generation levels are at approximately 1.3
Billion tons per year. As shown in Figure 1, almost half or approximately 44% of
these global wastes is generated by the Organization for Economic Co-operation

and Development (OECD) Region including the United States of America,

15

Canada, Australia, etc. This is then followed by the East Asia and the Pacific
(EAP) Region, including the Philippines, with 22%. However, bulk of the waste
from EAP is generated by China. Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC)
contributes 12% of waste, Eastern and Central Asia Region, 7%, and Middle
East and North Africa Region (MENA), 6%. The least generators of waste are
from Africa (AFR) and South Asia Region (SAR), both contributing 5% each
(Hoornweg & Bhada-Tata, 2012).

A

Figure 1. Waste generation per region.
(Source: Hoomweg & Bahada-Tata, 2012)

m OECD
EAP

mLAC

mECA

m@ MENA

mSAR

m AFR


16

Waste generation level is expected to double to 2.2 Billion tons per year
by the year 2025 and will triple by the year 2100 (Worldbank, 2012). As
projected, In 2000, waste generation level per day will reach 11 million tons

(Worldbank, 2013).

State of the Philippine Solid Waste Management

The Philippines is no exception from other developing countries which,
from the past decade until present, are experiencing major problems in terms of
their waste management. The country’s rapid population growth, urbanization,
and modernization are all significantly contributing to the increase of waste
generated and are exacerbating the issues on its management. According to
Atienza (2011), the Philippine solid waste generation rate ranges between 0.30
and 0.70 kg per capita per day for rural and urban. Based on 2012 data (Ng,
2012), the country is producing 29,315 tons of municipal solid waste and it is
expected to triple by the year 2025 due to projected population growth

(Hoornweg & Bhada-Tata, 2012).

Ecological Solid Waste Management Act of 2000

In response to the growing need to address the country’s solid wastes, the
Ecological Solid Waste Management Act of 2000 or R.A. 9003 was enacted in
January 26, 2001. R.A. 9003 emphasizes the importance of the three aspects of

solid waste management — technical, administrative, and social aspect. The main

objectives of the laws are the following (DENR-EMB):

a

b.

Ensure the protection of public health and environment;

Utilize environmentally-sound methods that maximize the
utilization of valuable resources and encourage resources
conservation and recovery;

Set guidelines and targets for solid waste avoidance and volume
reduction through source reduction and waste minimization
measures, including composing, recycling, re-use, recovery, green
charcoal process, and others, before collection, treatment and
disposal in appropriate and environmentally sound solid waste
management facilities in accordance with ecologically sustainable
development principles;

Ensure the proper segregation, collection, transport, storage,
treatment and disposal of solid waste through the formulation and
adoption of the best environmental practices in ecological waste
management excluding incineration;

Promote national research and development programs for

improved solid waste management and resource conservation

18

techniques, more effective institutional arrangement and
indigenous and improved methods of waste reduction, collection,
separation and recovery;

f. Encourage greater private sector participation in solid waste
management;

g. Retain primary enforcement and responsibility of solid waste
management with local government units while establishing a
cooperative effort among the national government, other local
government units, non-government organizations, and the private
sector;

h. Encourage cooperation and self-regulation among waste

generators through the application of market-based instruments;

Institutionalize public participation in the development and
implementation of national and local integrated, comprehensive
and ecological waste management programs; and
j. Strengthen the integration of ecological solid waste management
and resource conservation and recovery topics into the academic
curricula of formal and non-formal education in order to promote
environmental awareness and action among the citizenry.

According to Atienza (2011), RA 9003 is indeed a stringent and
comprehensive act in addressing solid waste management in the country,
however weak compliance with the law is still evident. Failure of the previous
laws enacted before R.A. 9003 to fully address the solid waste management

issues of the country may be attributed to several reasons. One of which is the

19

lack of cooperation of the community and various stakeholders due to the
command-and-control nature of the law. Another factor is the lack of political will

of the officials (Atienza, 2011).

Solid Waste Management Researches in the Philippines

Several studies have been done in order to understand the interplay of
factors that are currently affecting the solid waste management of the
Philippines. These include the scrutiny of social factors and_ institutional
arrangements in relation to solid waste management.

The study of Ancog, Archival, and Rebancos (2012), for example, looked
into the efforts of Cebu City, one of the highly urbanized city in the country, in
addressing their municipal solid wastes. It analyzes the three aspects of an
institutional arrangement - the legal, regulatory, and financing mechanisms.
Analyses were done through intensive review of secondary data as well as KIl
interviews of pertinent individuals. The study found, based on the experience of
Cebu City, the success of solid waste management programs rely heavily on
community involvement and is fostered with rigid enforcement schemes.

On the other hand, the study of Tatlong-hari and Jamias (2010), looked
into the Knowledge, Attitudes, and Practices on solid waste management. The
study was conducted in Sta. Rosa Laguna, one of the urbanizing towns near

Metro Manila. Result of the aforementioned research can be used in developing

20

extension campaigns strategies to better promote solid waste management in the
area. Moreover, the study's goal is to aid campaign planners in designing
message content, channels and feedback. It was discovered that knowledge
levels on solid waste management in the municipality is high, thus messages
should focus more on sustaining motivation to practice effective solid waste
management.

Similarly, the study of Del Mundo, Rebancos, and Alaira (2009), explored
the socio-economic status, environmental awareness, knowledge, and
perception of the residents of Barangays Talisay and Balibago, Calatagan
Batangas and its correlation to their Solid Waste Management Practices. Based
on the result of the study, the respondents have high environmental knowledge
but have low awareness on the ordinances and laws on proper solid waste
management. These then are the reasons why the residents continue to do
open-burning and open-dumping of garbage. In general, it was found that socio-
economic status and environmental awareness is negatively correlated to solid
waste management practices while environmental knowledge and perception is
Positively correlated with solid waste management practices. With these results,
it can aid the local government of Calatagan in the improvement of their Solid

Waste Management Plan and Coastal Resource Management Plan.

21

Pila, Laguna Muni

History of the Municipality

The rich history of Pila or Pailah dates back before 1000 A.D. as proven
by archeologists who found ancient potteries, artifacts, and horse bones from the
Tang Dynasty. The municipality, with its ancient culture and trade, was deemed
as a National Historical Landmark since the year 2000 thus, Pila is named as La
Noble Villa de Pila.

Moreover, in 2002, the San Antonio de Padua Parish Church of Pila, the
first Antonine Church in the Philippines, was proclaimed by the Roman Catholic
of San Pablo as a Diocesan Shrine of St. Anthony. According to Dr. Luciano
Santiago (1997) — a Philippine historian, Pila is the only town in the country which
is recognized by both the church and the state as a historical site.

Pila is known by its many names. Even before the Spanish colonization,
the municipality is known as Pagalangan or The Place of Reverence. During the
Spanish colonization, Franciscan missionaries named the municipality Villa de
Pila due to the anthills that lined the site that they visited. However, the
colonization of Pila was made difficult because, according to the elders, the
municipality was once submerged in flood water thus, Pila was called by the

locals as Bayang Pinagpala. |n addition, after the war, several old houses and

22

the church of Pila was spared from destruction during the Spanish and Japanese

occupation (Pila Laguna Municipal Profile, n.d.).

Physical Description

Belonging in the fourth district of Laguna, Pila lies along the 121 degrees
latitude and 14 degrees latitude approximately 85 kilometers south of Manila.
The municipality is bounded by the Laguna de Bay on the north, the municipality
of Victoria on the west, Liliw on the south, and Sta. Cruz on the east. The
municipality's 3,120 hectares of land is divided into 17 barangays (Table 1).
Generally, Pila has a dominantly level or nearly level topography in terms of it
slope. Its slopes ranges from 2.5 % to 5% with the lowest areas situated in the
coastal barangays and the highest elevation found at the barangays nearing the

municipality of Liliw.

Socio-Economic Description

In terms of land area (Table 1), Barangay Concepcion (439.90 ha) has the
biggest land area. However, based on population, Pinagbayanan is the most
Populated. Indeed, population of the municipality is concentrated in the poblacion
and rural lakeshore barangays (Table 2). Two of the most populated barangays

Of Pila is situated along the coast of Laguna de Bay - Pinagbayanan (5,562) and

23

Labuin (4,810) while one of the poblacion barangay also made it to the top 3
populated barangays - Sta. Clara Sur (5,507). In terms of population density,
Bulilan Sur has the highest density of 50 persons per hectare in 2013.
Furthermore, population of Pila is expected to increase in the coming years given

the trend from 2007 to 2013 (Table 2).

Table 1. Jurisdiction, slope type, and land area of Pila, Laguna.

BARANGAY —- BARANGAY SLOPE TYPE reer
Aplaya tural lakeshore gently sloping/ undulating 86.20

Bagong Pook tural lakeshore gently sloping/ undulating 220.80
Bukal tural upland gently sloping/ undulating 114.60
Bulilan Norte urban/poblacion gently sloping/ undulating 92. 30
Bulilan Sur urban/poblacion gently sloping/ undulating 68.50

Concepcion rural upland gently sloping/ undulating 439.90
Labuin tural lakeshore gently sloping/ undulating 126.25
Linga tural lakeshore gently sloping/ undulating 168.60
Masico rural upland level to nearly level 107.90
Mojon tural upland gently sloping/ undulating 316.90
Pansol rural upland gently sloping/ undulating 296.50
Pinagbayanan —_—rurallakeshore —_ gently sloping/ undulating 131.50
San Antonio rural upland gently sloping/ undulating 230.90
San Miguel rural upland level to nearly level 195.50

StaClara Sur ——_urban/poblacion _gently sloping/ undulating 120.80
Sta. Clara Norte urban/poblacion gently sloping/ undulating 66.60
Tubuan (Tanza) _rurallakeshore __gently sloping/ undulating _ 347.25

TOTAL 3,120.25
Source: Pila Laguna Municipal Solid Waste Management Plan, 2013


24

Table 2. Population and Population Density (2007, 2010, and 2013) of Pila
Laguna.

LAND 2007 2010 2013

BARANGAY AREA Pop. Density Pop. Density Pop. Density

Rural Lakeshore

Aplaya 86.20 3253 37.74 «3114 36.13 3265 «37.88
Bagong Pook 220.80 2752 12.46 3165 14.33 3319 15.03
Labuin 126.50 3767 «29.70 4587 36.26 4810 38.02
Linga 168.60 3542 21.01 3372 20.00 3536 20.97

Pinagbayanan 131.50 5011 38.11 5305 40.34 5562 42.30
Tubuan (Tanza) 347.25 1933 5.57 2153 6.20 2258 6.50
Urban/Poblacion

Bulilan Norte 92.30 2112 22.88 2194 23.77 2301 24.95
Bulilan Sur 68.50 3271 47.70 3273 47.75 3432 50.10
Sta Clara Norte 66.60 2491 37.97 2424 36.95 2542 38.75
Sta. Clara Sur 120.80 5691 47.11 5253 43.49 5507 45.59

Rural Upland

Bukal 114.60 591 5.16 630 5.50 661 5.77
Concepcion 439.90 931 2.12 1114 2.53 1168 «2.66
Masico 107.90 1194 18.48 2250 20.85 2359 21.86
Mojon 316.90 714 2.25 1051 3.32 1102 3.48
Pansol 296.50 1993 6.96 2444 «6.53 2563 8.95
San Antonio 230.90 3315 14.36 3024 1310 3171 13.73
‘San Miguel 195.50 866 4.43 1181 6.04 1238 6.50
TOTAL 3,120.25 44,227 46,534 48,794

Source: Pila Laguna Municipal Solid Waste Management Plan, 2013

Pila is one of the municipalities of Laguna which is currently, though
slowly, in the process of urbanization. The once rural town of Pila is experiencing
urban sprawl through the increase in residential trend in the form of private
subdivisions since 2002. Twenty-one subdivisions were created in 2002 alone

and based on the current data of Pila, in 2007, this increased to 27. Currently,

25

there are four barangays considered as urban zones while the remaining thirteen
are considered rural barangays divided into lakeshore and upland community
(Table 2).

The increase in private subdivisions signifies an increase in the population
of Pila. Population of the municipality is approximately 49,000 in 2013 and will
eventually increase with 2.4% growth rate. Moreover, the municipality may be
considered as a developing one however the poverty incidence in Pila (8.4) is
relatively low as compared to its surrounding towns. Also, the poverty gap is high
with 2.26 as compared with neighboring municipalities (Philippine Statistics
Authority, 2014). This means that some constituents of Pila might belong to
higher income residents.

As a third class municipality, majority of Pila’s income comes from the
agriculture sector. Several commercial establishments can also be found
especially in the poblacion. Furthermore, small scale, cottage-level, and
household-based industries are additional sources of employment for the
municipality's population. Based on the report of Baticados, Natoza, and Sotto
(2015), Pila is one of the agricultural communities of Laguna and is heavily

dependent on rice farming and backyard poultry and hog raising.

Solid Waste Generation

The Municipality's generated waste averages to about 23,168.64
kilograms per day (Pila Laguna Municipal Solid Waste Management Plan, 2013).
Approximately 53% (12,261 kgs/day) of these wastes are residentially generated
while 47.08% (10,907 kgs/day) come from commercial and _ institutional
establishments. Most of these establishments are composed of the 21 local
schools situated in the area. Figure 2 illustrates the waste of Pila in terms of

generators.

= Residential Waste

Commercial and
Institutional Waste

Figure 2. Portion of waste generated by the residential and commercial
institutional establishment in Pila Laguna.
(Source: Pila Laguna Municipal Solid Waste Management Plan, 2013)

27

Based on the Waste Analysis and Characterization System (WACS)
conducted in 2013, more than half of Pila’s wastes are biodegradable (53% or
12, 335 kgs/day). The remaining 47% is divided to recyclables (22.25% or 5,155
kgs/day) and residual wastes (22.82% or 5,287 kgs/day). Residual wastes
characterized were composed of sando bags, thin films, Polypropylene (candy,
biscuits, and food wrappers), and metallic foils. Moreover, a small portion of
waste is considered as special waste (1.68% or 389 kgs/day) and may be
attributed to the absence of hospitals in the municipality except for Barangay

health centers. Figure 3 shows the waste characterization of the municipality.

™ Biodegradable
Recylables

mResidual
Special Waste

Figure 3, Characterization of Pila's solid wastes.
(Source: Pila Laguna Municipal Solid Waste Management Plan, 2013)

28

In accordance with the RA 9003, the local government of Pila created
ordinances to address issues on its municipal solid waste. As early as 2009, the
LGU is regulating the use of plastics bags. Moreover, in 2014, Pila approved the
ordinance that prohibits outdoor or open burning of wastes. Also, the municipality
of Pila finished their full-blown 10- year solid waste management plan in 2013
and was submitted to the National Solid Waste Management Commission. In
2014, the plan was finally approved and is currently being implemented.

Based on the study of Lizaba (2010), overall compliance of Pila with R.A.
9003 is within the average level. However, in terms of its Barangay level
Compliance Assessment, which focuses more on the social level, the

municipality's average compliance is indeed low.

Transactional Worldview

Overview on Transactional Worldview

Altman and Rogoff (1897 as cited by Werner, Brown, and Altman, 2006)
believed that psychological worldview is a promising psychological approach to
study a phenomena or behavior. Transactional world view functions with three
basic assumptions. First, this world view perceives a phenomenon; with people,

Psychological processes, physical setting, and temporal qualities as a

29

component; holistically and simultaneously. Second assumption, is the view that
time and temporal qualities actually affect a phenomena or behavior and not as a
separate entity. Lastly, transactional world view is employed to investigate
patterns, shapes, and forms of a phenomenon to better describe and understand
it. Table 3 summarizes the comparison between the usual interactional
worldview, wherein a phenomenon

is studied through cause-and-effect

relationship, and the transactional world view (Altman & Rogoff, 1987 as cited by

Rogoff, 2016)

Table 3. Comparison between interactional worldview and transactional
worldview.
INTERACTIONAL TRANSACTIONAL
WORLDVIEW WORLDVIEW
“psychological qualities of “holistic entities composed
Unit of person and social or of ‘aspects’, not separate
Analysis physical environment parts or elements; aspects
treated as separate are mutually defining; tem-
underlying entities, with poral qualities are intrinsic
interaction between parts.” features of wholes.”
“change results from
interaction of separate “stability/change are intrinsic
person and environment and defining features of
entities; change sometimes — psychological phenomena;
Time and occurs in accord with change occurs continuously;
Change —_underlying regulatory directions of change [are]

mechanisms, e.g.,
homeostasis; time and
change [are] not intrinsic to
phenomena.”

emergent and not pre-
established.”


Table 3 continued.

30

INTERACTIONAL, TRANSACTIONAL
WORLDVIEW WORLDVIEW
“emphasizes efficient “emphasizes formal causes,
causes, i.e., antecedent- i.e., description and
Causation consequent understanding of patterns,
relations, ‘push’ ideas of shapes, and forms of
causation.” phenomena.”
“describe and understand
“seek laws of relations patterning and form of
between variables and parts of events; [there is] openness
Aim of chara benasheled syste, bY to seeking general princi-
investigation Prediction and contro! and by ples, but primary interest [is]

cumulating additive information
about relations between
elements.”

in accounting for event;. .
prediction [is] acceptable
but not necessary.”

Source: Altman and Rogoff, 1987 as cited by Rogoff, 2016

Accordingly, the four aspects of the transactional worldview - people,
Psychological processes, physical setting, and temporal qualities - are all
interconnected (Werner, Brown, and Altman, 2002). Moreover, they all have a
mutual relationship and are inseparable from one another. The extent of these
aspects and what is required to be studied depends on the phenomena or event.
When considering these aspects, there are wide and complex array of factors
that can be included in the study. Succeeding discussion look into the possible
factors that could be included in the study of aspects under the transactional

analysis.

31

Aspects of Transactional Worldview

A. Social Milieu

According to the study of Huffman et a/. (2014), social influence plays a
significant role in the prediction of environmentally responsible behavior.
However, this factor only encourages external Perceived Locust of Causality
(PLOC) thus affecting self-reported behavior. People having an external PLOC
are usually motivated by the desire to appear socially responsible, caused by
social influence, thus encouraging them to self-report such behavior. Based on
the result of the study, there is indeed a strong relationship between social
influence and self-reported environmentally responsible behavior. Those with

higher social influence are more likely to acknowledge self-reported behavior.

B. Psychological Processes

Climate change is indeed one of the pressing issues that need to be
addressed immediately. According to Green and Schafer (2003), in order to
further reduce the global GHG emission, behavioral measures need to be taken
into account. Moreover, according to Oskamp (2002 as cited by Bonnes &
Bonaiuto, 2002), immediate change in lifestyle and cultural practices is

imperative to reduce the degradation of the environment.

32

According to Huffman et a/. (2014), individual action can create impacts on
a larger environmental problem. Thus, it is important to understand what
motivates an individual to do certain action or behavior. Based on the Self-
determination Theory, motivated behavior lies in a continuum of intentional
regulation called the (PLOC as shown in Figure 4). This continuum ranges from
autonomous to controlled wherein autonomously motivated behavior is

considered as long-term and persistent.

ES

V

Extrinsic Motivation ( varying degree of
self- determination)

[Binutasedst|

Figure 4. Perceived Locust of Causality.

The study of Huffman et a/. (2014) which centered on predicting recycling
behavior put emphasis on PLOC. PLOC is divided into two parts namely: the

intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. It has five constructs, four of which belongs in

33

the extrinsic motivation (Figure 4). Huffman et al. (2014) explained PLOC by

relating it to recycling behavior. The following are the five constructs:

a.

b.

Intrinsic Motivation — people recycle because they enjoy doing it
Integrated Regulation — people recycle because it aligns with their
belief system

Identified Regulation — people recycle because they wanted to achieve
a goal

Introjected regulation — people recycle because they don't want to feel
guilty or ashamed

External Regulation ~ people recycle because they don't want to be

penalized through laws and policies

Usually, compliance with environmental laws follows external regulation.

This may be the reason why their behaviors do not last long. As aforementioned

studies emphasize, there is a need to improve people's behavior and be

intrinsically motivated.

According to Lizaba (2010), social factors that affects compliance with

solid waste management is shown in Figure 5. Social diversity includes culture,

level of education, and income class. Lizaba (2010) mentioned that these social

diversity influences a person's behavior specifically discipline and environmental

apathy. These factors then affect cooperation

34

Figure 5. Social Factors that affects compliance with solid
waste management adapted from Lizaba (2010).

In contrast with social influence, the personal world view of a person
affects more than just their self-reported behavior. World view, specifically
anthropocentrism or the view that humans are the most important part of the
environment, is more related with observed or actual environmentally responsible
behavior. This is because world view is rooted in a deeper belief system which

represents intrinsically motivated PLOC.

C. Physical Environment

Several studies use place attachment to predict environmentally
responsible behavior. However, most of these studies are concentrated on
recreational areas like the study of Eder and Arnberger (2012) wherein they
studied the influence of place attachment on the depreciative behavior of an

urban national park. Local studies also used the concept of sense of place for the

35

relocation or evacuation of hazard-prone community (Lamug, Crittenden, &
Nelson, 1999). Sense of place is subdivided into three concepts — place identity,
place attachment, and place dependence. Place identity, according to Jorgensen
and Steadman (2001), is a cognitive relationship between a person and the
environment, for instance, a person's role in the community. Place attachment,
according to William and Vaske (2013, as cited by Eder & Arnberger, 2012), is an
affective bond between people and a specific place. Lastly, place dependence,
according to Schumaker (1981 as cited by Jorgensen & Steadman, 2001), is a
conative bond of people, as occupants, with the environment to achieve a certain
goal. People with higher sense of place are more likely to exhibit greater
environmental concern. Moreover, they are likely supporting government efforts

and practicing environmentally responsible behavior.

Application of transactional worldview

Though transactional worldview is a promising approach to understand a
phenomenon, especially through its holistic view on things. Wemer, Brown, and
Altman (2002) mentioned that a researcher cannot in fact exhaust everything in a
transactional study. Depending on the project or research, it may be possible that
only a specific feature or features of the transactional worldview will be
highlighted. At times it is indeed necessary to limit the scope or aspects of the

Study to be able to achieve a sound result or conclusion (Werner, Brown, &

36

Altman, 2002). Moreover, a transactional research project does not always
require the use of participants, psychological processes, places, time and depth
At some level, all these aspects have to be included though not emphasized
(Wemer, Brown, & Altman, 2002).

Various environmental psychologists make use of transactional approach
to study phenomena like courtship and marriage (Altman et a/., 1992 as cited by
Werner, Brown, & Altman, 2002), the Christmas Street (Altman et a/., 1987), or
the use of front porches.

Altman et al. (1987), using the transactional approach, studied the
Christmas Street in the United States where the neighborhood maintains a 40-
year old tradition of decorating the entire street for the Christmas celebration.
The study found that the people that interact often with their neighbors are more
likely to have the most appealing Christmas decorations. Moreover, these people
are also the ones who have a positive attitude towards the tradition. This study
illustrates the conformity of the participants, their psychological processes, their
social context, and the physical environment. The researchers, during the
conduct of the study, used multiple methodological instruments and procedure to
better apply the transactional approach. They made use of ocular observations
and extensive questionnaires as well as photographs to analyze and understand
the Christmas Street tradition.

Contrary with the Christmas Street study, which uses the four aspects of

transactional worldview, the study on front porches by Brown, Burton, and

7

Sweaney (1998 as cited by Wemer, Brown, & Altman, 2002) focused only on the
psychological processes and social actors involved in the use of porches. The
study discovered that the porches encouraged friendly interactions among
neighbors which use their front porch as well as interactions with the passersby.
Moreover, the front porches serve different purposes depending on the users. It
became a private area for some, an area for socialization, a place to appreciate
nature, and a place to do various leisurely activities. The research is indeed an
example of a study using a transactional analysis by limiting the aspects
involved

Another study attempted to change environmental behaviors through the
use of transactional approach (Werner, Brown, & Altman, 2002). Transactional
worldview guided the project in creating a program called “No More Chemical
Dependent Homes’ which discourages homeowners from using toxic household
products (Werner & Adams, 2001). The project view homes as a holistic entity
composed of people, setting, time, and psychological process. Therefore, the
locale of the study is situated in the individual homes of the respondents.
Moreover, the study assumes that the attitude of an individual is influenced by
their social group thus the program made use of group discussions in order to
elicit behavior change. Another assumption of the study is that behaviors are
related to an individual physical environment. Hence, persuasive messages were
formulated in order to emphasize positive phenomenal experiences related with

subscribing to non-toxic household products. Time and temporal qualities also

38

guided the study by developing a program that would encourage a long-term
effect (Wemer, 2002). This study also made use of various strategies to collect
pertinent information (Wemer, Brown, & Altman, 2002). Focus group discussions
were initiated as well as preliminary presentation and key participants interview,
and were supplemented with questionnaires and interviews. With this, the
program is considered open-ended and evolving until its final form (Werner,
Brown, & Altman, 2002).

Werner, Brown, and Altman (2002) preferred the use of a transactional
worldview due to myriad reasons and advantages. First, transactional worldview
expands an individual’s understanding of the complexity of phenomena. Second,
the researchers believed that the application of this worldview is not only limited
to psychologists but is also of use to a non-psychologist audience like architects
and planners. Thus, they “find it useful to describe and understand complexities
of everyday experiences”. Third, certain problems and phenomena require
holistic analyses. According to Werner (1990 as cited by Werner, Brown, &
Altman, 2002), in order to create a long-term impact, the use of holistic and
multilevel intervention is imperative. Lastly, there are considerable untapped
potential in the transactional worldview. Consequently, the researchers are
hoping that through their researches, it may encourage other scholars from
different disciplines to think, discuss, and create researches along these lines

(Altman et a/., 1987).

39
Theoretical Framework

Transactional approach formulated by Altman and Rogoff (1987) is the

framework of this study. Transactional worldview is composed of several aspects

(Figure 6). These aspects are to be scrutinized and understood simultaneously

and holistically in order to better explain a behavior or an event.

TEMPORAL QUALITIES

PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT

PSYCHOLOGICAL PROCE:
PEOPLE
BEHAVIOR/

EVENT

Figure 6. Framework of Transactional worldview
adapted from Altman and Rogoff (1987).

40

The aspects of transactional worldview are as follows:

People - composed of social participants and social milieu. Social
Participants are people whose actions and mental processes are the
primary target of the study while social milieu are people around the
participants who have relevance to them.

Psychological Processes - complex array of human actions, emotional
and affective experiences, cognitions, and the enactment of and
response to social and cultural rules, norms, and so on.

Physical Environment - complex and can involve a wide variety of levels
of scale, from objects in a home, to rooms, the home itself, the
neighborhood, city, and beyond.

Temporal Qualities - understand different phases of phenomena and how

they unfold; includes time as part of the phenomena.

44

Conceptual Framework

In order to understand the underlying reasons for the current solid waste
management practices of Pila Laguna constituents, the study uses a framework
adapted from transactional worldview approach (Figure 7). Possible causes of
their current solid waste management scheme was explored by describing and
establishing patterns through scrutiny of the social participants their
psychological processes, the physical environment, and temporal qualities
involved. Findings facilitated formulation of strategies tailor-fitted for Pila Laguna

constituents in order to better promote solid waste management.

42

Figure 7. Conceptual Framework to promote Solid waste management
in Pila Laguna.
(Source: Modified Transactional worldview from Altman and Rogoff, 1987)

43

For the purpose of this study, the aspects were limited to and focused only
‘on the following:

Psychological Processes — include the knowledge and attitude on solid
waste and solid waste management.

Physical Environment - include the distinct landscape of Pila Laguna
(upland, urban, and coastal), the residential waste facilities of the
respondents, community waste facilities and establishments, as
well as law and ordinances encompassing solid waste
management of the municipality.

Temporal Qualities - considered the history of Pila’s land use, and the

history of solid waste management through past local ordinances.

CHAPTER Ill

METHODOLOGY

Location of Study Site

Geographically, the town of Pila lies within the 121° 122’ latitude and 14°
14° longitude. Pila is one of the municipalities that lined the Laguna de Bay
(Figure 8). Moreover, Pila, Laguna has three distinct landscape - the rural
upland, the urban area, and the rural lakeshore. For the purpose of this research,
representative of each landscapes were selected as study sites. These are
Barangay Pansol for rural upland, Barangay Sta. Clara Sur for urban area, and
Barangay Pinagbayanan for rural lakeshore (Figure 8). These barangays are the
highest waste generators from their respective landscapes (Table 4). Pansol
generates 1,472.78 kilograms of waste per day; Sta. Clara Sur creates 1,218.74

while Pinagbayanan produces 3,196.48.

45

Source: Philgis.org

Figure 8. Map of Pila, Laguna including the three selected barangays.
(Source: Philgis.org; Map Generated by: Abel Fulgencio, 2016)


Table 4. Pila Laguna waste generation per barangay in 2013.

46

Waste Waste
Barangay Generated/day Barangay Generated/day
(kilograms) _ (kilograms)

Rural Lakeshore Rural Upland
Aplaya 1,876.35 Bukal 379.76
Bagong Pook 1,907.04 Concepcion 671.36
Labuin 2,763.56 Masico 1,355.75
Linga 2,031.98 Mojon 633.49
Pinagbayanan 3,196.48 Pansol 1,472.48
Tubuan (Tanza)* 1,297.12 San Antonio* 1,822.10
Urban/Poblacion San Miguel 711.85
Bulilan Norte 508.93
Bulilan Sur 759.39
Sta Clara Norte 562.32
Sta. Clara Sur 1,218.74

“barangay type of Tubuan and San Antonio is not clearly stated

if it belongs in the rural lakeshore or the rural upland
(Source: Pila Laguna Municipal Solid Waste Management Plan, 2013)

Data Collection Procedure

Preliminary data were gathered in preparation for the actual study. These

came from the municipal office and barangay offices through face-to-face

interviews and secondary data.

To describe the current solid waste management of Pila Laguna

constituents, primary data regarding the current solid waste management

47

practices of Pila Laguna constituents were gathered through self- administered

survey.

In order to understand the underlying reasons for Pila constituents’

current solid waste management practices, the following objectives were

‘Satisfied through the following data collection procedure:

1. Identifying knowledge, attitude, perception toward solid waste and its
management.
Respondents’ knowledge and attitude regarding solid waste and its
management were explored through the use of survey. The researcher,
together with Barangay Health Workers (BHW), conducted the survey

through individual house visits to satisfy the objective of the study

ny

Describing individual's physical setting.

Individuals physical setting comes in many forms. For the purpose of this
study, it was composed of three aspects. First is the distinct landscapes
of Pila, Laguna. This was described through transect line observation
from the upland barangay (Pansol), to poblacion (Sta. Clara Sur), to
lakeshore barangay (Pinagbayanan). Second is the residential and
municipal waste facilities which were identified through direct
observations as well as secondary data from the municipal office. Lastly,
the current law and ordinances being implemented in the municipality.
Information about these were obtained through Key Informant Interviews

(Kil) and secondary data from the municipal office.

48

4. Identify the temporal qualities that affect solid waste management
Temporal qualities included in the study are the municipality's land use
history and its solid waste management history through previous SWM
ordinances. To identify the following, a Kil was done as well as the use
of secondary data available in the municipal office.

The formulation of strategies to further improve solid waste
management in the municipality depended on the result of the previous
objective. Patterns were identified and understood in order to recommend
effective solid waste management strategies.

‘Survey for barangay Pansol was scheduled on September 5 to September

9, 2016. For Barangay Sta. Clara Sur, survey was conducted on September 26

to September 29, 2016 while survey for Barangay Pinagbayanan was conducted

on the previous week of September 19 to 23, 2016. Surveys were done from 9

o'clock in the morning to 4 o'clock in the afternoon of the scheduled dates.

Secondary data gathering and KIl interviews were conducted in the month
of October, 2016 while observations are done from the month of September to

October. Transect mapping was done in morning of September 15, 2016.

49

Selection of Respondents

Representatives from the three identified barangays of Pila Laguna -
Pansol, Sta Clara Sur, and Pinagbayanan - were selected by the accompanying
Barangay Health Workers per barangay. Respondents were selected based on
their availability during the conduct of the survey. Nonetheless, respondents were
as widespread among the puroks of each barangay as possible. For the KI,
participants include officer-in-charge of the solid waste management of the entire
municipality of Pila, including the Municipal Environment and Natural Resources
Office (MENRO) and Municipal Planning and Development Office (MPDO), as
well as the barangay chairmen of the three barangays or heads of their solid

waste management.

Sampling Method Used

The barangays identified in the study was purposively picked by the
fesearcher for the reason that these barangays have the highest waste
generation based on their respective distinct landscapes (rural-upland, urban,
and rural-lakeshore). Consequently, Pansol, Sta. Clara Sur, and Pinagbayanan
can significantly represent their respective landscapes.

For the survey respondents from each barangay, acceptable sample size

was computed using the online sample size calculator of the Creative Research

50

Systems. Sample size was calculated at 95% confidence level and margin of
error of 10%. However, due to time and resources constraints, total sample size

from 281 was reduced to 210 (Table 5).

Table 5. Computed Sample Size per Barangay (Generated through Creative
Research Systems Calculator) and Actual Sample Size

CONF. MARGIN OF CALCULATED ACTUAL

Cee Eno LEVEL ERROR SAMPLE SIZE SAMPLE SIZE

Pansol 2563 95% 10% 93 75
Pinagbayanan 5562 95% 10% 94 70
Sta. Clara Sur 5507 95% 10% 94 65

TOTAL 281 240

* Pila Laguna Population Size as of 2013

Moreover, convenient sampling was employed as the researcher was
assisted by BHW from each barangay. The BHW selected the respondents
nonetheless, it was ensured that respondents are scattered among the puroks of

each barangays.

51

Research Instruments

For the survey, the study used a structured questionnaire (Appendix 1).
Questions were focused on the respondents’ solid waste management practices
and their psychological processes including their knowledge, attitude, and
perception about solid waste and its management. To record information during
Key Informant Interview (Appendix 4), a recorder and camera was used.

Since on-site observation is required to explore the physical environment,
specifically the community landscape, municipal waste facilities, and residential
waste facilities, of the social participants, a point-and-shoot camera and journal

notebook was used to record findings.

Data Analysis

The study is a qualitative-type research thus; findings were presented
descriptively. It also applied minimal descriptive statistics through the frequency
count and percentages calculation. Moreover, results were analyzed through the
identification and understanding of patterns regarding the constituents’ current

solid waste practices.

CHAPTER V

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Aspects of Transactional Analysis

Transactional approach guided this study to better understand the
underlying reasons behind the current solid waste management practices of the
constituents from the municipality of Pila, Laguna. Aspects explored include the
psychological process of the respondents, specifically their knowledge and
perception on solid waste and its management. Moreover, the physical
environment, including the landscapes, waste facilities, and ordinances on solid
waste, was observed in the study. Lastly, the temporal qualities affecting SWM,
such as the municipal history and history of SWM ordinances, were also studied.
These aspects are then discussed in the succeeding sections.

Detailed survey results for individual barangays of Pansol, Sta. Clara Sur,
and Pinagbayanan is discussed in Appendix 2. As summarized from Appendix
Table 1, 12, and 23, surveyed population are mostly female comprising 74% of
the total respondents. They are commonly married (82%) with two to three
children (41%) or four to nine children (30%). Most of the respondents’ age
varies from 31 to 60 years old (69%) and almost half of them are housewives

who are high school (33%) or college graduates (25%).

53

Current Solid Waste Management Practices

Solid waste management practices of the respondents from Barangay
Pansol, Sta. Clara Sur, Pinagbayanan were consolidated as a macro scale
representative of the municipality. Their current solid waste management
practices include waste segregation, practice of 3Rs, incineration of waste, and

waste collection

A. Waste segregation

As shown in Table 6, majority of the respondents are segregating their
waste (93.33%). Moreover, the remaining 6.67% declared that they are not
sorting their waste because they do not have time to cater to their waste
(28.57%). Also, some rather bury alll their waste in their backyard (28.57%).

Those who sort their waste do so because they can exchange recyclable
waste for cash or heaps of salt (25%). Some of them also mentioned that
collection of waste would be easier if wastes are segregated accordingly
(24.48%). Moreover, segregating waste will ensure the cleanliness of the
surroundings, according to some (13.78%) while others segregate to follow the
municipal ordinance (10.20%). As claimed by some, there is a law on
segregation of waste in the municipality.

Those who segregate their waste usually sort them into non-

biodegradable and biodegradable (61.73%) while some segregate them into

54

biodegradable, non-biodegradable, and others (11.22%). Moreover, some
categorize their waste into non-biodegradable, biodegradable, and recycle. Plate
1 shows how one of the residents of Pila segregates their waste. One of the
respondents puts her biodegradable, like rambutan peelings, in sacks; her non-
biodegradable, usually residual plastic wrappers in plastic bags; and her

recyciable, like papers, in cardboard boxes.

Plate 1. A resident of Pila segregating their waste into categories.
(Photo by: Ma. Russell Natoza, 2016)

55

Table 6. Summary of the respondents’ waste segregation practices.

TOTAL
FREQUENCY (peRCENTAGE)
A Cc
Are you segregating your solid waste?
Yes, | am segregating my waste 64 64 «68 196 (93.33)
No, lam not segregating my waste 11 01 02 014 (06.67)
TOTAL 75 65 70 210 (100.00)
Why are you segregating your waste?
Easy collection of waste 07 24 «#17 48 (24.48)
Ensure cleanliness of surroundings 10 16 01 27 (13.78)
Ensure orderliness of trash
for disposal 00 o7) 15 22 (11.22)
Exchange for money or salt 17 19 13 49 (25.00)
Follow municipal ordinance 06 og 605 20 (10.20)
Help the environment 00 00 03 0301.53)
Prevent diseases 03 00 600 03 (01.53)
Prevent flooding 01 00 01 02 (01.02)
Reduce waste to be disposed 00 00 603 03 (01.53)
Separate waste that can be reused 05 00 «606 11 (05.61)
Separate waste that can be burned 10 oo 601 11 (05.61)
Use some waste as fertilizer 05 00 02 07 (03.57)
OUTOF 64 64 68 196 (100.00)
In what categories are you segregating your
waste?
Biodegradable and
non-biodegradable 28 47 «46121 (61.73)
Biodegradable, non-biodegradable,
others 04 12 (06 022 (11.22)
Biodegradable, non-biodegradable,
recyclables 01 04 «09 014 (07.14)
Biodegradable and others 11 02 «(04 017 (08.67)
Non-biodegradable and others 01 00 00 001 (00.51)
Others 20 00 = =600 020 (10.20)
OUTOF 64 64 68 196 (100.00)


56

Table 6 continued...
TOTAL
FREQUENCY (peRCENTAGE)
A B Cc
Why are you not segregating your waste?
Burying all my waste 02 00 02 04 (28.57)
Busy with work 03 oo 601 04 (28.57)
Difficult to segregate 02 00 01 03 (21.43)
Dispose all together elsewhere 00 01 00 01(07.14)
No available garbage can 01 00 600 01 (07.14)
Putting them all in one sack 02 00 8600 02 (14.29)

OUT OF 11 0102 14 (100.00)
Legend: A- Pansol, B- Sta. Clara Sur, C- Pinagbayanan

B. Recycling and reusing

Most of the respondents declared that they are recycling or reusing their
waste (76.56%) while the remaining 23.44% are not practicing recycling and
reusing (Table 7). Majority of those who do not recycle or reuse their waste
mentioned that they rather sell their waste to junk shops (73.33%).

On the other hand, those who recycle do so to make use of the utmost
benefit of their waste (43.75%). Most of them are also recycling to exchange
recyclable for money or salt (31.25%). While the aforementioned respondents
believe that they are recycling by selling their waste to junkshops, some
respondents do not consider this are recycling thus they declare that they are not
Tecycling (73.33%). With this, it can be inferred that most of the respondents
have little knowledge on recycling. Thus, only a few of them are knowledgeable

‘on the different ways of recycling their trash.

57

As seen in Plate 2, one of the respondents is creating home decorations
out of scrap snack wrappers by rolling them into beads. However, she is one of
those who declared that she is not recycling. Indeed, some of the respondents

are still unfamiliar with the concept of recycling.

Plate 2. Snack wrappers rolled into beads as material for home décor.
(Photo by: Ma. Russell Natoza, 2016)

58

Most of the respondents recycle or reuse plastic bottles (78.13%) and
plastic bags (50.62%). Some of the respondents also recycle or reuse metals
and tin cans (28.13%). Paper (20%) and boxes (22.5%) are also recycled or

reused by some of the respondents.

Table 7. Summary of the respondents’ recycling and reusing practices.

TOTAL
FREQUENCY _(PERCENTAGE)
A B Cc
Do you recycle or reuse Some of your
waste?
Yes, | recycle/reuse our waste 50 «53 57 160 (76.56)

No, I do not recycle/reuse our waste 25 11 13 049 (23.44)
TOTAL 75 64 70 209 (100.00)
What are the waste that you usually recycle

or reuse?
Bottle 29° «50 46 125 (78.13)
Cardboard box 07° «21 +«=—08 ~—«036 (22.50)
Paper 07 «10 15 032 (20.00)
Plastic 29° «32 20 081 (50.62)
Tin can and metals 06 #17 22 045 (28.13)
Others 08 03 06 017 (10.63)

QUTOF 50 53 57 __160 (100.00)
Why are you recycling/reusing your waste?

Exchange for money or salt 07 «18 «©2045 (31.25)
Follow municipal ordinance 04 00 01 05 (03.42)
Maintain cleanliness of surroundings 04 00 11 15 (10.42)
Make utmost benefit of recyclables 17 28 18 63 (43.75)

Project or decoration materials 06 08 04 © 18 (12.50)
Reduce trash to be discarded 03 07 12 22 (15.28)
Save some cash 04 00 03 07 (04.86)

QUTOF 40 52 52 __ 144 (100.00)


Table 7 continued...

59

TOTAL
FREQUENCY (peRcENTAGE)
A B Cc
Why are you not recycling/reusing your
waste?
Easier and better to discard 02 «00 00 02 (06.67)
Little knowledge on recycling/reusing 02 00 00 02 (06.67)
No time to recycle/reuse 04 00 00 04 (13.33)
Selling recyclables oe 11 05 22 (73.33)
No need to recycle 00 ©6600 01 01 (03.33)
OUT OF 14 05 __30 (100.00)

Legend: A- Pansol, B - Sta, Clara Sur, C- Pinagbayanan

C. Burning of waste

As shown in Table 8, one third of the respondents burn their waste

(33.01%) while the remaining two thirds stated that they do not burn their waste

(66.99%). The main reason why most of the respondents do not burn their waste

is because, according to them, it is prohibited to burn waste. Some also said that

it is bad for the health (25%) as well as the environment (23.39%). Moreover, a

Portion of the respondents also said that their wastes are being collected thus

there is no need to burn them (17.74%).

Those who burn their waste usually burn leaves (91.22%) and paper

(33.33%). However, some also burn plastics (28.07%) and candy or snack

wrappers (7.02%). As seen in Plate 3, some residents burn their trash, mostly

dried leaves and plant cuttings with some candy or snack wrappers. The mound

60

of burned waste is located in a public space along a local road. Indeed, some of
the residents still burn their waste even though an ordinance prohibiting open
burning of waste is being implemented in the municipality since 2014.

Reasons for incinerating waste vary among the respondents. Most of them
mentioned that they burn because this could reduce their garbage ready for
collection. Some also burn because according to them the smoke will encourage
the growth or flowering of plants (19.60%) and that the smoke will drive away
insects like mosquitoes (15.69%). Moreover, a few said that waste are irregularly
collected (15.67%), so instead of waiting for their waste to pile up they opt to

burn them.

Plate 3. incinerated leaves and plastic wrappers.
(Photo by: Ma. Russell Natoza, 2016)

61

62

Table 8. Summary of the respondents’ waste incineration practices.

Legend: A- Pansol, B - Sta. Clara Sur,

- Pinagbayanan

TOTAL
FREQUENCY (peRCENTAGE)
A Cc
Are you buming waste?
Yes, | am burning my waste 38 07 24 69 (33.01)
No, | am not burning my waste 36 58 46 140 (66.99)
TOTAL 74 65 70 209 (100.00)
What waste are you burning?
All waste 02 00 01 03 (05.26)
Candy and snack wrappers 04 00 00 04 (07.02)
Grasses 04 00 00 04 (07.02)
Leaves 27 07 «18 = 52(91.22)
Paper 07 04 08 19 (33.33)
Plastic 10 00 06 16 (28.07)
QUTOF 27 07 23___57 (100.00)
Why are you burning your waste?
Avoid flooding 00 00 02 02 (03.92)
Avoid litters caused by rummaging 00 04 00 ~—-04 (07.84)
Convenient to burn 00 00 02 02 (03.92)
Encourage flowering of trees 08 00 02 10 (19.60)
Irregular garbage collection 08 00 00 08 (15.67)
Reduce garbage to be collected 07 01 10 18 (35.29)
Shoo away insects like mosquitoes 06 00 02 08 (15.69)
OUTOF 29 05 17  51(100.00)
Why are you not burning your waste?
Burning is prohibited 07 35 14 56 (45.16)
No place to burn garbage 01 04 01 ~—06 (04.84)
Waste are being collected 06 05 11 22 (17.74)
Bad for children 04 04 00 08 (06.45)
Bad for the environment 08 08 13 29 (23.39)
Bad for the health 05 23 03 31 (25.00)
Smoke 08 08 02 18 (14.52)
OUT OF 58 39 __ 124 (100.00,

63

D. Waste disposal

Since most of the respondents do not burn their waste, majority said that
they commonly sell their waste to junkshops (Table 9). Some of the respondents
also bury their waste (12.42%) while a few rather pile them up in their backyards
(6.21%). Most of the respondents also said that they let the garbage collector
pick their waste up (69.57%).

As shown in Plate 4, residential waste, commonly stuffed in sacks and

large plastic bags, are lining municipal roads in time for collection of waste.

Plate 4. Piles of wastes lining municipal roads ready for collection
(Photo by: Ma. Russell Natoza, 2016)

64

Table 9. Summary of the respondents’ waste disposal practices.

TOTAL
FREQUENCY (PERCENTAGE)
A B Cc
What do you do with unburnt trash?
Buried at their backyard 08 03 09 020 (12.42)
Collected by garbage trucks 33 44 35 112 (69.57)
Piled up in their backyard 09 00 01 010 (06.21)
Recycled 02 00 02 004 (02.48)
Sold to junkshops 30 53 35 118 (73.29)
Use as fertilizers 04 02 00 006 (03.73)

QUTOF 67 63 ___—~61_164 (100.00)
What do you use to manage your

trash?
Boxes 01 02 00 003 (01.86)
Large cans 02 00 00 002 (01.24)
Large pail 04 02 03 009 (05.59)
Plastic 10 10 18 038 (23.60)
Sack 54 60 44 155 (96.27)
Trash can 10 09 08 027 (16.77)
Well 04 00 01 005 (03.11)

OUTOF 49 60 52161 (10
Pansol, 8 - Sta, Clara Sur, C- Pinagbayanan

10)

Psychological Processes Affecting SWM Practices

Psychological process is one of the aspects of transactional analysis that
deals with the individual's actions, emotional and affective experiences,
cognitions, and the enactment of and response to social and cultural factors. In
this study, the respondents’ knowledge and their attitude towards solid waste

management were explored.

65

A. Knowledge on solid waste management

The study looked into the knowledge of the respondents on solid waste in
itself as well as their knowledge on national and local laws on solid waste
management.

Proper waste management. Based on the survey, majority of the
respondents thinks that segregating waste (97.13%) and selling them to junk
shops (97.61%) are both proper waste management schemes (Table 10). Also,
most of the respondents consider composting of waste (80.38%) and integrating
ecological SWM in the curricula of formal and non-formal education (78.47%).
Majority of the respondents also mentioned reduction of waste by avoiding
materials that can add up to trash (80.38%) as a proper solid waste management
scheme.

However, some of the respondents listed burning of waste as one of the
Proper schemes for managing solid waste (22.49%). Most of which are coming
from the upland barangay of Pansol (22 out of 47). A few of the respondents
believe that piling of waste in their own backyards is another scheme to properly
manage waste (4.31%). Half came from the rural barangays of Pansol and
Pinagbayanan. The remaining 15.78% said that the use of plastic is also a proper
way of managing waste. This is because, according to them, this depends on the

use of plastics as well as how people would use them.

Table 10. Summary of the respondents’ knowledge on proper

solid waste management.

66

WHAT ARE THE PROPER TOTAL
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE)
SCHEMES? ( )
A B c
Buming of waste 22 05 20 047 (22.49)
Composting of waste 58 64 46 168 (80.38)
Integrating ecological SWM in the
curricula 54 58 52 164 (78.47)
Piling up of waste in the backyard 05 00 04 009 (04.31)
Reducing waste generation 55 61 52 168 (80.38)
Segregating waste 72 64 67 203 (97.13)
Selling of waste to junk shops 71 65 68 204 (97.61)
Using plastics _ 13 10 10 33 (15.78)

OUTOF 74 65 70 209 (100.00)
Legend: A- Pansol, B - Sta. Clara Sur, C- Pinagbayanan

Improper waste management. When asked about the negative effects of

improper solid waste management, majority of the respondents consider waste

as the source of foul smell (99.04%) as top of the list (Table 11). Most of them

also thinks that it can cause severe flooding and a source of diseases like

leptospirosis, dengue, and diarrhea.

Moreover, majority mentioned that

improperly managed waste can cause wounds and cuts (95.67%). Another

95.67% said that it can cause air, land, and water pollution. The least number of

67

responses is chemical poisoning. Nonetheless, 92.31% of the respondents

answered that chemical poisoning is another negative effect of improperly

managed solid waste.

Table 11. Summary of the respondents’ knowledge on the negative effect of
improper solid waste management.

WHAT ARE THE

TOTAL
NEGATIVE EFFECTS OF FREQUENCY
INCORRECT SWM? SPERRENT MGS
A B c

Acquiring diseases 71 65 69 205 (98.56)

Acquiring wounds and cuts 68 65 66 199 (95.67)

Air, land, and water

ean 67 65 67 199 (95.67)

Chemical poisoning 65 60 67 192 (92.31)

Severe flooding 70 65 70 205 (98.56)

Source of foul smell 71 65 70 206 (99.04)
OUT OF 5 70208 (100.00)

Legend: A- Pansol, B - Sta. Clara Sur, C- Pinagbayanan

Solid waste categories. Table 12 shows the respondents knowledge on

solid waste categories. When asked to categorize dried leaves and plant

cuttings; fruits and vegetables peelings; glassware; leftover food; metals and tin

cans; plastics, sacks, and Styrofoam; and tissue and paper, most of them

categorize fruits and vegetables peelings under biodegradable (99.02%). Majority

of them classify dried leaves and plant cuttings (97.57%), as well as, leftover

68

food (96.60%) under biodegradable while most of them categorize plastics,
sacks, and Styrofoam (97.57%) under non-biodegradable. Majority also
categorize glassware (93.20%) and metal and tin cans (90.78%) under non-
biodegradable. Moreover, most of the respondents consider tissue and paper as
biodegradable (76.70%) while a significant portion of the respondents classify
them under non-biodegradable (25.24%).

Furthermore, a few of the respondents classify glassware (1.94%) and
metal and tin cans (9.80%) under biodegradable. According to the respondents,
this is because these materials, in time, will crumble into smaller pieces. A few
also categorize dried leaves and plant cuttings (2.43%), fruits and vegetables
peelings (1.94%), and leftover food (6.31%) as non-biodegradable. Based on the
tespondent’s accounts, this is because some serve as food to their pets while
some are burned together with their other waste. This shows that although most
respondents are knowledgeable on the correct classification of waste, there are

‘still some who are confused with it.

69

Table 12. Summary of the respondents’ knowledge solid waste categories.

TOTAL
FREQUENCY (PERCENTAGE)
A B Cc

Biodegradable
Dried leaves and plant cuttings 71 65 65 201 (97.57)
Fruits and vegetables peelings 73 65 66 204 (99.02)
Leftover food 72 65 62 199 (96.60)
Tissue and Paper 54 5450 158 (76.70)
Glassware 01 01 02 04 (01.94)
Metals and tin cans 06 09 «605 20 (09.80)
Plastics, sacks, and styrofoams 00 00 = =600 00 (00.00)

OUTOF 74 65 ‘67 206 (100.00)
Non-biodegradable
Glassware 73 61 58 192 (93.20)
Metals and tin cans 69 56 «62 187 (90.78)
Plastics, sacks, and styrofoams 73 65 63 201 (97.57)
Dried leaves and plant cuttings 03 00 8602 05 (02.43)
Fruits and vegetables peelings 01 00 «603 04 (01.94)
Leftover food 02 03 «(08 13 (06.31)
Tissue and Paper 24 11 17 52 (25.24)

OUT OF

74 6567 206 (100.00)

Legend: A- Pansol, B - Sta. Clara Sur, C- Pinagbayanan

Laws on SWM. The respondents were asked about the laws on solid

waste management. More than half of the respondents said that they are

knowledgeable on RA 9003 (54.55%) while the remaining 45.45% mentioned

that they do not know anything about the law (Table 13)

Moreover, majority of the respondents claimed that they are well informed

‘on the municipal ordinances on solid waste management (79.33%). However,

70

those who mentioned that they know of the municipal ordinances, have diverse
answers. Almost half of the respondents said that one of the ordinances of the
municipality is the segregation of waste (44.51%). Some of them mentioned that
Pila prohibits the use of plastics (33.53%) and open burning of waste (35.36%).
Also, according to some, regular and proper collection of waste is another
ordinance of the municipality (20.12%). Some mentioned the prohibition of
littering (14.63%). In relation to this, a few mentioned that one of the municipal
ordinances is keeping the cleanliness of the surroundings (9.76%), as well as,
the recycling and reusing of waste (2.44%). However, 7.32% vaguely mentioned
RA 9003. Interestingly, not only did the respondents include municipal

ordinances but the municipality's programs related to SWM as well.

Table 13. Summary of the respondents’ knowledge on laws
on solid waste management.

TOTAL
FREQUENCY (pERCENTAGE)
ABC

Do you know what R.A. 9003 is about?

Yes, | know 29 39 46 © 112 (54.58)

No, | do not know 46 25 24 95 (45.45)

TOTAL 75 64 70 209 (100.00)
Do you know any municipal ordinances on

SWM?
Yes, | know 49 63 53 165 (79.33)
No, | do not know 26 02 15 043 (20.67)

TOTAL 75 65 68 208 (100.00)


71

Table 13 continued...

TOTAL
FREQUENCY (PERCENTAGE)
A BC
What are the municipal ordinances on
sw?
Littering is prohibited 08 11 05 24 (14.63)
Open burning is prohibited 07 «443 «#208 58 (35.36)
Plastics are prohibited 07 «41 «#07 55 (33.53)
Regular and proper collection of waste 14 11 «08 33 (20.12)
Reusing and recycling of waste 04 00 00 04 (02.44)
Segregation of waste is encouraged 21° 32 20 73 (44.51)
Maintain cleanliness 02 «11 «203 16 (09.76)
RA 9003 00 00 12 12 (07.32)

OUTOF 49 63 52 164 (100.00)
Do you know if your wastes are being

collected?
Yes, | know 72 65 64 201 (96.17)
No, | do not know 03 «00 «(05 008 (03.83)

TOTAL 75 65 69 209 (100.00)
Do you know where your waste are being

disposed?
Yes, | know 54 50 48 152 (73.43)
No, | do not know 19 15 19 53 (25.60)

TOTAL 75 65 67 207 (100.00)
Legend: A- Pansol, B — Sta, Clara Sur, C- Pinagbayanan

A. Attitude towards solid waste management

The perception of the respondents on solid waste management is divided
into five. This includes their perception on segregation, 3Rs, incineration, waste

disposal, and solid waste management in general.

72

Waste segregation. As shown in Table 14, majority of the respondents
claimed that it is easy to segregate waste into biodegradable and non-
biodegradable (95.69%). The remaining 1.91% disagree because according to
them, they are still adjusting with the new program of the municipality on waste
segregation.

Moreover, most of them believe that through segregation of waste, they
could help in the livelihood of other individuals (97.10%). Majority also
mentioned that it is indeed one’s responsibility to segregate their trash (97.57%).
In conclusion, most of the respondents have positive response towards waste

segregation.

Table 14. Summary of the respondents’ attitude on solid waste management.

TOTAL
PRE CUENCY, (PERCENTAGE)
A B Cc

It is easy to segregate waste in

biodegradable and non-

biodegradable
Agree 69 62 69 200 (95.69)
Disagree 04 00 00 004 (01.91)
No Comment 02 03 00 005 (02.39)

TOTAL 75 65 69 209 (100.00)


Table 14 continued.

73

TOTAL
FREQUENCY (PERCENTAGE)
A B Cc
1 would be able to help in the
Jivelihood of others if | separate my
recyclables from other waste
Agree 70 65 66 201 (97.10)
Disagree
No Comment 00 00 00 000 (00.00)
TOTAL 05 00 01 006 (02.90)
75 65 67 207 (100.00)
It is my responsibility to segregate
my waste
Agree 72 65 «64 201 (97.57)
Disagree 01 00 01 002 (00.97)
No Comment 02 00 01 004 (01.94)
TOTAL 75. 65 66 206 (100.00) _

Reduce, reuse, recycle. In terms of their perception of 3Rs, a portion of

the respondents believe that it is easy to use recyclable materials like bayongs

and the like (70.81%). However, a noteworthy 25.36% find difficulty in using

reusable. Nonetheless, though they experience trouble in using reusable,

majority believe that avoiding the use of disposables can relatively reduce their

waste generation. In general, majority have a positive perception on reducing,

reusing, and recycling of waste (Table 15)

Table 15. Summary of the respondents’ attitude on 3Rs.

74

TOTAL
er EeY (PERCENTAGE)
A B Cc
It is not easy to use
reusable materials like eco
bags and bottles
Agree 27 "1 15 053 (25.36)
Disagree 43 54 51 148 (70.81)
No Comment 05 00 03 008 (03.82)
TOTAL 75 65 69 209 (100.00)
can relatively reduce my
waste if | avoid using
disposables like paper
plates and Styrofoam
Agree 73 65 64 202 (97.58)
Disagree 01 00 03 004 (01.93)
No Comment 01 00 00 001 (00.50)
TOTAL 75 65 67 207 (100.00)

Incineration of Waste. |n Table 16, most of the respondents believe that

it would be beneficial to the community if people would refrain from burning their

waste (89.37%) while a few disagree (7.25%) or chose not to comment (3.38%).

Moreover, most of the respondents agreed that buming of waste have harmful

effects (85.51%) while a few thinks that buming does not have any harmful

effects (10.14%) or rather not comment (4.35%).

75

Table 16. Summary of the respondents’ attitude on incineration of waste.

TOTAL
EREQUENCY (PERCENTAGE)
A B (J
It will be beneficial for my
community if | refrain from
burning my waste
Agree 65 61 59 185 (89.37)
Disagree 06 02 07 015 (07.25)
No Comment 04 02 01 007 (03.38)
TOTAL 75 65 67 207 (100.00)
Burning of waste,
especially biodegradable,
does not have any harmful
effects
nal 06 04
mae er eee
Disagree 05 00 04 009 (04.35)
No Comment 75 65 67 207 (100.00)

TOTAL

Waste disposal. When asked on waste disposal, majority of the
fespondents believe that it is improper to throw trash anywhere no matter how
small it is (87.92%). However, some thinks it is negligible to throw small trash like
candy wrappers anywhere (9.66%). The respondents were also questioned on
waste collection and almost all believe that the individual residents are
responsible for bringing their trash out in preparation for waste collection

(98.54%). The result was shown in Table 17.

76

Table 17. Summary of the respondents’ attitude on waste disposal

TOTAL
FREQUENCY (PERCENTAGE)
A B c

Throwing small trash, such

as candy wrappers,

anywhere is negligible and

will not affect the

environment
Agree 16 02 02 020 (09.66)
Disagree 56 63 63 182 (87.92)
No Comment 03 00 02 005 (02.42)

TOTAL 75 65 67 207 (100.00)

It is my responsibility to

bring out my segregated

trash for them to be

collected
Agree 73 65 65 203 (98.54)
Disagree 01 00 01 002 (00.97)
No Comment 01 00 00 001 (00.50)

TOTAL 75 65 66. 206 (100.00)

Solid waste management. Almost all of the respondents agreed that it

would be beneficial for their community if they will practice the recommended

Proper solid waste management schemes. However,

almost half of the

tespondents mentioned that they will follow such schemes if their peers are doing

the same thing as well (43.69%).

Moreover, almost all of the respondents agree that they would be of help

to their community if they abide by the laws provided by the municipality

(99.03%). Half of the respondents also said that they will be motivated to apply

77

proper management in their solid waste if there are laws on it and corresponding
penalties for violators (48.79%). Consequently, majority of the respondents agree
that it is indeed their responsibility to report and file a case against violators
(71.98%) while a portion rather not express their opinion on telling on their
constituents (24.64%).

Furthermore, majority also believe that their peers would appreciate it if
they would share their knowledge on proper solid waste management (97.10%).
Also, everyone thinks that solid waste is one of the pressing issues that the
municipality should address with great commitment. The respondents’ attitude
towards SWM is almost homogeneous to all the surveyed barangays as shown in
Table 18. In general, the respondents have a positive opinion on solid waste
management. Although, their motivation for practicing solid waste management

differs across individuals.

78

Table 18. Summary of the respondents’ attitude on solid waste management.

TOTAL
aad (PERCENTAGE)
A B Cc
It will be beneficial for my
community if | follow the proper
solid waste management
recommended by the
municipality
Agree 74 65 66 205 (99.03)
Disagree 00 00 00 000 (00.00)
No Comment 01 00 01 002 (00.97)
TOTAL 75 65 67 207 (100.00)
Twill properly manage my waste
if only my peers will do the
same
Agree 34 38 18 090 (43.69)
Disagree 35 27 48 110 (53.40)
No Comment 05 00 01 006 (02.91)
TOTAL 74 65 67 206 (100.00)
| will be of help to my
barangay/community if | will
abide by the laws and
ordinances on solid waste
management
Agree 73 65 67 205 (99.03)
Disagree 00 00 00 000 (00.00)
No Comment 02 00 00 002 (00.97)
TOTAL 75 65 67 207 (100.00)


79

Table 18 continued.

TOTAL
FRERUENOE (PERCENTAGE)
A B c
| will properly manage my waste
only if there are existing laws
and corresponding penalties for
violators
a 39 375 101 (48.79)
i pee 31 28 = 40 099 (47.83)
05 oo = 02 007 (03.38)

TOTAL

It is my responsibility to report
anyone who violates the laws
and ordinances regarding solid

75 65 67 207 (100.00)

waste management
Agree 46 43 60 149 (71.98)
Disagree 01 03 03 007 (03.38)
No Comment 28 19 04 051 (24.64)

TOTAL 75 65 67 207 (100.00)
My neighbors would appreciate
‘if | will Share information on
proper solid waste management

Agree 70 64 67 201 (97.10)
Disagree 01 00 00 001 (00.05)
No Comment 04 01 00 005 (02.42)
TOTAL 75 65 67 207 (100.00)

Proper solid waste

management in my municipality
should be given much needed

attention
Agree 73 65 67 205 (99.03)
Disagree 00 00 = 00 000 (00.00)
No Comment 02 00 = 00 002 (96.62)

TOTAL 75 65 67 207 (100.00)

80

Physical Environment of Pila, Laguna

Physical environment is another aspect of transactional analysis. For the
purpose of this study, physical environment involves the different landscapes,
upland, urban, and coastal; the residential and municipal waste facilities of the

tespondents; and the SWM ordinances of the municipality.

A. Different landscapes of the municipality

As shown in Figure 9, Pila Laguna is one of the agricultural municipality of
the province that lies within the 121° 122’ latitude and 14° 14' longitude and is 85
kilometers south of Manila. Its agricultural nature was observed during the
transect walk last September 15, 2016 from 8 o'clock to 11 o'clock in the
morning. During the transect walk, barangays of Masico, Pansol, Sta Clara Sur,
Bulilan Norte, and Pinagbayanan were traversed via Pila-Calumpang road,
National Highway, and an unnamed road locally known as the boulevard or
Bulusukan road.

Masico is one of the upland barangays of Pila. Its elevation reaches up to
70.3 meters above sea level. Due to its hilly nature, land in the area is usually
used as an agro-forest for fruit bearing trees like coconut, rambutan, banana, and
santol. Aside from being forested and being a plantation area, Masico also have

Patches of grassland area including bamboos. The barangay houses upland farm

81

animals like horses and goats. Masico is also considered as a residential area
with a population of 2,359 (Municipal Profile, 2013).

Similarly, Pansol is also considered as a rural upland barangay of the
municipality. It is elevated up to 60.5 meters above sea level. Being one of the
agricultural areas of Pila, expanse of rice fields is found in the barangay.
Agricultural animals like horses, ducks, pigs, cows, water buffalos are commonly
raised in the area. Fruit bearing trees like mango, rambutan, chico, and banana
area also grown in the barangay. Moreover, Pansol is considered as a residential
area with a population of 2,563 (Municipal Profile, 2013)

On the other hand, Santa Clara Sur is considered as one of the urban
barangay of Pila and is one of the barangays comprising the Poblacion, elevated
to 50.1 meters above sea level. Being an urban barangay, Santa Clara Sur is
mostly paved where commercial establishments like sari-sari stores, bakeries,
pharmacies, and convenient stores are situated. Moreover, institutional facilities
like schools, barangay halls and churches lined the said barangay. Aside from
the commercial and institutional facilities, Santa Clara Sur also is considered as a
residential area housing a population of 5,507 (Municipal Profile, 2013).
Domestic animals like dogs and cats are commonly observed in the barangay.

Bulilan Norte is also one of the barangays considered as part of the
Poblacion with an elevation of 45 meters above sea level. It is mainly used as a
residential area for a population of 2,301 (Municipal Profile, 2013) and as an

agricultural area. Rice fields lined parts of the barangay with some fruit bearing

82

trees like rambutan and bananas. Patches of grassland is also observed in the
areas with occasional bamboo grass. Domestic animals are normally found in the
area as well as grassland dwellers like butterflies and dragonflies.

One of the rural lakeshore barangays of the municipality is Pinagbayanan.
It is one of the lowest parts of Pila with an elevation of 44 meters above sea
level. Pinagbayanan is commonly used as an agricultural site for raising ducks.
As a lakeshore barangay, residents fish along the coast of Laguna lake.
Moreover, tracts of land are used for plantation of vegetables like bitter gourds
and tomatoes. Pinagbayanan also houses a population of 5,562 (Municipal

Profile, 2013).

Flow of Goods and Waste. Pila, Laguna exemplify a typical ridge-to-reef
community from the upland community of Pansol and Masico to the lakeshore
barangay of Pinagbayanan. Most of the agricultural produce of the municipality
comes from the upland barangays and agricultural lakeshore barangays. Most
these produce are brought to the municipal poblacion and neighboring towns
where they are usually sold. Some of the vegetables grown in the plantations of
Pinagbayanan are also being transported and put on sale in Divisoria.

Indeed, the flow of goods in Pila is from the agricultural barangays toward
the urban barangays. Nonetheless, since most of the barangays are residential in
nature, the goods then are distributed among all of the other barangays of the

municipality. Once these goods are consumed, what remains become waste.

83

Thus, waste also accumulates in most of the barangays of Pila in varying
degrees. When wastes are finally collected, they are then brought back to one of
the upland community of the municipality where the MRF is located, in Barangay
San Miguel. Some wastes, especially recyclables, also find their way in junk
shops that pepper the town.

However, mismanaged waste remains as litters in one’s backyard or in
public lands and roads. Some are also carried to Laguna de Bay through the

irrigation system and the Bulusukan river that traverse the municipality.

Findings. Based on the result of the survey, those living in the upland
barangay closely resemble the solid waste management of the respondents from
the lakeshore barangays. However, the solid waste management of those from
the urban barangays are slightly different from those of the respondents from the
other two. For one, more respondents from barangay Pansol and Pinagbayanan
are burning their waste, especially leaves and paper, as compared to those from
Sta. Clara Sur. This may be attributed to the agricultural nature of the two
barangays. Residences in the Pansol and Pinagbayanan have larger backyard
where litter fall usually accumulate; while the residences of Sta. Clara Sur have
smaller areas and are more congested thereby limiting them from burning their

waste.

COORDINATES

ELEVATION
LAND USE

VEGETATION
COVER

N 14* 12° 39.1"
E121" 2258.8"

70.3 meters

Agroforestry,
Residential

Plantation area,
Forested area,
Patches of
grassland area

N 14°12" 39.1" E121" 22°
32.2"

60.5 meters
Agricultural, Residential
‘Some pavements,

Ricefields, Trees and
shrubs

84

SANTA CLARA SUR
N 14* 13° 54.9" E 121° 21"

50.1 meters
(Residential

Mostly paved areas, partial
trees and shrubs

N14" 14'173°E
121° 21' 42.5"

45 meters

Agricultural,
Residential

Ricefield, Some
paved areas

Lakeshore

Paved areas, some trees
and shrubs

Coconut,
Rambutan,
Banana, Santol,
Bamboo, grasses

horses, goats,
dogs, insects,
birds:

Fruit bearing trees (mango,
rambutan, chico, banana),
bamboo, grasses, Mostly
rice field

horse,ducks, pigs, cow,
carabao, domestic animals
(dog, cat, chicken), insects
(butterfly, dragonfly)

Fruit bearing trees (mango,
rambutan, chico etc.),
ornamental plants

Bamboo, grasses,
some fruit bearing
trees, rice field

‘omamental plants,
ampalaya plantation,
bamboos

domestic animals (dog, cat,
chicken)

Figure 9. Transect map of Pila, Laguna.

animals

dragonfly)

ducks, goats, fish


85

B. Solid waste management facilities

Residential waste facilities. Residential waste facilities of the
respondents of Pila are usually sacks (96.27%). Given that the municipality is an
agricultural one, sacks are commonly sold in the area and are widely available
for everyone. According to accounts of some of the residents, some of them
recycles sacks, like those from cements and rice, while some bought new ones
for ten pesos each. Some, moreover, uses large plastic bags (23.60%), trash
cans (16.77%), and even recycled plastic containers. A few uses cardboard
boxes as waste disposal facility. Some of the respondents also uses wells, dug

out from the soil, as receptacles for their wastes (Plate 5).

Plate 5. Trash bags, sacks, boxes and plastic bags as residential waste facility.
(Photo by: Ma. Russell Natoza, 2016)

86

Municipal waste facilities. Generated municipal waste of Pila, Laguna is
currently at 23,168.64 kilograms per day or approximately 0.45 kilograms per
capita per day. Current waste generation of the municipality is within the range of
rural municipalities or low income communities which ranges at 0.4 kg/capita/day
to 0.6 kg/capita/day. However, as previously discussed, the municipality is slowly
urbanizing thus, waste generation may increase to 1.1 to 5 kilograms per capita
per day. Figure 10 illustrates the projection of waste generation of Pila based on
a 2.4% growth rate. As shown, if the municipality remains rural, waste generation
constantly and gradually increase. However, if Pila becomes an urban center,
starting 2016, waste generation will double than the projected waste generated if
the municipality stays rural. Thus, this increase in waste generation could

compete with the current functions of the Pila's environment.

87

90,000
80,000
70,000
60,000
50,000
40,000
30,000
20,000 +

Population
Waste generation (kg/day)

10,000

° 2007 2010 2013 2016 «2019 +2022 ©2025 ©2028 +2030
© «@ Population Year
‘== Waste generation if Pila remains rural (0.45 kg/cap/day)
‘= Waste generation if Pila becomes urban (0.45 to 1.1 kg/capiday)

Figure 10. Population projection and waste generation projection.

To address the current municipal waste, various garbage cans line public
spaces in the municipality of Pila, including the town plaza parallel to the
municipal hall and the church. These trash cans are colored differently each
assigned for the different categories of trash (Plate 6). However, these garbage

cans are unlabeled therefore wastes thrown are still unsegregated

Plate 6. Unlabeled colored trash cans that lined the municipal plaza.
(Photo by: Ma. Russell Natoza, 2016)

To collect waste, the municipal office has provided mini dump trucks
(Plate 7) that would travel across town and gather segregated waste at a
designated time and day. Table 19 shows the schedule for the collection of waste
on majority of the barangays excluding the agricultural barangays of Bukal,
Concepcion, and Mojon as mentioned by the Head Municipal Engineer, Engr.
Cyrene Pangilinan. However, as seen in the schedule, there is no schedule for

Brgy. San Miguel as well.

89

Plate 7. Mini dump trucks (white, red, green) that collects waste across town
(Photo by: Ma, Russell Natoza, 2014)

90

Table 19. Schedule of waste collection in the municipality.

DAY

MINI DUMP TRUCKS, CATEGORIES
RED WHITE GREEN
Pinagbayanan Labuin Sta. Clara Sur ,
Mon (@AM-10 AM) (6AM-10AM) _@ AM-10 AM) _Non-biodegradable
Sta. Clara Norte
Aplaya Bulilan Norte (6 AM-9 AM) .
Tues (6 AM-10AM) (6 AM-10 AM) Tubuan Biodegradable
(AM -10 AM)
Wed ‘San Antonio
Linga (6 AM-9 AM)
(6 AM-9 AM) Bulilan Sur Pansol bi
Pook (6AM-10AM) (9 AM-10. am) _‘Nor-biodegradable
(9 AM- 10 AM) Masico
(10 AM-11 AM)
Pinagbayanan Tabuin Sta. Clara Sur
Thurs (6 AM-10AM) _(6AM-10 AM) __(6 AM-10 AM) _B/0degradable
Sta. Clara Norte
Aplaya Bulilan Norte (6 AM- 9 AM)
Fri (@AM-10 AM) ~— (6. AM-10 AM) Tubuan Non-biodegradable
( AM-10 AM)
San Antonio
Linga (6 AM-9 AM)
(6AM-10AM) ——_Bulilan Sur Pansol
Set Pook (6AM-10AM) (9 AM-10 AM) ~—s=BiOdegradable
(10 AM- 11 AM) Masico

(10 AM-14 AM)

(Source: Municipal leafiet on solid waste management found in Appendix 6)

Apart from the smaller trucks that individually collect waste from the local

roads of Pila, a bigger ten-wheeler one (Plate 8) is on standby in the MRF to

receive the collected waste. Once full, this dump truck is ready to bring the

accumulated waste to the Sanitary landfill located in Hain Canlubang, Calamba.

91

Plate 8. Municipal solid waste hauled to the dump truck ready for transport.
(Photo by: Ma. Russell Natoza, 2014)

As of the moment, Pila has a singular Material Recovery Facility situated
in one of the upland barangays of the municipality - in Barangay San Miguel.
Right after the scheduled collection, segregated wastes are directly brought and
attended to in the MRF. Previously, wastes are collected even though it is
unsorted. Thus, sorters are assigned in the MRF to further segregate waste. At
Present, the current administration ensures that wastes are segregated upon
collection. Hence, after collection, wastes are immediately transferred to a larger

dump truck ready for transfer to the sanitary landfill. However, both

92

biodegradable and non-biodegradable wastes collected are dumped to the same
landfill

The MRF currently houses different equipment, like a bioreactor, plastic
shredders, and facility like the vermicomposting pit (Plate 9). However, these
facilities and equipment are left idle in the MRF. These have been used for some
time after purchase however, markets for shredded plastics is not enough to
compensate for electricity cost used to power the multi shredder. Moreover,
feedstock for bioreactor, which process biodegradable waste, was not sufficient
for its continuous operation. Same goes with the vermicomposting pit wherein
occasional market for the produced fertilizers is inadequate to sustain investment.

cost for vermicomposting.

93

Plate 9. Plastic shredder, vermicomposting pit, and bioreactor found in MRF.
(Photo by: Ma. Russell Natoza, 2014)

Findings. As observed the respondents’ current residential waste facility,
indeed, affects their behavior. Some are reluctant to segregate because
according to them they do not have enough trash cans to place their segregated
waste. Therefore, they rather not segregate at all and resorted to other means
like burning their waste or dumping them in their backyards. Some are also
complaining that they routinely buy two sacks every week to act as waste bags
for their non-biodegradable and biodegradable waste which is taking some toll on
their finances. Though they are willing to segregate their waste, unavailability of

proper waste facility is limiting their behavior.

94

According to accounts of some respondents, garbage trucks seldom
collect their trash thus they opt to burn some of their waste to prevent it from
piling up. The physical characteristics of the some of the barangays also limit the
collection of waste. Usually, places, not included in the collection route, cannot
be reached by the mini dump trucks for the reason that roads are too small to
accommodate vehicles. Also, some individual residences are too far flung that
they rather not segregate for they know that their waste would not be collected.

Moreover, it was observed that the MRF of the municipality only serves as
a transfer station for the municipal waste instead of being utilize to further classify
and divert wastes. Thus, these recovered wastes can serve some other
functional purposes instead of being dumped immediately in the sanitary landfill
Nonetheless, the municipality is currently proposing individual MRF for each
barangays of Pila so as to reduce the wastes to be discarded in the sanitary

landfill. Community bins along the collection area are also being proposed.

C. Solid waste management ordinances and programs

The municipality is currently implementing four local ordinances on solid
waste management. These ordinances address issues on littering and dumping
of waste in public lands. Moreover, ongoing ordinance on the regulation of
plastics is being administered. The prohibition of both open burning of residential

waste and the burning of agricultural wastes is enforced in the municipality.

95

Municipal Ordinance No. 012-97. This ordinance prohibits littering or
dumping of waste along public roads and places. Moreover, it prohibits burning of
waste along the aforementioned areas. Violators are subjected to fines ranging
from one hundred pesos (100 PhP) for first offense, two hundred (200 PhP) for
second offense, to three hundred (300 PhP) for third offense. Violators may also
be subjected to up to seven days imprisonment.

According to the ordinance, even children who violate the law may be
subjected to corresponding penalties. Parents of the violator will be warned for
first offense. Second offense require a fine of two hundred pesos (200 PhP) while
third offense increases to a three hundred peso (300 PhP) fine and the
submission of the child under the care of DSWD for seven days. The resolution
has not been amended since then. Fines and penalties still apply in the present

year.

Municipal Ordinance No. 01-2009. This resolution addresses the
problem on plastic waste. Under the ordinance, it is prohibited to sell or provide
plastic bags to customers as packaging materials for dry goods. Moreover,
though it regulates the use of plastics on wet goods, the ordinance bans the use
of secondary plastic packaging for wet goods. In addition, it is illegal to use
Styrofoam packaging as containers for food products or any other products.
Plastic waste will remain uncollected unless it is cleaned and dried upon waste

collection

96

Business establishments or individuals who violate the said ordinance
have to pay fines. For first offense, violators have to pay five hundred pesos (500
Php) while one thousand pesos (1000 PhP) has to be paid for second offenses.
Third offense requires a fine of two thousand five hundred pesos (2500 PhP)
and/or imprisonment of not more than six months depending on the discretion of
the court. Business establishments, however, may be subjected to cancellation of
license for a year.

This is the first and sole ordinance on plastics in the municipality as of the
moment.

Municipal Ordinance No. 03-2011. This ordinance deals with the
agricultural waste of the municipality. Under this, the municipality prohibits the
burning of agricultural waste, specifically rice hulls and hays. Violators of this
ordinance will be warned after first offense. After second offense, they will be
fined with five hundred pesos (500 PhP) per mound of hays. Third offense will be
fined with one thousand five hundred pesos (1500 PhP) per pile or up to six
months of imprisonment.

This ordinance is an amendment of the previous ordinance that prohibits
burning of hays in public lands. However, burning them in private areas may be
permitted. The former state of this ordinance was one of the earliest solid waste

management ordinance in Pila.

97

Municipal Ordinance No. 01-T-2014. This law is the first ordinance to
totally ban the outdoor or open burning of residential waste thus modifying the
provision provided by Municipal Ordinance No. 012-97. Individuals or
corporations who violate this ordinance will be penalized accordingly. First
offense requires reprimanding of the violators. For the succeeding offenses,
violators will be fined from five hundred (500 PhP) to one thousand five hundred
pesos (1500 PhP) or community service at the MRF for two days or community

service for two days at the barangay and three days at the MRF.

SWM programs. Aside from all the existing ordinances on solid waste,
programs on solid waste management are currently being practiced in the
municipality of Pila. At the beginning of September 2016, the solid waste
management campaign of Pila was started.

Seminars, attended by barangay officials, were conducted as a refresher
course on RA 9003 and local ordinance being implemented in the municipality.
Through this seminar, Barangay Health Workers (BHW) and Day Care Workers,
were briefed on their importance in the success of the campaign on solid waste.
Moreover, they were also encouraged to do house visits for further discussions
‘on the current and future plans of the municipality regarding waste management.

A kick off parade was also held to show the municipality's dedication to
address problems on solid waste. During the march, leaflets were distributed and

Posters on solid waste management were paraded. However, parade was only

98

done with in the poblacion barangays. On the same day, a covenant signing was
done and pledges from public servants were gathered. Therefore, exemplifying
the municipal campaign slogan: “Tara Na, Sama-sama sa Paglinis ng Basura”
(Come, Together, Let us Clean our Waste).

A garbage collection immersion was also done in accordance to the solid
waste program of the municipality. During the immersion, the currently seated
Mayor himself personally assessed the compliance of the residents on current
ordinances and programs of the municipality. Through the garbage collection
immersion, the municipal leader further asked for the cooperation of the people.

Moreover, the municipality distributed bayongs or weaved bags as
alternative for plastics. This program aimed to encourage residents to refrain
from using plastics bags in support to the Municipal Ordinance No. 01-2009 with
a slogan: “Sa Pila Bawal Ang Plastik” (In Pila, Plastics are Banned).

Other programs related to solid waste management include the clean-up
of the Bulusukan River and public roads spaces through Oplan Linis-llog and
Oplan Simot-Dampot, respectively. Furthermore, an organization called Task
Force Linis -Unlad was created to man programs on the cleanliness of the

municipality.

Findings. \t was found out that even though there are few ordinances on
solid waste, most of the residents of Pila are knowledgeable on the other solid

waste management programs of the municipality, such as the segregation and

99

collection of waste. Most of them are practicing segregation thinking that this is in
accordance to municipal ordinance. Although, there are still no formal laws on it
yet.

However, the leniency of some ordinances might have been urging some
of the residents to continue inappropriate practices like littering and dumping of
waste anywhere and burning of waste. As observed some areas are still teeming

with waste even with the municipal ordinance prohibiting littering (Plate 10).

Plate 10. Improper waste practices in the municipality of Pila.
Left - Litters in a public space in front of a local school,
Right - burned snack wrappers and dried leaves
(Photo by: Ma. Russell Natoza, 2014)

100

Nonetheless, the efforts of the administration to address solid waste are
immensely visible to the residents, thus they are more willing to conform with the

rules and participate in the programs.

Temporal Qualities Affecting Solid Waste Management

To further explain reasons for the current solid waste management
practices of the constituents from Pila, Laguna, temporal qualities were also
studied. These include the history of the municipality's land use and the history of
solid waste management of Pila through their previous ordinances regarding

solid waste.

A. History of municipality’s land use

Pila, Laguna is one of the early civilizations established in the Philippines.
According to historians, the municipality is one of the biggest barangayanic
domains in Southern Luzon during pre-Hispanic times. In 1589, a Datu farmed
the arable lands of Pila and rented them out to nobles and freemen who paid the
leader with sacks of rice as rent. During the Spanish era, part of the municipality
was a hacienda owned by prominent Spanish-Portuguese families. Pila then

remained to be a vast agricultural land.

101

Presently, Pila continue to be as one of the agricultural municipalities of
Laguna. However, residential developments are starting to spread across the
municipality. Trends in the establishment of residential subdivisions occurred in
early 2002. Based on recent data, the municipality has a total of 26 subdivisions
situated in some of the previous agricultural lands. Nonetheless, 90% of the land
area of Pila is devoted as agricultural land while only 8.01% is considered

residential sites and 1.6% is considered commercial areas.

B. History of the solid waste management

Preliminary to the current solid waste management ordinances of Pila, the
municipal council or the Sangguniang Bayan incepted a few laws on solid waste
tong before the establishment of RA 9003. Out of the many environmental laws
currently recorded in the Sangguniang Bayan, the municipality have ten
ordinances pertaining to solid waste (Appendix 5). Figure 11 illustrates how the

solid waste ordinances of the municipality progresses.

102

1973. Municipal 1997. 2014, Municipal
Ordinance No.5 Municipal Ordinance No.
Oxtinene 2009. Resolution
Municipal No. 012-97 @ No. 034-S-2009,
Ordinance No. 12
' ‘
1970 | 1980 | 1990 | 2000 | 2010
.

° ¢
1989, Municipal + :

Ld Municipal

Ordinance No. 11 7) ;
" Ordinance No.
Municipal 03-2011
Ordinance No. 18 2007. Resolution
No. 042-T-2007

Figure 11. Timeline of the municipality's ordinances on solid waste.

1973. The earliest documentation of solid waste management in the
municipality dates back in the 1973. Municipal Ordinance No. 5 simply prohibits
‘the dumping of broken glass, dilapidated tin cans, and any other waste in any
parts of the road or public lands. Also in the same ordinance, the residents are
allowed to burn any of their waste, even along the roads, as long as there will be
no residue left uncleaned. This ordinance was signed in February 3, 1973 by the

then Mayor Juanito Relova Jr.

103

Another ordinance on solid waste, specifically agricultural waste, was
signed on April 28, 1973. Municipal Ordinance No. 12 regulates the operation of
rice mills and requires owners to have individual rice hull deposits. Moreover, the
ordinance prohibits the burning of rice hulls in public lands while a permit from

the mayor is necessary before burning them in private properties.

1989. It is after 16 years that an addition to the solid waste management
ordinance of Pila was established. In July 3, 1989, Municipal Ordinance no. 11
was signed by another municipal leader, Mayor Querubin Relova.

This ordinance requires all stores, situated in the public market of Pila, to put up
garbage cans in their storefronts. These cans have to be made of metal, painted
similarly, and have to be lined with plastic bags.

On the same year, another ordinance on solid waste was signed in
October 16, 1989. The ordinance prohibits piling up or dumping of hays along the

roads of the municipality.

1997. After eight years, another ordinance on solid waste was adapted
Municipal ordinance No. 012-97 is an amendment of Municipal ordinance no. 5 in
1973. Similarly, the ordinance prohibits the throwing of shattered glass, shabby
tin cans, and any other trash along the public lands and roads. However,

Municipal ordinance No. 012-97 prohibits the burning of waste along public

104

roads, whereas the previous one permits buming as long as no trash or residues

will be left behind.

2007. Subsequent to RA 9003, a resolution on the establishment of Plia
Ecological Solid Waste Management Board was created. Seven years after the
founding of RA 9003 in 2000, Resolution No. 042-T-2007 was approved in
November 19, 2007 by the then Mayor Wilfredo Quiat. The objectives, duties,

and functions of the board is listed in Appendix 5.

2009. Two years after, another ordinance was created to address one of
the solid waste issues, not only in Pila, but in the entire country - plastic waste.
Resolution No. 034-S-2009 was signed in April 28, 2009. It was created to
regulate the use of plastic bags in wet goods and to prohibit its use in dry goods.
The use of Styrofoam was also prohibited under this law. Moreover, the law
states that plastic wastes will not be collected unless cleaned and dried prior to

submission

2011. In February 14, 2011, the municipality prohibits the burning of hays
altogether, regardless of where it will be burned. The previous state of the
ordinance on hays and rice hulls permits burning only if it is burned in private
lands and permits were secured. Prohibition of burning agricultural waste was

‘strengthened through the Municipal Ordinance No. 03-2011 signed by the Mayor

105

Edgardo Ramos. According to the resolution, burning is prohibited because the
act depletes the nutrients present in the soil. Moreover, agricultural waste, when

buried and allowed to decompose, will make soil fertile.

2014. Fourteen years after RA 9003, the municipality created an
ordinance solely for the incineration of waste. In April 7, 2014, Municipal
Ordinance No. 01-T-2014 was approved by Mayor Wilfredo Quiat. The resolution
ultimately prohibits outdoor or open burning of waste for the reason that today’s
trash like plastic, metals and synthetic materials contains harmful compounds.
Once burned, this waste can cause diseases like respiratory ailments and
probably cancer. Aside from plastics and synthetic materials, the ordinance also

prohibits burning of leaves and paper for this can also cause pollution,

Findings. Based on the recorded ordinances of the municipality, the
history of solid waste management in Pila could have had affected their current
solid waste management practices. For one, apart from RA 9003, local
ordinances on Reduce, Reuse, Recycle (3Rs) and segregation of waste are still
not enacted in Pila Laguna. Nonetheless, massive campaigns on these practices
are currently being introduced by the present administration. This may be the
Teason why some of the respondents surveyed claimed that they are not
practicing this management yet. The respondents are still adjusting with the

current municipal programs.

106

Moreover, a portion of the respondents are still burning their waste for the
reason that the ordinance on open burning was recently incepted - 2 years ago.
As documented in the 1973 ordinance, the residents of Pila are burning their
waste and were still allowed to burn them along highways. In 1997 though,
constituents were not allowed to burn along main roads and public lands but can
bum their waste on private spaces away from local roads. Burning of waste,
usually leaves and papers, is the residents practice since the early days. For
years, most of the residents are burning or grew up burning their waste. Thus,
burning persists even after the establishment of Resolution No. 028-T-2014.
Nonetheless, the current administration is determined in changing the residents’
burning of waste behavior.

In addition, littering along public lands and roads are widely known by the
residents of Pila. This is because as early as 1973, the people were instructed to
tefrain from dumping waste like broken glass, dilapidated tin cans, and any other
waste that can compromise the cleanliness of the municipality.

Moreover, the municipality instructed business owners to setup trash cans to
properly manage litters. However, this is limited only in public markets.

As observed, most of the ordinances of the municipality is concentrated on
agricultural waste. This is attributed to the agricultural nature of Pila, Laguna.
However, current trash of the municipality includes commercial wastes, like
plastics and the likes, other than agricultural waste. Thus, there is a need to

address the current characteristics of waste present in the municipality.

107

Moreover, the years of interval among the solid waste management laws, could
have indeed negatively reinforced the residents’ solid waste management

practices

Understanding Solid Waste Management

Through Transactional Analysis

To better understand the current solid waste management practices of the
residents from Pila, a transactional approach, proposed by Altman and Rogoff
(1987) guided the study. Through the transactional worldview, aspects including
psychological processes, physical environment, and temporal qualities, were
explored. Based on the transactional approach, the study did not aim to apply all
of these aspects in understanding behavior. Nevertheless, it tried to identify
patterns through these aspects to further explain the solid waste management
practices of the constituents. Thus, explanation for the practices, segregation,

3Rs, incineration, and disposal, may vary depending on the identified patterns.

108

Segregation of Solid Waste

Psychological processes. As noted, segregation practices of the
fespondents are very high. Indeed, most of them declared that they are
segregating their waste (see Table 6). Their segregation is affected by several
factors. For one, their attitude on sorting of waste is highly positive. They think
that it easy to sort waste into different categories (i.e. biodegradable and non-
biodegradable), and that through segregation they could be of help to an
individual's livelihood. Moreover, they believe that it is their responsibility to
segregate their waste. Therefore, these are influencing their segregation practice
(see Table 14).

The respondents’ knowledge on segregation may also have affected their
segregation practice. Majority of them believe that segregation is one of the
proper solid waste management schemes as cited in Table 10. Also, most of the
respondents think that segregating waste have benefits on them, some of which
is that it prevents flooding and diseases, and that they could earn cash through
segregating recyclables (Table 6). Thus, they are motivated to sort their waste.
With this positive knowledge, their perception or attitude then becomes positive
towards segregation. Both of these psychological processes affect one another.
Thus, they are motivated to segregate their waste.

However, it was also observed that some of the respondents wrongly

classify their waste into biodegradable and non-biodegradable (Table 12). When

109

those who wrongly classified their biodegradable waste is summed up, 12% of
the respondents are indeed mistaken. Moreover, 36% incorrectly categorize their

non-biodegradable.

Physical environment. The physical environment also affects the
respondents’ segregation practice. Specifically, the current programs of the
municipality on waste segregation encouraged the residents to practice waste
segregation. Even without a formal ordinance on segregation, majority of the
respondents still segregate their waste. The municipality's persistent campaign
on waste segregation might have affected their knowledge and attitude towards
the segregation of waste.

The different landscapes of the municipality, however, do not have much
bearing on their segregation. The segregation practices of the respondents
across landscapes are almost the same. As shown in Table 6, most of the
respondents from Pansol, Sta. Clara Sur, and Pinagbayanan are segregating
their waste. Nonetheless, the respondents’ residential waste facilities affect their
segregation. Some declared that they fail to segregate their waste because they
do not have enough trash cans. The municipal waste facilities are also affecting
segregation of waste. Since wastes are being collected at a specific day and
time, the respondents are motivated to segregate them for convenient waste
collection. This municipal waste service in turn affects the individuals’ knowledge

and attitude towards solid waste management.

110

Patterns on the temporal qualities, such as the history of land use and
ordinances on SWM, and its relation to the segregation were not observed.
Nonetheless, the researcher does not discredit that there might be a connection
between temporal qualities and their segregation of waste like the categories of
waste generated in the past and how it pars with the present. However, these

have not been included in this study but may be included for further researches.

Reducing, Recycling, and Reusing of Waste

Psychological processes. Majority of the respondents claimed that they
are recycling or reusing their waste while one fourth of them said that they are
not (see Table 7). Their practice on 3Rs is affected by their psychological
processes. The respondents’ attitude towards 3Rs garnered almost three fourths
positive response that it is easy to use reusable materials while the remaining
‘one fourth finds it inconvenient. Some also perceived that it is better to discard
recyclable waste. With this perception, some rather not recycle or reuse their
waste (see Table 18).

Nonetheless, majority of the respondents thinks that reducing waste being
generated is another proper waste management scheme. Thus, majority are
Practicing 3Rs. Moreover, their perceived benefits of recycling or reducing waste
encourage the respondents to do so. The most common motivation is that they

can exchange recyclables for money. However, this reason is stated by both

111

declared recyclers and non-recyclers (see Table 17). With this, it was inferred

that the respondents have little knowledge on 3Rs.

Physical environment. In terms of physical environment, it was observed
that there is no major difference on 3Rs practice among the different landscapes
of the municipality. As shown in Table 7, most of the respondents from Pansol,
Sta. Clara Sur, and Pinagbayanan are recycling or reusing their waste.
Nonetheless, it was observed that the municipality, through their waste
management program, encourages the residents to practice 3Rs even without
the existence of formal ordinance on reduce, reuse, and recycle. This programs,
could have affected their knowledge and attitude towards 3Rs.

Individual waste facilities and municipal waste facilities also do not affect
3Rs. Nonetheless, the presence of junk shops in the area has motivated the
respondents to recycle their waste.

Moreover, connection between 3Rs and the history of land use as well as
previous ordinances on solid waste was not observed in this study. Like that of
waste segregation, the previous categories of waste being generated by the
municipality could have affected their recycling and reusing practices. However,

this was not included in this study but can be of future use to other studies.

112

Incineration of Waste

Psychological processes. Most of the respondents do not incinerate
their waste however, one third of the respondents claim that they still burn their
waste (see Table 10). These practices could have been affected by their
knowledge on burning waste. Some of the respondents consider burning of
waste as one of the proper waste management scheme (see Table 10). Also,
their perceived benefits from burning waste, like the flowering of plants or the
fleeing of insects, affect their practice (see Table 8). Nonetheless, majority of the
respondents believe that they should refrain burning any kind of trash. However,
this is still outweighed by the circumstances presented to them thus resulting to

continuous incineration of waste.

Physical environment. \ndeed, the physical setting has an effect on the
incineration practice of the respondents. As previously discussed, most of the
respondents burning their waste are from the upland barangay of Pansol (see
Table 8). The nature of its surroundings, as well as the wide backyard spaces,
motivated the residents to burn. Moreover, the municipal waste facilities
constrain their choices. As mentioned, people continuously burn because their
garbage remains uncollected. Some of the areas, especially far flung ones, are
not included in the collection route. Nonetheless, there is a current ordinance on

burning of waste that is limiting the residents from burning. Most of those who

113,

refrain from burning mentioned that they do so because they chose to abide by
the law.

With this, it can be concluded that the physical setting is affecting the
knowledge and attitude of the residents therefore their incineration practice as

well.

Temporal qualities. One of the significant aspects affecting waste
incineration is the temporal qualities of Pila, Laguna. Based on the history of the
municipal land use, Pila is highly agricultural. Wastes generated are commonly
agricultural waste and back in the days, this type of waste can be burned.
Indeed, burning can be traced back on the early days of Pila Laguna. Even the
previous ordinances can attest to that. As mentioned in the previous section,
residents of Pila were allowed to burn their waste even in public lands. Then the
said law was amended prohibiting them to incinerate waste in public lands
though they can still burn in their private spaces. It was only in 2014 that the total
banning of incineration was implemented in Pila. Thus, even now that the type of
waste in Pila changed due to land use changes, some of the residents still could
not refrain from burning their waste.

It is then concluded that the incineration of waste of the residents is the
interplay of the temporal qualities, the physical environment, and their knowledge

and attitude on the said practice.

114

Waste Disposal

Psychological processes. Based on the result, majority of the
respondents have their waste collected by the garbage collectors. Some also
said that they sold their waste to junk shops, bury them, and even pile them at
their backyards. Majority of the respondents consider the aforementioned waste
disposal practices as proper segregation practices. Thus, their knowledge on
these waste disposal practices could have had affected their actions. In terms of
their attitude, majority of the respondents believe that it is indeed their
responsibility to take out their trash for its collection. Therefore, this is affecting
their waste disposal practice. Their knowledge on waste disposal is, in turn,

affecting their attitude towards it as well.

Physical environment. The different landscapes of the municipality affect
their waste disposal practice. Most of those who opt for waste collection are
mostly from the urban barangay of Sta. Clara Sur. This is because they usually
do not have enough lands to bury or pile their waste. Those who resort to other
waste disposal means, on the other hand, are from the rural barangays of Pansol
and Pinagbayanan. This is because they have the space to bury or pile their
waste. Moreover, the respondents from these barangays have more litter fall thus

‘selecting other means of reducing their waste.

115

Also, the waste management facilities of the municipality greatly affect the
waste disposal practice of the residents. Most of the residents who take their
trash out for collection are along the collection route or situated in the urban
barangays. However, those who opt for other means, including burning of waste,
are not along the collection route and are mostly from the rural barangays.
Nonetheless, the current program of the municipality on collection of waste is
starting to encourage the residents to opt for waste collection. Yet, the physical

characteristic of the barangays is currently restricting the waste collection route.

Temporal qualities. The history of the ordinances on waste disposal
affected the respondents’ practices as well. As presented, as early as 1973, the
municipality prohibits the dumping of waste in public roads and space thus
people are refraining from dumping them in these areas. However, some are still
littering public areas and this might be affected by their attitude that small wastes
like candy wrappers are negligible.

Moreover, since the municipality is agricultural in nature, their wastes are
mostly agricultural waste. Some respondents are still practicing waste disposal
practices like the ones they are practicing before, i.e. burying and piling up their
waste in their backyards.

In general, it is therefore concluded that the history of land use, from
agricultural to residential, has affected the current characteristics of the

barangays, thus, changing the type of waste generated by the constituents.

116

Moreover, through the changing land use, the laws and ordinances on solid
waste management have evolved as illustrated by the history of SWM
ordinances. The evolution in land use also calls for the improvement of waste
facilities to address the growing waste. Solid waste programs are now
significantly needed. The respondents’ knowledge and attitude towards proper
solid waste management also evolved through time and is dependent on the
progression of their physical environment. Thus, their current solid waste
practices are attributed to the interplay of these aspects. However, the study only
cited identified patterns in relation to waste segregation, 3Rs, incineration of
waste, and its disposal. Indeed, some of these waste management schemes
does not clearly illustrate relationship with all the aspects. Nonetheless, this
study does not discredit the existence of these connections. Further studies have

to be done in order to understand them even more

Recommendations for the Improvement

of Solid Waste Management

After understanding the current solid waste practices of the respondents
and analyzing its relation to other aspects, recommendations were formulated to

improve solid waste management in the municipality of Pila.

17

Waste Segregation

It was found out that majority of the respondents segregate their waste
into non-biodegradable and biodegradable. However, some of them fails to sort
their waste. In order to encourage the respondents to sort their waste, it would be
better to conduct seminars or intensify information drive on waste segregation
given that some are still confused with the classification of their waste. Also,
categories maybe expanded from biodegradable and non-biodegradable to
biodegradable, residuals, and recyclables.

Moreover, SWM programs should also include diversion of waste other
than merely being collected for disposal. Opportunities of transforming waste to
another resource, aside from selling them to junk shops, have to be explained to
the residents for them to be encouraged to segregate their waste. To cite an
example, biodegradable waste can be surrendered to collectors as food for
livestock or as raw materials for composting

Furthermore, in terms of the residential waste facilities of the respondents
who complain on their lack of trashcans, provision for trashcans can be
considered. Else, residents have to be taught on other ways of securing their
own trashcans like using recycled large plastic bottles or pails as alternatives.
Also, in case their residential waste facilities are not enough to receive their

waste, since it is only collected twice a week - one for biodegradable and one for

118

non-biodegradable, a community bin per category can be provided as
receptacles for weekly collection.

To foster a stronger participation on waste segregation, it is recommended
that an ordinance be written in accordance to RA 9003. It might not matter so
much in the current segregation practices of the residents but in the long run it

can affect the future behavior of the people.

Reducing, Recycling, and Reusing

It was found that majority of the respondents recycle and reuse their
waste. Moreover, they are willing to reduce their waste by avoiding plastics. To
further acquaint them on ways to reduce, recycle, and reuse waste, it would be
better if the municipality could include these topics on their massive information
drive, whether be it through Information, Education, and Communication (IEC)
materials or full blown seminars. Nonetheless, the respondents have positive
attitude towards 3Rs.

However, their understanding of recycling is only limited to selling them to
junk shops, aside from using them as materials for home decor and school
projects. Thus, it would be better to educate the people on other opportunities for
recycling like turning residual waste, such as snack wrappers, into arts and
crafts. These then can be sold as souvenirs for tourism campaign. Or, like one of

the residents is doing, it can be rolled in to beads and turn into deviant gowns for

119

competition. Also, since some of them are still using coals, paper waste can be
tumed into paper briquettes, instead on selling them to junk shops. This then can
be sold to the community or to the neighboring municipalities. Upcycling these
waste can encourage the residents from merely throwing them or selling them at
a minimal price.

In connection, the MRF can house the aforementioned projects to give
value to the municipal waste of Pila. Instead of using the solid waste budget on
transfer of waste from MRF to sanitary landfills, it would be of great help to the
community if funds can be redirected to income generating activities.

In addition, the respondents are knowledgeable on the program of the
municipality on the use of plastics. Currently, the municipality is using paper bags.
and eco bags as replacement for plastic bags. However, paper bags can also
add up to the waste if use inappropriately. Thus, the municipality should
encourage the use of reusable materials like eco bags and bayongs. Also,
feconsidering the use of oxo-biodegradable plastics should be explored since
these are more durable and can withstand weight better than paper bags.

Like the recommendation for waste segregation, it is advised to enact an
ordinance on reducing, recycling, and reusing of waste. This is mostly to benefit

the future behavior of the residents of Pila, Laguna.

120

Waste Incineration

Most of the respondents are refraining from burning their waste. However,
some are still burning a portion, if not all, of their waste. Since it was found that
their knowledge and attitude on incineration is divided, educating them on the
negative effects of buming can encourage them to stop such practice. Topics on
waste incineration can be included in the SWM program of the municipality.

Since some residents are seeing some benefits from burning, the
municipality should be able to address this issue. For one, as some of the
respondents declared, burning can encourage flowering of plants. The
municipality, in partnership with government agencies like the Department of
Agriculture, should be able to provide other environmental friendly methods to
encourage flowering of plants. Moreover, some residents said that burning drive
away insects thus the municipality, in coordination with government organizations
like the Department of Health, should provide or acquaint the residents with
alternative methods on preventing insects from proliferating.

Moreover, some respondents complain on their uncollected waste. To
address this, the municipality should provide other means of collecting their trash
if the narrow roads hinder the entrance of garbage trucks. It can be the collectors’
use of wheel barrows or pedicabs just to bring the waste along the collection
route. Installment of community bins will also be of help to address issue on

uncollected waste. Diversion of waste, as previously mentioned, can encourage

121

them to stop burning their waste given that one of the respondents’ objectives for
burning is to reduce waste.

Also, since there are already existing laws on burning, its strict
implementation needs to be sustained. The people should realize that their
municipality is committed in their solid waste management programs. It would
take some time for the respondents to adjust to this ordinance given that they are
burning their waste for a long time. However, it would be beneficial for the future

generation if incineration of waste out in the open will not be practiced anymore.

Waste Disposal

Majority of the respondents have positive attitude towards waste disposal,
specifically taking their trash out for collection and refraining from improperly
throwing their waste. Nonetheless, some people resort to littering as observed
Thus, this indeed requires behavior change through education and strict
implementation of ordinance. The amendment of Municipal Ordinance No. 012-
97 may also be needed to encourage participation for a litter-free municipality.

Moreover, to motivate the residents to opt for the collection of waste,
proper municipal waste facility has to be provided like additional collection route
or other collection schemes, as well as community bins. Also, the residents
request balik-sako or returning of sacks after waste collection so they do not

have to buy two sacks every week.

122

The municipality does not prohibit burying of waste, especially if the
residents have enough space to do so, however, the residents should be able to
discern waste that may be buried from those that compromise the health of the
‘soil and ground water. Also, piling of waste in one’s backyard is not discouraged,
however it should not compromise the health and safety of other individuals.
Proper waste disposal has to be discussed further and together with the current
SWM program of the municipality.

In general, it is advised that the municipality's program on solid waste
continue with great commitment on serving the people and the betterment of all
Indeed, the municipality is doing a great job in encouraging participation from the
residents. Sustaining these efforts can eventually change the negative behaviors
and nourish the positive ones.

Moreover, devolution of effort from the municipality to the barangays has
to be organized for the success of the programs. This is also to ensure that the
advocacy will trickle down to the individuals comprising each barangays. Indeed,
the municipality is currently organizing a contest to reward barangays with the
best solid waste management schemes. More than encouraging competition
among barangays, it should be explained that this is for the common good of
addressing problems on solid waste.

Table 20 summarizes the ideal solid waste management schemes based
‘on R.A. 9003, acceptable schemes, and the recommended strategies based on

the results of the study

123

Table 20. Ideal solid waste management schemes based on RA 9003, acceptable, and recommended SWM

schemes.

Solid Waste
Management
Practices

Ideal Solid Waste
Management Schemes

Acceptable Solid Waste
Management Schemes

Recommendation/s

Barangay Solid
Waste
Management
Board

Each Barangay should have a

Solid Waste Management

Board responsible for the ff:

© collection of waste
(biodegradable,
compostable, and reusable
wastes)

 establi

hment of MRF

Municipality may be
task for the coll
of waste from
residential facil

* MRF may not be
required for individual
barangays. Clustering
may be employed.

‘expounded solid waste
programs to address their
constituents’ wastes in
support with their municipal
programs

Devolution of efforts from
the municipality to
barangay level

Waste Segregation

© Separate container for
each type of waste from all
sources

© Container shall be properly
marked or identified for on-
site collection
"compostable,” recyclable’
or "special waste

Labelled community
bins may be used to
receive segregated
waste

« Segregated waste for
collection can be
categorized as
biodegradable and
non-biodegradable

Conduct seminars or
intensify information drive
on waste segregation
Waste categories
expanded to
biodegradable, residuals,
and recyclables

Provision for trashcans can
or community bins for each
categories

Ordinance requiring waste
segregation at source


Table 20 continued...

124

Solid Waste 5
Ideal Solid Waste Acceptable Solid Waste 7
peel Management Schemes Management Schemes Recermendatenis

Reducing, Reusing,
and Recycling

Prohibition of manufacture,
distribution, or use of non-
environmentally acceptable
packaging materials

Prohibits unauthorized
removal of recyclable
material intended for
collection by authorized
persons

Mandatory Solid Waste
Diversion requires LGU
shall divert at least 25% of
all solid waste from waste
disposal facilities through
re-use, recycling and
composting activities and
other resource recovery
activities

Regulation of use of
plastic bags and
encouragement for the
use of paper bags and
eco bags

Residents may sel
their recyclables in junk
shops or buy-back
facilities

Encouragement of
waste reduction by
preventing the use of
disposables; and
recycling and reuse of
waste are being done

Conduct massive
information drive on 3Rs
Educate the people on
other opportunities for
recycling or upcycling their
waste (arts and crafts, and
briquetting)

Encourage the use of
reusable materials like eco
bags and bayongs.
Reconsider the use of oxo
-biodegradable plastics
since these are more
durable and can be reused
Enact an ordinance that
would support reducing,
recycling, and reusing
programs


125

Table 20 continued.
Solid Waste 7
Ideal Solid Waste Management | Acceptable Solid Waste |
Management Recommendation/s
Practices Schemes Management Schemes
‘© Prohibition of open burning | e Prohibition of open * Educate them on the

Waste Incineration

including the traditional

burning including the
traditional small-scale
community sanitation
siga

negative effects of burning
* Provide other
environmentally friendly
methods to encourage
flowering of plants

* Acquaint the residents
with alternative methods
on preventing insects from
proliferating

plementation of

the ordinance on the

prohibition of open burning |


Table 20 continued...

126

Solid Waste
Management
Practices

Ideal Solid Waste
Management Schemes

Acceptable Solid Waste
Management Schemes

Recommendation/s

Waste Disposal

* Prohibition of littering,
throwing, dumping of waste
matters in public places

* Collection of solid waste
shall be done in a manner
that prevents damage to
the container and spillage
or scattering of solid waste

* Vehicles shall be designed
to consider road size,
condition and capacity to
ensure the safe and
efficient collection and

+ Prohibition of
littering, throwing,
dumping of waste
matters in public
places

* Collection of solid
waste shall be done
in a manner that
prevents damage to
the container and
spillage or scattering
of solid waste

* Collection routes and
schedules has to be
established

Education and strict
implementation of
ordinance; amendment of
ordinance for a litter-free
municipality

Provide other means of
collecting their trash (e.g.
wheel barrows or pedicabs
to bring waste along
collection route)

¢ Additional collection route
or other collection
schemes, and use of
community bins, balik-sako

Material Recovery

is designed to receive, sort,
process and store
compostable and
recyclable material
efficiently and in an
environmentally sound
manner

receive, sort, process
and store compostable
and recyclable material
efficiently and in an
environmentally sound
manner

« MRF can house income

generating activities aside
from composting

° Funds, intended for

transfer from MRF to

landfill, be redirected to
support income- generating
activities that diverts waste


CHAPTER V

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

This study aimed to improve solid waste management in Pila, Laguna by
understanding the underlying reason behind the current solid waste management
practices. Through transactional approach, the study described the current solid
waste management practices of the constituents. Moreover, it identified their
knowledge and attitude towards solid waste management as well as the physical
environment and the temporal qualities that can affect these practices.

The objectives were satisfied by conducting a survey among the different
landscapes of Pila. Representative barangays for the upland, urban, and
lakeshore communities were selected. Based on the amount of waste generated,
Barangay Pansol, Sta. Clara Sur, and Pinagbayanan acted as representatives for
upland, urbans, and lakeshore barangays, respectively. In addition, Key
Informant Interview was conducted and secondary data were used to understand
the current solid waste management practices.

Solid waste management practices included in the study are waste
segregation, recycling and reusing of waste, incineration of waste, and waste
disposal. It was then found out that majority of the respondents are sorting their

waste while some are not segregating their waste yet. The most common reason

128

for not segregating is that they do not have enough time to do so. However,
those who sort their waste usually do so for the benefit of exchanging recyclables
for cash or salt and so that it would be easier to collect their waste if it is
segregated. Respondents often sort them in to non-biodegradable and
biodegradable.

Moreover, it was found that most of the respondents claimed that they are
recycling or reusing their waste while some said that they are not practicing these
schemes. However, both the non-recyclers and recyclers reasoned out that this
is because they are selling their recyclables to junk shops. Most of those who
recycle or reuse their waste recycle or reuse plastic bottles and plastic bags.

In terms of their incineration practice, it was discovered that most of them
are refraining from burning their waste. However, a portion still burns their waste
for the reason that they would want to reduce waste to be collected. Also, some
said that burning encourage flowering of plants and drive away insects. Some
said that their wastes are not collected regularly. Commonly, the respondents
burn leaves and papers while some also burn plastic wastes. Nonetheless, those
who are not practicing incineration reasoned that it is prohibited to burn waste.

Since most of the respondents do not burn their waste, majority of them
claimed that they sell their waste to junk shops. Also, most respondents let
garbage collectors pick up their trash while some prefer to bury them or pile them

up in their backyards.

129

In general, the respondents are knowledgeable on proper solid waste
management. However, some thinks that burning of waste is one of the proper
waste management, as well as, piling of waste in their backyards. Most of those
who mentioned these are from the rural barangays of Pansol and Pinagbayanan.
Almost all also know the negative effects of improperly managed waste except
chemical poisoning. Moreover, though most classify waste correctly, some of the
respondents are confused with categories of waste. Most of the respondents are
knowledgeable on RA 9003 and the municipal ordinances on solid waste.
According to them, segregation of waste, regulation of plastics, banning of
incineration, proper waste collection, and banning of littering are some of the
municipal ordinances.

Moreover, result shows that the respondents have positive attitude
towards the solid waste management practices mentioned. Also, they are most
willing to participate in proper solid waste management programs.

In terms of the physical environment, through transect mapping, it was
found that the landscapes of Pila vary and is one of the examples of a ridge-to-
reef community. Residential waste facilities of the respondents are commonly
sacks aside from plastic bags, trash can and boxes. Furthermore, municipal
waste facilities include colored trash cans lining public spaces, color coded trucks
for collection and waste, and a Material Recovery Facility situated in one of the

barangays of the municipality. Based on the collection schedule, it was

130

discovered that some areas are not yet included in the collection route. Thus,
their wastes are not being collected

Current municipal ordinances include the prohibition of littering or dumping
of waste along public roads and places. Also, a municipal ordinance on the
regulated use of plastics is being implemented in the municipality. Two
ordinances address open burning. One is the prohibition of burning rice hulls and
hays and the other one is the total banning of open burning of residential waste.
Aside from the ordinances, solid waste management programs are being
campaigned in the municipality. Based on the history of solid waste ordinances in
the municipality, it was found out that ordinances focused on agricultural wastes.
Only in the recent years that municipal ordinances on other types of waste is
being addressed. This may be attributed to the history of the municipality's land
use.

It is therefore concluded that the current solid waste management
practices of the residents are explained by interplay of psychological processes,
physical environment, and temporal qualities. As observed, waste segregation
practice may be attributed to the respondents’ accurate knowledge on
segregation and positive attitude towards it. Moreover, the limitations on
segregation is rooted on the lack of residential waste facilities as well as
municipal facilities. These are also observed in the reducing, recycling, and

reusing practices. However, as found out, knowledge on 3Rs is very limited. The

131

MRF is also not utilized to divert waste and convert them in a more income
generating materials.

In terms of incineration, the psychological processes of the respondents
undeniably affect their behavior. The different landscapes also affect burning
practices, together with, residential and municipal waste facilities. Temporal
qualities on solid waste significantly affect burning practice. Waste disposal is
also affected by these aspects. Indeed, some of these waste management
schemes does not clearly illustrate relationship with all the aspects. Nonetheless,
this study does not discredit the existence of these connections.

After understanding the reasons behind current solid waste management
practices of the respondents, tailor-fitted recommendations were formulated to
further improve solid waste management in the municipality. One of the
recommendations is to improve municipal programs through campaigns and IEC
materials. Also, enactment of ordinances on segregation, 3Rs, and waste
disposal can potentially improve waste management. Moreover, amendments
and strict implementation of existing ordinances is also advised. Diversion of
waste through income generating programs like arts and crafts, as well as paper
briquette making, is another way of encouraging the residents from participating
in solid waste programs in 3Rs. Provision of community bins and trash cans is
another suggestion. Moreover, alternative programs like environmentally friendly
methods to encourage flowering of plants and drive away insects may motivate

the respondents to refrain from burning.

132

As a conclusion, transactional analysis is a holistic approach to
understand behavior. Through this study, current solid waste management
practices of Pila Laguna are better understood. Thus, formulation of strategies for
an effective solid waste management for the municipality will be easier. Thus, the

chance of encouraging residents to participate is relatively high

CHAPTER VI

SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER STUDIES

To improve the study, other aspects of transactional approach may be
included. Social interactions among the residents may be explored to further
explain their solid waste management practices. Also, temporal qualities, like the
evolution of waste generated by the municipality as land use changes, may also
be looked into and added as aspect for analysis. Moreover, to further understand
the solid waste practices of the constituents from Pila, Laguna, instead of using
self-reported behavior, it will be more accurate if the observed behavior of the
respondents will be scrutinized. Increasing the number of respondents as well as
selecting representatives from the 17 different barangays of Pila might also
garner a different result from what this study discovered.

Using the transactional approach, studying a different locale, is
recommended. Locale can be a municipality practicing best solid waste
management schemes. It is suggested to study and understand their behavior
through transactional analysis. Findings can then be applied to other

municipalities with poor solid waste management if possible.

134

This study uses transactional analysis to understand current solid waste
management of the residents. However, this approach still has its limitations.
Primarily, it does not follow any structure to explain behavior. Moreover, analysis
can only be done based on the patterns inferred from the gathered information.
The said approach claimed a holistic take on the issue yet it cannot fully exhaust
reasons behind the residents’ current solid waste management practices.
Therefore, it is suggested to use other environmental psychology frameworks like
the Theory of Planned Behaviors. Moreover, other environmental science
theories like the study of institutions involved in the solid waste management may

be employed.

CHAPTER VII

LITERATURE CITED

ALTMAN I., WERNER, C.M., OXLEY, D., AND HAGGARD, L.M. (1987).
Christmas Street as an Example of Transactionally Oriented Research.
Environment and Behaviour 19(4). 501-524.

ANCOG, R.C., ARCHIVAL, N.D., REBANCOS, C.M. (2012). Institutional
Arrangements for Solid Waste Management in Cebu City, Philippines.
Journal of Environmental Science and Management 15(2). 74-82.

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (2014). Republic of the Philippines National
Urban Assessment. Retrieved May 14, 2016 from http:/Awww.adb.org/
sites/ default/files/publication/4281 7/philippines-national-urban-
assessment. pdf

ATIENZA, V. (2011). Review of the Waste Management System in the
Philippines: Initiatives to Promote Waste Segregation and Recycling
through Good Governance. Kojima and Michida ed., Economic
Integration and Recycling in Asia: An Interim Report, Chosakenkyu
Hokokusho, Institute of Developing Economies. Retrieved May 18, 2016
from http: /Awww. ide. go. jp/Japanese/Publish/Download/Report/2010/pdf
2010_431_05.pdf

BALISACAN, A.M. (March 10, 2013). NEDA calls for greater LGU compliance
with solid waste management. Official Gazette. Retrieved from
http://www. gov. ph/2013/03/1 0/neda-calls-for-greater-Igu-compliance-on-
solid-waste-management/

BARLES, S., 2014, History of waste management and the social and culture
representation of waste. In: Agnoletti, M., Neri Serneri, S. (Eds.), The
Basic Environmental History. Springer, Switzerland (Chapter 7).

BASILIO, DELOS REYES, AND SANTOS (March 2, 2016). A Plastic Story. LB
Times. Retrieved May 7, 2016 fromhttp://Ibtimes. ph/201 1/2016/03/02/a-
plastic-story/

136

BATICADOS, E.J.B, NATOZA, M.R.A., AND SOTTO, R. (2015). Municipal Solid
Waste Management: the case of Los Bafios and Pila Laguna.
Unpublished Report ChE 284. University of the Philippines Los Bafios.

BONNES, M., AND BONAIUTO, M. (2002). Environmental Psychology: From
spatial-physical environment to sustainable development. In R.B. Betchel
& Churchman (Eds.), Handbook of environmental psychology (pp. 28-54).
New York: Wiley.

CARR, G.M. AND J.P. NEARY. (2008). Water Quality for Ecosystem and Human
Health, 2nd Edition. United Nations Environment Programme Global
Environment Monitoring System. Retrieved May 5, 2016 from
http://www.gemswater.org/publications/pdfs/water_quality_human_health.
pdf

CEBU CITY ORDINANCE NO. 1361. An ordinance establishing a system of
garbage collection, imposing fees therefore, and expropriating funds and
for other related purposes. Retrieved May 7, 2016 from
http://www.globenet.org/ preceup/pages/ang/
chapitre/capitali/cas/phimana_e.htm

CHANDRAPPA, R. AND DAS, D.B. (2012). Waste Quantities and
Characteristics. In Solid Waste Management Principles and Practices. (pp.
47-63). Berlin: Springer Berlin Heidelberg

COMMUNICATION GAP FOR GOVERNANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY
PROGRAM. (n.d.). Theories of Behavior Change. Retrieved May 17, 2016
from
https://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTGOVACC/Resources/Behavior
Changeweb. pdf&ved=0ahUKRwix08_Lt97 QANUDH5QKHanxBJMQF ggg
MAA&usg+AFQjCNGKbuhsHbRA_R&EjFTIilLsgFie5Vw&sig2=poHXVT57
3venLe2RLYBOOA

CREATIVE RESEARCH SYSTEMS (2012). Sample Size Online Calculator.
Generated May 14, 2016 from http:/www.surveysystem.com/sscalc.htm

CUNA, J.M. (March 3, 2012). DENR seeks more altematives to open burning of
waste/Interviewer: Philippine News Agency in: interaksyon.com Retrieved
May 5, 2016 from http://interaksyon.com/article/25897/denr-seeks-more-
alternatives-to-open-burning-of-waste

DAHIYA, R. (2015). Projections for the population growth and its impact on solid
waste generation of a medium sized North Indian City. International
Journal of Technical Research and Applications. 3(6). pp. 57-61.

137

Retrieved May 17, 2016 from http://www. ijtra.com/view/projections-for-the-
population-growth-and-its-impact-on-solid-waste-generation-of-a-medium-
sized-north-indian-city.pdf

DEL BARRIO, M.C. (2015). ChE 284: Solid Waste Management. Unpublished

powerpoint presentation. A.Y. 2014-2015. University of the Philippines Los
Bafios.

DEL MUNDO, D.M.N, REBANCOS, C.M, AND ALAIRA, S.A. (2009) Correlation
of Socio-Economic Status, Environmental Awareness, Knowledge, and
Perception on Solid Waste Management Practices in Barangays Talisay
and Balibago, Calatagan, Batangas, Philippines.Journal of Environmental
Science and Management. 12(2).

DUNLAP R.E. (2002). Environmental Sociology. In: Betchel, R.B. and
Churchman, A. (2002). Handbook of Environmental Psychology.

DUNLAP R.E. AND MARSHALL B.K. (2006) Environmental Sociology in: Bryant,
C.D. and Peck, D.L. (2006). 21st Century Sociology: A Reference
Handbook. Sage Publication.

ECOLOGICAL SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT ACT OF 2000 OR REPUBLIC
ACT 9003 (2001). Retrieved May 5, 2016 from http://www.lawphil.net/
statutes/repacts/ra2001/ra_9003_2001.html

ECOWASTE COALITION (July 9, 2012). Payatas Dumpsite Tragedy 12 Years
Later: When Shall We Leam?. Eco Waste Coalition Retrieved May 5,
2016 from http://ecowastecoalition.blogspot.com/2012/07/payatas-
dumpsite-tragedy-12-years-later.html

EDER, R. AND ARNBERGER, A. (2012). The influence of place attachment and
‘experience use history on perceived depreciative visitor behavior and
crowding in an urban national park. Environmental Management. 50. 566-
580.

GAIDAJIS, G., ANGELAKOGLOU, K., AND AKTSOGLOU, D. (2010). E-waste:
Environmental Problems and Current Management. Journal of
Engineering Science and Technology Review. 3(1). pp 193-199. Retrieved
May 17, 2016
fromhttp://www jestr.org/downloads/volume3/fulltext342010.pdf?ref=driver!
ayer.com/web.

GREENE, D.L. AND SCHAFER A. (May 2003). Reducing Greenhouse Gas
Emissions from US Transportation Retrieved May 17, 2016 from

138

http://www.c2es.org/docUploads/ustransp.pdf&ved=OahUKEwjc3Lmjud&Q
AhUJEpQKHc&UAWkQF ggdMAA &usg=AFQjCNGycsGo38WyDjaVygRMe
xXDEUTI9FA7sig2+GbIGiqsY8G2E 1 yvo2xS6rA

HASS, P.M. (2015). Epistemic Communities, Constructivism, and International
Environmental Politics. Rutledge.

HOORNWEG, D. AND BHADA-TATA, P. (March 2012). What a Waste: A Global
Review of Solid Waste Management. World Bank Urban Development
Series Knowledge Papers. Retrieved May 17, 2016 from
http://siteresources.
worldbank.org/INTURBANDEVELOPMENT/Resources/336387-
1334852610766/What_a_Waste2012_Final.pdf

HOORNWEG D., BHADA-TATA P., AND KENNEDY, C (October 30, 2013).
Environment: Waste Production must peak this century. Nature:
International Weekly Journal of Science. 502(7473). Retrieved May 17,
2016.from http://www.nature.com/news/environment-waste-production-
must-peak-this-century-1.14032#peak.

HUFFMAN, AH., VAN DER WERFF, B.R., HENNING, J.B., WATROUS-
RODRIGUEZ, K. (2014). When do recycling attitude predict recycling? An
investigation of self-reported versus observed behavior. Journal of
Environmental Psychology. 38. 262-270.

INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE (2007). Waste
Management: Status of the sector, development trends, and implication in:
IPCC Fourth Assessment Report: Climate Change 2007 Retrieved May 4,
2016 from https://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/wg3/en/tssts-
10.htmi

JORGENSEN, B.S. AND STEADMAN, R.C. (2001). Sense of place: Lakeshore
owners attitudes toward their properties. Journal of Environmental
Psychology. 21, 233-248.

LAMUG, C.B., CRITTENDEN, K., NELSON, G.L.M. (1999). Place identity of
women of Bacolor. Philippine Sociological Review. 47. 21-30.

LEGARDA, L (July 5, 2012). Legarda wants solid waste, flood contro! projects
fully implemented/ Interviewer: Evangelista, K. in: Inquirer.net Retrieved
May 5, 2016 from http://newsinfo.inquirer.net/22397 1/legarda-wants-solid-
waste-flood-control-projects-fully-implemented.

139

LIZABA, M.A.D.L.R. (2010). Development of a protocol for rapid assessment and
monitoring of compliance by LGUs to R.A. 9003 (Ecological Solid Waste
Management Act of 2000). Unpublished Master's Thesis. University of the
Philippines Los Bafos.

LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE OR REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7160 (1991). Retrieved
May 7, 2016 from _ http:/www.lawphil.net/statutes/repacts/ra1991/
ra_7160_1991 .html

LOS BANOS MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE NO. 2008-752. An Ordinance
Prohibiting The Use of Plastic Bags on Dry Goods & Regulating Its
Utilization On Wet Goods and Prohibiting The Use of Styrofoam In The
Municipality of Los Bafios and Prescribing Penalties Thereof.

NATIONAL STATISTICAL COORDINATION BOARD (2009). 2003 City and
Municipal Level Poverty Estimates. National Statistical Coordination
Board: Makati City.

NAVARRO, A.M. (2014). Scrutinizing Urbanization Challenges in the Philippines
through the Infrastructure Lens. Philippine Institute for Development
Studies. Discussion Paper Series No. 2014-37. Retrieved May 14, 2016
from _http://dirp3.pids. gov. phiwebportal/CDN/PUBLICATIONS/pidsdps
1437. pdf

NG, J.A. (June 7, 2012). Trash Generated by PH cities to increase by 165% in
2025 - WB. Business Mirror in ABSCBN News. Retrieved May 18, 2016
from http://news.abs-cbn.com/business/06/07/12/trash-generated-ph-
cities-increase-165-2025-wb.

PAVIA, Municipal Ordinance No. 2015 - 03 “AN ORDINANCE PROHIBITING
OPEN-BURNING AND PRESCRIBING PENALTIES THEREOF”.
Retrieved May 7, 2016 from _ http:/Awww.pavia-iloilo.gov.ph/
sites/defaultfiles/sites/ default/files/reso_ord/2015-03.pdf

PAGANO, A. (July 21, 2000). Promised Land garbage landslide kills at least
2000 in the Philippines in: World Socialist Web Site Retrieved May 5, 2016
from https:/www.wsws.org/en/articles/2000/07/phil-j21 html.

PHILIPPINE STATISTICS AUTHORITY. Income Classification for Provinces,
Cities, and Municipalities. Retrieved May 14, 2016 from
http://nap.psa.gov. ph/activestats/psgc/articles/con_income.asp

140

PHILIPPINE STATISTICS AUTHORITY (2014). 2012 City and Municipal-Level
Small Area Poverty Estimates. Retrieved October 13, 2016 from
https://psa.gov.ph/poverty-sae-press-releases

PILA LAGUNA MUNICIPAL PROFILE. (n.d.)
PILA LAGUNA MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN. (2013)

RAJKUMAR, N., SUBRAMANI, T., AND ELANGO, L. (2010). Groundwater
Contamination Due to Municipal Solid Waste Disposal - A GIS Based
Study in Erode City. International Journal of Environmental Sciences. 1
(1). Retrieved May 6, 2016 from __http:/Avww.ipublishing.co.in/
jesvolino12010/EIJES1004.pdf

SANTIAGO, L.P.R. (1997). The roots of Pila, Laguna: A Secular and spiritual
history of the town (900 ad to the present). Pila Historical Society
Foundation Inc. Retrieved from http://historyofpila.bayangpinagpala.org.

TAMMEMAGI, H.Y. (1999). The Waste Crisis: Landfills, Incinerators, and Search
for a Sustainable Future. Oxford University Press.

TATLONGHARI, R.V. & JAMIAS, S.B. (2010). Village-Level Knowledge,
Attitudes and Practices on Solid Waste Management in Sta. Rosa City,
Laguna, Philippines. Journal of Environmental Science and Management
13(1). 35-51

UNITED NATIONS ENVIRONMENTAL PROGRAMME (2009). Policy and
Regulations - Cebu. Retrieved May 5, 2016 from http://www.unep.org/ietc/
Portals/136/Other%20documents/Waste%20ManagementWaste%20Plas
tic(WP_5_P_PoilcyAndRegulations_Cebu.pdf

UN-HABITAT (2010). Solid Waste Management in the World’s Cities: Water and
Sanitation in the World's Cities 2010. Earthscan: UK.

WEIDINMYER, C (September 2, 2014). Burning Trash Bad for Humans and
Global Warming/Interviewer: Thompson, A. in: Scientific American Climate
Central September 2, 2014. Retrieved May 4, 2016 from
http:/Awww.scientificamerican .com/article/burning-trash-bad-for-humans-
and-global-warming/

WERNER, C. (2003). Changing Homeowners’ use of toxic household products: A
transactional approach. Journal of Environmental Psychology. 23. 33-45

141

WERNER, C. AND ADAM D. (2001). Changing homeowners’ behaviors involving
toxic household chemicals: A psychological, multilevel approach. Analyses
of Social Issues and Public Policy. 1. 1-31.

WERNER, C., BROWN, B., AND ALTMAN, I. (2002). Transactionally Oriented
Research: Examples and Strategies in:Betchel, R.B. and Churchman, A.
(2002). Handbook of Environmental Psychology.

WORLD BANK (June 6, 2012). What a Waste Report Shows Alarming Rise in
Amount, Cost of Garbage. Feature story in The World Bank News.
Retrieved May 4, 2016 from _http:/www.worldbank.org/en/news/
feature/2012/06/06/report-shows-alarming-rise-in-amount-costs-of-
garbage

WORLD BANK (October 30, 2013). Global Waste on Pace to Triple by 2100.
Feature Story in The World Bank News. Retrieved May 4, 2016 from
http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2013/10/30/global-waste-on-
pace-to-triple

ZOLETA-NANTES, D.B. (2000). Flood Hazards in Metro Manila: Recognizing
Commonalities, Differences, and Courses of Action. Social Science
Diliman. 1(1). 60-105. _— Retrieved May 6, 2016 from
http://www. journals.upd.edu. ph/index. php/socialsciencediliman/article/dow
nload/36/7

Powerpoint Presentation:

DEL BARRIO, M. (2015). Solid Waste Management. Presentation in ChE 284:
Solid Waste Management under Prof. Marilyn del Barrio. 2nd Semester,
AY. 2014- 2015.

APPENDICES

Appendix 4

Survey Questionnaire

143

144

‘August 10, 2016
Minamaha! kong kababayan,
sang mapagpalang araw po.

‘Ako po ay estudyante mula sa Unibersidad ng Pilipinas, Los Baftos na kasalukuyan
nanaliksisk ukol sa wastong pangangasiwa ng basura o solid waste management ng
bayan ng Pila._ Layunin ng pagaaral na ito na tipunin at suriin ang mga isyu at polisiyang
nakapaloob at nakaaapekto sa wastong pangangasiwa ng basura sa ating bayan. Higit pa
tito, layunin din ng proyekto na magbigay ng mga rekomendasyon na naglalayong
mapagtuunan ng pansin ang mga isyu at polisiya at makabuo ng konkreto at
apapanahong pamamaraan upang mailunsad at maitaguyod ang wastong pangangasiwa
rng basura.

Upang maisagawa ito, hinihiling ko po ang inyong kooperasyon sa pamamagitan ng
pagsagot sa aking survey form. Ang inyo pong mga kasagutan ay makatutulong upang
‘malaman ang pananaw ng publiko ukol sa wastong pangangasiwa ng basura.

Umasa po kayo na ang inyong ibabahaging kaalaman ay mananatiling pribado at
gagamitin lamang sa mga kadahilanang nabanggit

Maraming Salamat po!

Lubos na gumagalang,

ta. ACU atora
Re rcher
University of the Philippines Los Banos

Noted by:

‘Thesis Adviser

PANGALAN:

145

TIRAHAN:

TRABAHO: EDAD:

EDUKASYON (ANTAS):. KASARIAN:
CIVIL STATUS: CBinata/Dalaga COMay Asawa
BILANG NG ANAK:

A, Gawi ukol sa pangangasiwa ng basura

1. Pinaghihiwalay mo ba ang iyong mga basura?

CBabae DLalaki
Dba pa

100 (Tumuloy sa # 2) COHINDI (Tumuloy sa #3 )

2. Anu-ano ang mga kategorya ng basurang pinaghihiwalay?

3. Bakit ka naghihiwalay/ hindi naghihiwalay ng basura?

4. Nagre-recycle at nagre-reuse ka ba ng gamit?

1100 (Tumuloy sa # 5) COHIND! (Tumuloy sa #6 )

a

Anu-ano ang iyong karaniwang nire-recycle o nire-reuse?

2

Bakit ka nagrerecycle/ hindi nagrerecycle?

7. Sinusunog mo ba ang iyong basura?

00 (Tumuloy sa # 8) CHINO! (Tumuloy sa #9)

8. Anu-ano ang mga basurang sinusunog mo?

9. Bakit ka nagsusunog/ hindi nagsusunog ng basura?

10. Ano ang ginagawa mo sa mga basurang hindi sinusunog?

11. Anu-ano ang mga ginagamit mo sa pangangasiwa ng iyong basura?

B. Kaalaman ukol sa Basura

1. Saiyong palagay, anu-ano ang wastong pamamaraan ng pangangasiwa ng iyong
basura? (Maaring i-tsek lahat ng posibleng sagot)

CiPaghihiwaly ng nabubulok at di-nabubulok na basura

CiPagtambak ng basura sa bakuran

CPagsunog ng basura

CPag-cocompost o pag-gawa ng abono mula sa nabubulok na basura
CiPag-gamit ng plastik

CoPagbebenta ng basura tulad ng papel at plastik sa junkshop
CiPag-iwas sa mga bagay na maaring makadagdag sa basura

Cldagdag ang tamang pangangasiwa ng basura sa curricula ng edukasyon
(pormal at di-pormal)

Diba pa


147

2. Saiyong palagay, anu-ano ang masasamang naidudulot ng maling pangangasiwa
ng iyong basura? (Maaring i-tsek lahat ng posibleng sagot)

CiPagkakaroon ng sakit tulad ng dengue, leptospirosis, hika, at diarrhea
CMatinding pagbaha

CiPagkalason mula sa mga kemikal

CPagdumi ng mga anyong-tubig, anyong-lupa, at hangin
CiNagdudulot ng mabahong amoy

CPagkakaroon ng sugat dulot ng matutulis at matatalim na bagay

Diba pa:

3. Saiyong kaalaman, alin-alin ang mga halimbawa ng nabubulok o biodegradable
(lagyan ng tsek) at di-nabubulok o non-biodegradable (lagyan ng ekis) na basura?

CPlastik, sako, at Styrofoam
CMetal tulad ng lata at yero
CTuyong dahon o halaman
CoTissue at papel

CiBalat ng prutas, gulay, o rekado
CBaso, bote, at salamin

OTirang pagkain

C. Kaalaman ukol sa Batas

1. Alam mo ba kung ano ang R.A. 9003 0 ang Ecological Solid Waste Management Act
of 2000?

100 (Tumuloy sa # 2) CHINO! (Tumutoy sa #7 )

2. Sa iyong kaalaman, anu-ano ang layunin ng R.A. 9003 o Ecological Solid Waste
Management Act of 2000? (Maaring i-tsek lahat ng posibleng sagot)

CPangatagaan ang kalusugan ng mamamayan
CPangalagaan ang kalikasan

C)Mabawasan ang basura sa pamamagitan ng 3R’s (Reduce, Reuse, Recycle)

148

CiSiguraduhin ang paghihiwalay at regular na pagkolekta ng basura
Cldagdag ang tamang pangangasiwa ng basura sa curricula ng edukasyon
Ollba pa:

3. Saiyong kaalaman anu-ano ang mga ipinagbabawal ng R.A. 9003? (Maaring Htsek
lahat ng posibleng sagot)

CiPagtapon ng basura kung saan-saan
CPagsunog ng mga basura

CPagkolekta o pagdulot ng pagkolekta ng hindi hiwalay (segragated) na
basura

CPagbaon o pagtambak ng basura sa bahaing lugar

CPaggawa, pamimigay at paggamit ng hindi makakalikasang balutan
(packaging materials) tulad ng plastic/styrofoam

Dla pa:

4. Sa iyong kaalaman, kaninong responsibiledad ang paghihiwalay ng basura?

CTungkulin ito ng bawat residente, may-bahay, o negosyante
CTungkulin lamang ito ng barangay captain sa tulong ng barangay council
CTungkulin lamang ito ng munisipyo at ng MENRO

Diba pa:

5. Sa iyong kaalaman, ano ang parusa sa paglabag sa R.A. 9003?
(Walang parusa ang sinumang lumabag

CMutta, community service, at pagkakabilanggo
DoTuluyang pagkakabilanggo

Hindi ko alam ang parusa sa sinumang lumabag
Ola pa:


149

6. Saiyong kaalaman, sino ang pwedeng magsampa ng demanda sa sinumang
lumabag sa R.A. 9003?

Ang barangay captain at ang council nito ang pwede magsampa ng reklamo
CSinumang makakita ng paglabag ay maaring magsampa ng reklamo

Ang munisipyo at ang MENRO ang pwede magsampa ng reklamo

Oba pa:

7. Alam mo ba kung anu-ano ang mga ordinansa ng inyong munisipyo ukol sa basura?
1100 (Tumuloy sa # 8) CHINO! (Tumuloy sa #9 )

8. Sa iyong kaalaman, anu-ano ang mga ordinansang ipinapatupad ng inyong
munisipyo ukol sa basura?

9. Alam mo ba kung kinokolekta ang mga basura ng inyong munisipyo?
100 (Tumuloy sa # 10) COHINDI (Tumuloy sa D)

10. Tuwing kailan at gaano kadalas kinokolekta ang inyong basura?

11. Alam mo ba kung saan dinadala ang inyong basura pagkakolekta?

O00, Saan? OOHINDI

150

D. Pananaw ukol sa wastong pangangasiwa ng basura (Lagyan ng tsek ang iyong

sagot)

‘SUMASANG-
AYON

‘SUMASANG-

AYON

1, Madali lamang maghiwalay ng basura sa
nabubulok at di-nabubulok

2. Hindi madaling gumamit ng reusable na gamit
tulad ng eco bag at mga bote

‘3. Mas mababawasan ko ang aking basura kung
jiwasan kong gumamit ng mga disposable na
gamit tulad ng plastic at Styrofoam

4. Mas makabubuti sa aking bayan kung iiwas
akong magsunog ng aking basura

5, Mas makabubuti sa aking bayan kung
susundin ko ang mga wastong pangangasiwa ng
| basura i-terekomenda ng munisipyo

6. Makakatulong ako sa kabuhayan ng ibang tao

| kung ihihiwalay ko ang mga narerecycle na
basura sa hindi narerecycle

7. Hindi nakasasama ang pagtapon sa kung
‘saan ng mailit na basura tulad ng balat ng
kendi

8. Hindi nakasasama ang pagsunog ng basura
lalo na ang mga nabubulok

9. Susunod lamang ako sa wastong
pangangasiwa ng basura kung gagawin din ito
| ng aking kababayan

10, Susunod lamang ako sa wastong
Pangangasiwa ng basura kung may batas at
kaukulang parusa ipapatupad sa mga lalabag

14. Responsibilidad kong maghiwahiwalay ng
aking basura

12. Responsibilidad kong isuplong ang
| sinumang lumabag sa wastong pangangasiwa
ng basura

13. Responsibilidad kong ilabas ang aking
segregated na basura sa tamang lugar upang ito

ay makolekta ng munisipyo


151

‘SUMASANG-
AYON

HINDI
‘SUMASANG-
AYON

WALANG
KOMENTO

14, Masisiyahan ang aking mga kapitbahay at
kakilala kung ibabahagi ko ang aking kaalaman
tukol sa wastong pangangasiwa ng basura

15, Makatutulong ako sa pagiging huwarang
barangay/bayan kung ako ay susunod sa
wastong pangangasiwa ng basura

16. Dapat tuonan ng pansin ang wastong
Pangangasiwa ng basura sa aming bayan

Maraming salamat po!


Appendix 2

Survey Result Analysis

152

153

Solid Waste Management of Barangay Pansol

Pansol is one of the 17 barangays of Pila Laguna. It has a land area of
296.50 hectares which is the largest among the rural upland communities of the
municipality including Bukal, Concepcion, Masico, Mojon, and San Miguel.

Barangay Pansol is divided into six zones or puroks (Appendix Figure 1).

Appendix Figure 1. Spot map of Barangay Pansol
(Source: Barangay Profile of Pansol, n.d.)

154

Pansol housed a population of 2,563 residents and 537 household (2013).
The community's main livelinood is agriculture-based. Most of residents sourced
their income from farming and raising livestocks. Moreover, some of them owns.
businesses related to agriculture like oil and rice mills, feed supplies, and rice
retailers.

Indeed, the lush forest and vast rice fields of Pansol dates back even
before the Spanish era. Based on the accounts of old folks, Panso/ came from
the term Papansol. Papansol is the stream of water that flows through bamboo
poles that hamesses water from a deep well and distribute it among the people.
Consequently, this stream of water flourishes the early civilization of Pansol,

The barangay of Pansol was selected as the representative of rural upland
barangays because it has the largest land area among them. Thus, a larger
population, a larger number of waste generators, and a larger number of waste
generated. Survey was conducted on September 5 to September 9, 2016, a
week after the launching of the solid waste management campaign of the

municipality.

A. Sociodemographic characteristics

As shown in Appendix Table 1, most of the respondents from Barangay

Pansol are female (76%) while the remaining 24% are male. Majority of these are

155

aged 31 to 60 years old (60%), the other 21.3% are already in their senior years,
while the remaining 18% are aged 19 to 30 years old.

Moreover, majority of the respondents are married (74.7%) while some
are single parents (6.7%). Since a portion of the respondents are considered
senior citizens, 17.3% are also widows/widowers while only a portion is not yet
married or considered single (1.3%). Aside from the single respondents, majority
of the respondents have children (92%). Forty-four percent have two to three
offspring while 30.7% have four to nine. Only 14.7% of the respondents have one
child only and the remaining 2.7% have ten or more.

Some of the respondents from Barangay Pansol have not entered formal
schooling (6.7%) while 16% reached primary school. Twelve percent are
elementary graduate while four percent are undergraduates. A portion finished
their secondary education (30.7%) while some have not (5.3%). Another five
percent graduated from vocational courses while the remaining 36% entered
College. However, only 18.7% of them graduated.

Almost half of the respondents are housewives (46.7%) since they are the
ones who usually stay at home and are more hands-on with the households’
solid waste management. Some of the respondents are self-employed (26.7%).
Among them are business owners (12%), drivers (6.7%), tailors (5.3%), and
vendors (2.7%). Some are factory workers (2.7%) and laborers (2.6%) while 8%

have various jobs like bus conductor, house helper, and teacher. Also, since Pila

156

Laguna is agricultural in nature 8% of the respondents are farmers while some of
the senior citizens are already retired (5.3%)

As much as possible, the researcher chose representatives from the
different puroks of Barangay Pansol. Thus, 17.3% of the respondents are from
Purok 1, 20% from Purok 2, 18.7% from Purok 3, 22.7% from Purok 5, and
18.7% from Purok 6. However, only 2.6% of the respondents are from Purok 4.
This is mainly due to the distance of Purok 4 from the other puroks and the

unavailability of its residences during the conduct of the study.

Appendix Table 1. Sociodemographic characteristics of respondents
from Brgy. Pansol.

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

Total no. of respondents 75 100
Gender
Female 57 76.0
Male 18 24.0
Age
20 and below 02 02.7
21-30 12 16.0
31-40 13 17.3
41-50 21 28.0
51-60 11 14.7
60 and above 16 21.3
Civil Status
Single 01 01.3
Married 56 747
Single Parent 05 06.7

Widow/Widower 13 17.3


157

Appendix Table 1 continued.

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

Total no. of respondents 75 100
Educational Attainment
None
Elementary Undergraduate A nes
Elementary Graduate 09 12.0
High School Undergraduate a as
High School Graduate 23 307
College Undergraduate 13 173
College Graduate 14 187
Vocational 04 053
Occupation
Business Owner 09 12.0
Driver 05 06.7
Factory Worker 02 02.7
Farmer 06 08.0
Housewife 35 46.7
Laborer 02 02.6
Tailor 04 05.3
Retired 04 05.3
Vendor 02 02.7
Other 06 08.0
Number of Children
None 06 08.0
Only 1 1 147
2-3 33 44.0
4-9 23 30.7
10 and above 02 02.7
Residence
Purok 1 13 17.3
Purok 2 15, 20.0
Purok 3 14 18.7
Purok 4 02 02.6
Purok 5 17 22.7

Purok 6 14 18.7


158

B. Solid waste management practices

The respondents were asked if they are segregating their waste (Appendix
Table 2). Results show that majority are indeed segregating their waste (85.3%)
while the remaining 14.7% are not segregating their waste. Out of the 64
respondents who are segregating their waste, 43.75% are segregating into two
distinct categories - biodegradable and non-biodegradable. Aside from
biodegradable and non-biodegradable, six percent adds other categories like
diaper and plastic (1), plastic alone (2), and those that can be sold (1) while
1.56% categorize it as non-biodegradable and other. Moreover, 17.19%
categorize their waste into biodegradable and others like plastics, papers,
cardboard boxes, and tin cans. The other 31% of the respondents do not
categorize their waste in strictly biodegradable and non-biodegradable but
instead on varied and more specific categories like: bottles, fruit and vegetable
peelings, and plastics (3); bottle and tin cans (3); bottles, tin cans, boxes, and
peelings (1); bottles, tin cans, diapers, plastics, and leaves (1); leaves, papers,
and tin cans (3); leaves and plastics (2); leaves, bottles, plastics, and tin cans (2),
tin cans, bottles, and ignitable waste (2); tin cans, plastics, carton (1); and
plastics and bottles (2).

Respondents that answered that they segregate their waste were
subsequently asked for the reason behind their segregation practice. About one-

fourth of their answer is because they exchange their waste, specifically the

159

recyclable ones, for money or for heaps of salt (26.56%). Another 15.62%
answered that they segregate to ensure the cleanliness of their surroundings and
10.94% is for the easier collection of waste. Moreover, some believed that
segregation also prevent the spread of diseases (4.69%) and flooding (1.56%).
The respondents also segregate because some waste can be used as fertilizer
(7.81%) while some can be reused (7.81%). Others state that they segregate
waste that can be burned from those that cannot (15.62%). Lastly, the
tespondents segregate in accordance to the municipal ordinance of segregate
their residential waste (9.37%).

On the other hand, there are some respondents who declare that they do
not segregate their waste. The most common reason for non-segregation is that
they are busy with their works (27.27%) and that it is difficult to segregate waste
(18.18%), so some opt to burn all their trash (18.18%). Some mentioned that
they do not have enough garbage can (09.09%) thus some gather and put all

their waste in a sack, unsegregated (18.18%).

Appendix Table 2. Segregating practice of respondents from Brgy. Pansol.

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

Are you segregating your solid waste?

Yes, | am segregating my waste 64 85.3
No, | am not segregating my waste 4 147
TOTAL 75 100.0


160

Appendix Table 2 continued...

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)
In what categories are you segregating your

waste?
Biodegradable and
non-biodegradable 28 43.75
Biodegradable, non-biodegradable,
others 04 06.25
Biodegradable and others 11 17.19
Non-biodegradable and others 01 01.56
Others 20 31.25
OUT OF 64 100.00

Why are you segregating your waste?

Easy collection of waste 07 10.94
Ensure cleanliness of surroundings 10 15.62
Exchange for money or salt 17 26.56
Follow municipal ordinance 06 09.37
Prevent diseases 03 04.69
Prevent flooding 01 01.56
Separate waste that can be reused 05 07.81
Separate waste that can be burned 10 15.62
Use some waste as fertilizer 05 07.81
OUT OF 64 100.00

Why are you not segregating your waste?

Burning all my waste 02 18.18
Busy with work 03 27.27
Difficult to segregate 02 18.18
No available garbage can 01 09.09
Putting them all in one sack 02 18.18
No comment 01 09.09

OUT OF 11 100.00

As shown in Appendix Table 3, apart from the respondents’ waste

segregation practices, they were also asked if they recycle or re-use some of

161

their waste. Majority of the respondents recycle or reuse their waste (66.67%)
while the remaining 33.33% are not recycling or reusing. Recycling and reusing
respondents were then questioned regarding the waste that they usually recycle
or re-use. Based on their response, the participants are commonly recycling
plastics and plastic bottles, both garnering 58% of their response. Papers (14%),
cardboard boxes (14%), as well as, tin cans (12%) are also recycled or reused.
Other waste that the respondents recycle or reuse are old clothing (1), snack
wrappers (1), egg shells (1), old kitchen wares (1), plastic straws (1), eco bags
(1), glass jars (1), and old magazines (1).

Accordingly, recycling and reusing individuals were asked why they
recycle or reuse some of their waste. Most of them reasoned that they want to
make use of the utmost benefit of some of the recyclable materials including
plastic bottles and bags (34%). In relation to the previous answer, some of the
Tespondents recycle or reuse because they aim to save some money by doing so
(8%) while a bigger portion recycle or reuse because they sell recyclables to junk
shops in exchange of cash or some salt (14%). Some also answered that they
recycle or reuse to reduce the amount of waste to be discarded to the dumpsite
(6%) while some turn them into decoration and use them as school project
materials (12%). Another reasons for recycling and reusing waste are following
the municipal ordinance (8%) and keeping the surroundings clean (8%).
However, a portion of the respondents refuse to disclose the reason behind their

recycling or reusing practices (20%)

162

Though majority of the respondents recycle or reuse their waste, some still
do not practice recycling or reusing for the reason that a portion of the
respondents rather sell their recyclables (24%). Some also mentioned that they
do not have time to recycle or reuse their waste (16%) while some are reluctant
because they only have little knowledge about recycling and reusing (8%)
Another 8% mentioned that it is easier and better to discard waste than recycle
or reuse it. Another reason for not recycling or reusing is that throwing your
waste as it is can prevent the proliferation of pest at home (1). Also, it is difficult
to recycle or reuse waste and that the municipal ordinance regarding recycling
and reusing is not consistent. Thus, people rather not recycle or reuse at all (1).
Moreover, most of the respondents rather hold the reasons for not recycling or

reusing to themselves (32%).

Appendix Table 3. Recycling or Reusing Practice of Respondents
from Brgy. Pansol.

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

Do you recycle or reuse some of your

waste?
Yes, | recycle/reuse our waste 50 66.67
No, ! do not recycle/reuse our waste 25 33.33

TOTAL 75 100.0


163

Appendix Table 3 continued..

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

What are the waste that you usually
recycle or reuse?

Cardboard box 07 14.0
Paper 07 14.0
Plastic 29 58.0
Plastic bottle 29 58.0
Tin can 06 12.0
Others 08 16.0
OUT OF 50 100.00
Why are you recycling/reusing your waste?
Exchange for money or salt 07 17.5
Follow municipal ordinance 04 10.0
Maintain cleanliness of
‘surroundings 04 10.0
Make utmost benefit of recyclables 17 42.5
Project or decoration materials 06 15.0
Reduce trash to be discarded 03 07.5
Save some cash 04 10.0
OUT OF 40° 100.00
Why are you not recycling/reusing your
waste?
Easier and better to discard 02 11.76
Little knowledge on
recycling/reusing 02 11.76
No time to recycle/reuse 04 23.53
Selling recyclables 06 35.29
Others 03 17.65
OUT OF 47° 100.00

2°70 out of 50 (20%) did not answer the question
° 8 out of 25 (32%) did not answer the question

164

In Barangay Pansol (Appendix Table 4), half of the respondents bum their
waste (50.7%). Result shows that all of those who burn their garbage commonly
burn leaves with 37% of them include plastics when burning their waste. They
also burn paper (25.93%), grasses (14.81%), and candy or snack wrappers
(14.81%). Other respondents mentioned that they burn waste like Styrofoam (1)
while some bum all their wastes (2).

The respondents’ reason for burning some of their trash is mainly because
of the irregular collection of garbage in the area and, sometimes, their area is not
included in the collection route due to the size of road or their place is too far
flung (24.24%). Moreover, the respondents burn their waste to avoid litter caused
by rummaging of stray dogs (24.24%) while some intend to reduce garbage for
collection (21.21%). A portion of the respondents also burn their waste to shoo
away insects like mosquitoes (12.12%). Other reasons for burning includes the
absence of garbage cans (1), the use of ash as fertilizer (2), and the use of some
trash as fire starter (1)

Almost half of the respondents avoid burning their waste for several
reasons (48%). The main reason why they do not burn their garbage is that they
believe that it is bad for the environment (32%) and is bad for the health for it can
cause respiratory diseases like asthma (20%). Also, 28% of the respondents
Stated that, in Pila, Laguna, it is prohibited to burn waste and that the municipality
collects the constituents’ waste hence there is no need to burn trash (24%).

Other respondents fail to burn because they do not have enough space to burn

165

their trash (4%). Furthermore, during the survey, the researcher observed that
those who burn their trash have relatively bigger backyard than those who do

not.

Appendix Table 4. Burning practices of respondents from Brgy. Pansol.

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

Are you burning waste?

Yes, | am burning my waste 38 50.7
No, | am not burning my waste 36 48.0
‘No Answer 01 01.3
TOTAL 75 100.0
What waste are you burning?
Candy and snack wrapper 04 14.81
Grasses 04 14.81
Leaves 27 100.00
Paper 07 25.93
Plastic 10 37.04
Others 03 11.11
OUT OF 27? 100.00
Why are you burning your waste?
Avoid litters caused by rummaging 08 24.24
Irregular garbage collection 08 24.24
Reduce garbage to be collected 07 21.21
‘Shoo away insects like mosquitoes 06 18.18
Others: 04 12.12

OUT OF 33° 100.00


166
Appendix Table 4 continued...

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

Why are you not burning your waste?

Burning is prohibited 07 28.00
No place to burn garbage 01 04.00
Waste are being collected 06 24.00
Bad for the environment 08 32.00
Bad for the health 05 20.00

OUT OF 25° 100.0

271 out of 38 (28.94%) did not answer the question
® 5 out of 38 (13.15%) did not answer the question
© 41 out 36 (30.50%) did not answer the question

The respondents were also asked what do they typically do with their trash
if they cannot or do not burn them (Appendix Table 5). Half of the respondents let
their trash be collected by the garbage truck provided by the municipality
(49.25%). Another half of the respondents opt to sell their remaining waste to
junk shops in exchange for cash or salt (44.78%). However, some rather pile up
their waste, like rusted steels and shards of glass, in their backyard (13.43%) or
bury their waste, like soiled diapers, in make shift wells (11.94%). Some rather
use their waste as fertilizers (5.97%) and recycle them (2.98%) than burn their
trash. Others uses it as food for their livestock (1) while some directly throw them
deep in the forest (2).

Moreover, almost all of the respondents use rice sacks to organize their
waste (82.25%). Some uses plastic bags (16.13%), trash cans (16.13%), and

large pails (6.45%) to manage their waste. Also, some dig wells to take in their

167

waste especially biodegradable (6.45%). Others uses boxes (1), large cans (2),

trash bags (1), and old plastic containers (1)

Appendix Table 5. Solid waste management of respondents from Brgy. Pansol.

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

What do you do with unburnt trash?

Buried at their backyard 08 11.94
Collected by garbage trucks 33 49.25

Piled up in their backyard 09 13.43
Recycled 02 02.98

Sold to junkshops 30 44.78

Use as fertilizers 04 05.97
Others 03 04.48

No answer 08 10.67

OUT OF 67 100.0

What do you use to manage your
trash?

04 06.45

Large pail 10 16.13,
Plastic 51 82.25

Sack 10 16.13

Trash can 04 06.45

Well 05 08.06
Others 13 17.33

No Answer 62 100.00

OUT OF

C. Knowledge on solid waste

Aside from their current solid waste practices, participants were also

investigated on their knowledge on solid waste per se (Appendix Table 6). The

168

respondents were asked what they think are the proper solid waste management
schemes based on the choices provided. The choices include burning of waste;
composting of waste; integrating proper solid waste management in the curricula
of formal and non-formal education; piling up of waste in the backyard; selling of
waste to junk shops, segregating waste in biodegradable and non-biodegradable,
reducing waste thru avoidance of materials that can add up to the waste stream;
and using of plastics.

Almost all of the respondents think that segregating waste into
biodegradable and non-biodegradable (97.30%) is one of the proper solid waste
management scheme. Even those who do not segregate their waste considered
it as proper solid waste management (9 out of 11). Selling waste to junk shops
also garnered 95.95% as a proper solid waste management scheme. A large
portion of the respondents also believe that composting of waste (78.38%);
reducing waste generated thru avoidance of materials that can further add up to
the waste stream (74.32%); and integrating ecological solid waste management
in the curricula of formal and non-formal education (72.97%) are all proper solid
waste management schemes. Eighteen percent of the respondents consider the
use of plastics as proper solid waste management schemes. Even so, majority of
them believes that it all depends on the use of plastics especially with wet goods.

However, some of the respondents believe that burning of waste and
pilling them in their backyards are proper ways of managing solid waste.

Responses garnering 29.73% and 6.76%, respectively. Nonetheless, some of

169

those who burn their waste do not think that burning waste is a proper way to

management waste (17 out of 38)

Appendix Table 6. Knowledge on proper SWM of the respondents
from Brgy. Pansol.

WHAT a daleg ier S FREQUENCY alta
Burning of waste 22 29.73
Composting of waste 58 78.38
Integrating ecological SWM in the curricula 54 72.97
Piling up of waste in the backyard 5 6.76
Reducing waste generation 55 74.32
Segregating waste 72 97.30
Selling of waste to junk shops 71 95.95
Using plastics 13 17.57

OUT OF 74 100.00

*4 out of 75 (1.33%) did not answer the question

Moreover, as shown in Appendix Table 7, the respondents were also

questioned regarding the negative effects of improper solid waste management

based on the choices provided. The question also permits multiple answers.

Choices provided include the following: acquiring diseases like dengue,

leptospirosis, asthma, and diarrhea; acquiring wounds and cuts caused by sharp

objects; air, land, and water pollution; chemical poisoning; severe flooding; and a

source of awful smell.

170

Majority of the respondents thinks that improper solid waste management
is a source of foul smell (97.26%) and severe flooding when trash blocks water
ways and canals (95.89%). Improper solid waste management, based on the
respondents’ accounts, is also one of the major causes of diseases like dengue,
leptospirosis, asthma, and diarrhea (97.26%); and injuries caused by sharp
objects (93.15%). Moreover, a smaller portion of the respondents states that
improper solid waste management can lead to air, land, and water pollution

(91.78%); as well as chemical poisoning (89.04%).

Appendix Table 7. Knowledge on the negative effects of improper solid waste
management of the respondents from Brgy. Pansol

WHAT De TICORREC (ena iain OF FREQUENCY arent

Acquiring diseases 71 97.26
Acquiring wounds and cuts 68 93.15

Air, land, and water pollution 67 91.78
Chemical poisoning 65 89.04
Severe flooding 70 95.89
Source of foul smell 71 97.26

OUT OF 73° 100.00

*Z out of 75 (2.67%) did not answer the question

To gauge the knowledge of the respondents on solid waste they were

asked to classify the presented waste into biodegradable or non-biodegradable

171

(Appendix Table 8). Waste indicated in the survey questionnaire are dried leaves
and plant cuttings; fruits and vegetables peelings; glassware; leftover food;
metals and tin cans; plastics, sacks, and Styrofoam; and tissue and paper.

Aimost all of the respondents classify fruits and vegetable peelings; left
over food; and dried leaves and plant cuttings as biodegradable. These
fesponses received 98.65%, 97.30%, and 95.95%, respectively. A smaller
portion of the respondents stated that tissues and paper are biodegradable
because according to them, not all paper can be easily degraded (72.97%).
Moreover, some respondents considered metal and tin cans as biodegradable for
the reason that metals and cans accumulate rusts and crumble into smaller
pieces (8.11%).

The respondents categorized glassware; and plastic, sacks and Styrofoam
as non-biodegradable, both receiving 98.65% of the responses. Majority also
considers metal and tin cans as non-biodegradable (93.24%) while some include
tissue and paper (32.43%) due to the aforementioned reason. A few respondents
mentioned fruits and vegetable peelings (1.35%); left over food (2.7%); and dried
leaves and plant cuttings (4.05%) as non-biodegradable. This may be because
they feed left overs and peeling to their pigs or pets while dried leaves are
usually burned. Their understanding of biodegradable is that they are waste
buried to save as compost while the previously mentioned waste do not fall under

‘such function.

Appendix Table 8. Knowledge on classification of waste of the respondents
from Brgy. Pansol

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

Biodegradable
Dried leaves and plant cuttings 71 95.95
Fruits and vegetables peelings 73 98.65
Glassware 01 01.35
Leftover food 72 97.30
Metals and tin cans 06 08.11
Tissue and Paper 54 72.97
OUT OF 74 100.0
Non-biodegradable
Dried leaves and plant cuttings 03 04.05
Fruits and vegetables peelings 01 01.35
Glassware 73 98.65
Leftover food 02 02.70
Metals and tin cans 69 93.24
Plastics, sacks, and styrofoams 73 98.65
Tissue and Paper 24 32.43
QUT OF 74° 100.00

*T out of 75 (1.33%) did not answer the question

D. Knowledge on laws and ordinances relating to SWM

RA 9003 or the Ecological Solid Waste Management Act of 2000 is the
umbrella law on solid waste and the respondents were tested about their
knowledge on such law. More than half of the respondents stated that they do
not know what RA 9003 or the Ecological Solid Waste Management Act of 2003

(61.33%) while the remaining 38.67% have heard of the law.

173

‘When ask about the objectives of RA 9003 (Appendix Table 9), majority
mentioned that one of its objectives is to protect the environment (93.10%).
Moreover, according to the respondents, RA 9003 ensures the proper
segregation, collection, transport, storage, treatment, and disposal of solid waste
(86.21%), as well as, reduction of waste through reduce, reuse, and recycle
(86.21%). Sixty-five percent of the respondents said that the law protects public
health and aims to integrate ecological solid waste management in the curricula
of formal and non-formal education.

The respondents were also asked to identify the prohibited acts
punishable by the law. Based on the result, majority of the respondents consider
littering, throwing, dumping of waste matter in public places (85.71%); and open
burning of waste as prohibited act under RA 9003 (82.14%). The act also forbids
the causing or permitting the collection of non-segregated or unsorted waste
(64.29%). As stated in the law, all of the respondents know that it is everyone's
responsibility, individual residents and business owners, to segregate their own
waste. Another 64.29% of the responses mentioned that manufacturing,
distribution or use of non-environmentally acceptable packaging materials are
prohibited by RA 9003. A large portion of the respondents believe that dumping
and burying of waste in flood prone areas is against the said law (71.43%).

Moreover, majority of the respondents know that the punishment for
violating RA 9003 ranges from fine, community service, and imprisonment

(96.43%). The remaining 7.02% either have no idea on the punishment or failed

174

to answer the said question. Consequently, only 64.29% know that anyone who
witnessed any violation on RA 9003 can report or file a case against the violator.
A portion of the respondents believed that it is the job of barangay captains and
their council to report violators (14.29%) while a few thinks that is only the
municipal officials and the MENRO who have the authority to file a case against

violators (21.43%).

Appendix Table 9, Knowledge on RA 9003 of the respondents from Brgy. Pansol.

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE(%)

Do you know what R.A. 9003 is about?

Yes, | know 29 38.67
No, | do not know 46 61.33
TOTAL 75 100.0

What do you think are the objectives of R.A. 9003?

Integration of ecological SVM into the
academic curricula

Proper segregation, collection, 19 65.52
transport, storage, treatment and
disposal of solid waste

Protection of public health 25 86.21
Protection of the environment 19 65.52
Reduction of waste through 3Rs 27 93.10
Others. 25 86.21

OUT OF 01 03.45

29 100.00


175

Appendix Table 9 continued.
FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE(%)

What do you think are the prohibited acts under

RA. 9003?
Causing or permitting the collection of
non-segregated or unsorted waste 18 64.29
Littering, throwing, dumping of waste
matters in public places 24 85.71

Manufacture, distribution or use of

non-environmentally acceptable

packaging materials 18 64,29
Open burning of solid waste 23 82.14
Open dumping, burying of

biodegradable or non-

biodegradable materials in

flood-prone areas 20 71.43

OUT OF 28° 100.00

Based on your knowledge, whose responsibility is it
to segregate waste?

Barangay Captains and councils 00 00.00

Individual residents or business
owners 29 100.00
Municipal officials and MENRO 00 00.00
OUTOF 29 100.0

Based on your knowledge, what are the penalties
for violating R.A. 9003?

Fine, community service, and imprisonment 27 96.43
Imprisonment 00 00.00
No idea on the penalties 01 03.57
There are no penalties 00 00.00

OUT OF 287 100.00

Based on your knowledge, who can report and file
a case against violators of R.A. 9003?

Anyone who witnessed the violation 18 64.29
Barangay captain and the council 06 21.43
Municipal officials and MENRO 04 14,29

OQUTOF 28? 100.00

*T out of 29 (3.45%) did not answer the question

176

In addition, the respondents were asked about the current municipal
ordinance of solid waste of Pila.As shown in Appendix Table 10, 65.33% of them
knows about the ordinances while the remaining 34.67% do not. Based on the
result, the respondents from Barangay Pansol have varied answers. Almost half
of the respondents said that the municipality encourages segregation of waste
(22.45%). Even 1 out of the 11 respondents who do not segregate mentioned
that segregation of waste is one of the municipality's ordinance.

A portion mentioned that the municipality regulates proper collection of
waste (28.57). A smaller percent of the respondents also believe that the
municipality have ordinances that prohibits littering (16.33%), open burning
(14.29); and the regulation of the use of plastics (14.29%). In terms of open
burning, 2 out of 38 who burn their waste mentioned that the municipality
prohibits open burning.

Another 8.16% states that recycling and reusing of waste is highly
encouraged in Pila Laguna. One out of the twenty five respondents who do not
fecycle and reuse knows that the municipality encourages recycling and reusing.
Other answers (12.24%) include maintaining the cleanliness and the beauty of
ones’ surroundings, and proper disposal of waste.

In relation, majority of the respondent know that wastes are being
collected at a designated time and day (65.33%) while the remaining (34.67%)
have no idea that the municipal waste are to be collected. Out of the respondents

who claimed that they know of the collection of waste, 44.76% percent of them

177

was correct that it is twice a week. Consequently, only 31.34% knows that it is
during Saturdays and Wednesdays which is the scheduled collection day for
Barangay Pansol while only few (4.47%) declared the correct type of waste
collected on specific days which are non-biodegradables on Wednesdays and
biodegradables on Saturdays.

However, 55.22% of the respondents are mistaken with the schedule of
waste pick-up. Some thinks it is thrice a week (4.47%) while 20.90% said that
wastes are collected every day. Another 11.94% mentioned that there are no
schedule for pick up and it varies from time to time depending on the
circumstances. Also, 17.91% do not know the exact schedule even though they
know that wastes are being collected.

In, terms of the disposal of waste, 73.97% declared that they know where
the collected wastes are being brought to. Some said that they are taken in the
Material Recovery Facility (MRF) while some said that it is disposed in Brgy. San
Miguel - the whereabouts of the MRF. A few also mentioned that wastes are

taken in Calamba City, where the sanitary landfill is located.

178

Appendix Table 10. Knowledge on municipal ordinances of the respondents
from Brgy. Pansol.

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

Do you know any municipal ordinances on

sw?
Yes, | know 49 65.33
No, | do not know 26 34.67
TOTAL 75 100.0
What are the municipal ordinances on SW?
Littering is prohibited 08 16.33
Open buming is prohibited 07 14.29
Plastics are prohibited 07 14.29
Regular and proper collection of waste 14 28.57
Reusing and recycling of waste 04 08.16
Segregation of waste is encouraged 21 42.86
Others 06 12.24
OUT OF 49 100.00
Do you know if your wastes are being
collected?
Yes, | know 72 71.43
No, I do not know 03 03.45
TOTAL 75 100.00
When are your waste being collected?
Thrice a week 03 04.47
Twice a week 06 08.95
Everyday 14 20.90
1.do not know 12 17.91
Wednesdays and Saturdays 21 31.34
Wednesdays (non-biodegradable) and
Saturdays (biodegradable) 03 04.47
Others 08 11.94
____OUTOF _ 67? 100.0
Do you know where your wastes are being
disposed?
Yes, | know 54 73.97
No, I do not know 19 26.03
TOTAL 73 100.00

*5 out of 72 (6.94%) did not answer the question

179

E. Attitude of solid waste management

Aside from exploring the knowledge and practices on solid waste of the
respondents from Barangay Pansol, their attitude or perception on solid waste
was also studied. Specifically, it looked into their attitude on 3Rs, segregation,
incineration, collection, and solid waste management in general.

As shown in Appendix Table 11, majority of the respondents agree that
avoiding the use of disposable products can significantly decrease the amount of
waste that they can generate. A large portion of the respondents believes that it
is convenient to use reusable containers like eco bags or bayongs. Moreover, 11
out of the 25 respondents who claim that they do not recycle and reuse agree
that it is easy to use reusable while 21 out of 50 who declared that they recycle
and reuse have some difficulty in using reusables.

In terms of the segregation of waste, majority of the respondents believe
that segregation of waste into biodegradable and non-biodegradable is an easy
task (92%) while the remaining 5.33% find it laborious. Moreover, 3 out of the 65
Tespondents who segregate their waste find it as an intensive task while 9 out of
the 11 who do not segregate their waste mentioned that segregation does not
require too much effort. Almost all of the respondents also mentioned that it is
their responsibility to segregate their waste (96%) and only 1.33% of the

respondents said that they are not responsible for segregating their waste.

180

When asked about burning of waste, the respondents predominantly think
that refraining from burning one’s waste can be beneficial for their community
(86.67%). Indeed, 30 out of the 38 respondents who burn their waste believe that
it is better to refrain from burning. However, the remaining 8% disagree that
refraining from burning can be favorable to the community. Furthermore, a large
number of the respondents also believe that burning of waste have harmful
effects (78.67%) 27 of which are those who burn their trash.

In terms of the waste collection, majority declared that it is indeed their
responsibility to bring out their trash in the designated collection area (97.33%).

The respondents’ attitude on solid waste management in general was also
scrutinized. Majority of the respondents believed that throwing of trash in any
place, no matter how small, is unacceptable. However, some of them thinks that
it is fine to throw small trash such as candy wrappers anywhere (21.33%).

Almost all of the respondents is convinced that it is beneficial to the
community if they will follow proper solid waste management recommended by
the municipality (98.67%). In addition, half of the respondents said that they will
still manage their waste properly even if their peers would not do the same
(47.29%) while the other half require the participation of their peers (45.94%).

The perspective of the respondents is also closely divided into two for
52% of them agree that they will only management their waste properly if there
are existing laws and corresponding penalties for violators while the other

41.33% will still manage their waste properly even without laws and penalties.

181

Consequently, 97.33% of the respondents believe that they can be of help to
their community, especially in their respective barangays, if they will abide by the
law and ordinances of the municipality. A large portion of the respondents also
believe that it is their responsibility to report anyone who violates any law or
ordinance regarding solid waste (61.33%). However, a portion of the respondents
is reluctant to disclose their opinion on the statement for they are afraid that this
can cause misunderstandings among their neighbors and peers (37.33%)
Nonetheless, majority of the respondents are positive that their neighbors and
friends will appreciate if they will share their know-how on proper solid waste
management (93.33%).

Lastly, almost every respondent believes that problems and issues on
solid waste should be given adequate attention for its resolution and

improvement (97.33%).

Appendix Table 11. Attitude on SWM of the Respondents from Brgy. Pansol

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

1. It is easy to segregate waste in
biodegradable and non-biodegradable

Agree 69 92.00
Disagree 04 05.33
No Comment 02 02.67

TOTAL 75 100.0


Appendix Table 11 continued

182

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

2. It is not easy to use reusable materials

like eco bags and bottles
Agree 27 36.00
Disagree 43 57.33
No Comment 05 06.67
TOTAL 75 100.0
3. | can relatively reduce my waste if |
avoid using disposables like paper plates
and styrofoam
Agree 73 97.33
Disagree 01 01.33
No Comment 01 01.33
TOTAL 75 100.0
4. It will be beneficial for my community if |
refrain from burning my waste
No Comment 04 05.33
TOTAL
75 100.0
5. It will be beneficial for my community if |
follow the proper solid waste management
recommended by the municipality
Agree 74 98.67
Disagree 00 00.00
No Comment 01 01.33
TOTAL 75 100.0
6. | would be able to help in the livelihood
of others if | separate my recyclables from
other waste
Agree 70 93.33
Disagree 00 00.00
No Comment 05 06.67
TOTAL 75 100.0


Appendix Table 11 continued...

183

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

7. Throwing small trash, such as candy
wrappers, anywhere is negligible and will
not affect the environment

Agree 16 21.33
Disagree 56 74.67
No Comment 03 04.00
TOTAL 75 100.0
8. Buming of waste, especially
biodegradable, does not have any harmful
effects
Agree 1 14.67
Disagree 59 78.67
No Comment 05 06.67
TOTAL 75 100.0
9. | will properly manage my waste if only
my peers will do the same
Agree 34 45.94
Disagree 35 47.29
No Comment 05 06.76
__TOTAL 742 1000
10. 1 will properly manage my waste only if
there are existing laws and corresponding
penalties for violators
Agree 39 52.00
Disagree 31 41.33
No Comment 05 06.67
TOTAL 75 100.0
11. It is my responsibility to segregate my
waste
Agree 72 96.00
Disagree 01 01.33
No Comment 02 02.67
TOTAL 75 100.0


184
Appendix Table 11 continued

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

12. It is my responsibility to report anyone
who violates the laws and ordinances
regarding solid waste management

Agree 46 61.33
Disagree 01 01.33
No Comment 28 37.33

TOTAL 75 100.0

13. It is my responsibility to bring out my
segregated trash for them to be collected

Agree 73 97.33
Disagree 01 01.33
No Comment 01 01.33

TOTAL 75 100.0

14. My neighbors would appreciate if | will
share information on proper solid waste

management
Agree 70 93.33
Disagree 01 01.33
No Comment 04 05.33

TOTAL 75 100.0

75. | will be of help to my
barangay/community if | will abide by the
laws and ordinances on solid waste

management
Agree 73 97.33
Disagree 00 00.00
No Comment 02 02.67

TOTAL 75 100.0
16. Proper solid waste management in my
municipality should be given much needed

attention
Agree 73 97.33
Disagree 00 00.00
No Comment 02 02.67

TOTAL 75 100.0
"1 out of 75 (1.33%) did not answer the question


185

Solid Waste Management of Barangay Santa Clara Sur

Barangay Sta. Clara Sur is one of the four barangays of the poblacion or
town of Pila. It is one of the urban barangays of the municipality together with
Sta. Clara Norte, Bulilan Norte, and Bulilan Sur. Like Pansol, Sta. Clara Sur has
the largest land area among communities with similar characteristics, with a land
area of 120.80 ha. Among all the barangays of Pila, Sta. Clara Sur has the most
number of zones with eight puroks (Appendix Figure 2). Moreover, Sta. Clara Sur
has the highest number of population among the urban barangays with 5,507

and 1,240 households.

paso

Appendix Figure 2. Hand drawn Map of Barangay Sta. Clara Sur
(Source: Municipal Map of Pila)

186

Barangay Sta. Clara Sur is once part of a bigger privately-owned land
estate called Hacienda Sta. Clara owned by the Riveras. However, due to the
family’s inability to take care of the entire hacienda, it eventually was divided into
two - Bulilan in the eastern part while Sta. Clara in the west. Years later, Sta.
Clara is divided into two - Sta. Clara Sur and Sta. Clara Norte.

Barangay Sta. Clara Sur is selected as a representative for urban
barangays of Pila. Survey for the barangay was conducted in September 26 to

29, 2016

A. Sociodemographic characteristics

Sixty-five residents of Barangay Sta. Clara Sur were surveyed last
September 26 to 29, 2016. Most of the respondents from Sta. Clara Sur are
female (69.23%) while the remaining 30.77% are male. Majority of the these are
aged 31 to 60 (75.27%) while a portion are already members of the senior citizen
(15.38%). Only a few of the respondents are aged between 21 to 30 years old.
Almost all of the respondents are married (93.84%) since majority of the
respondents are within the marrying and married aged. Some are widows or
widowers (4.62%) as well given that a few of the respondents are already on
their senior years while only one is single. Half of the respondents have two to
three children (49.23%) while 16.92% have four or more children. The remaining

15.38% have none to one child.

187

A portion of the respondents received their college degrees (36.92%).
Also, some graduated from vocational courses (3.08%) while another 36.92% are
graduates of secondary school. Some graduated from primary school (13.85%),
some are undergraduates from high school (03.07%), and few are college
undergraduates (1.54%)

One third of the respondents are housewife (30.77%) given that they are
the ones who are usually at home thus present during the survey. The remaining
portion of the respondents has various source of income (69.2%). From the
majority, 12.3% are business owners, 7.69% are government officials, while
3.07% are Overseas Filipino Workers. Some are business owners (6.15%),
farmers (6.15%), and due to the ageing population of the municipality, some are
tetired (6.15%). Few of the respondents are also private employees,
housekeepers and caretakers, and construction workers, each garnering 4.62%
of the responses

The respondents are, as much as possible, evenly spread among the
eight puroks of Sta. Clara Sur. As shown in Appendix Table 12, six of the
respondents are from purok 1, 10 are from purok 2. Seven are from purok 3, nine
lives in purok 4, and another six are from purok 5. Another ten of them are from

purok 6, nine from purok 7, while the remaining eight are from purok 8.

188

Appendix Table 12. Sociodemographic characteristics of respondents
from Brgy. Sta. Clara Sur.

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

Total no. of respondents 65 100
Gender
Female 45 69.23
Male 20 30.77
Age
20 and below 00 00.00
21-30 06 09.23
31-40 15 23.07
41-50 13 20.00
51-60 21 32.20
60 and above 10 15.38
Civil Status
Single 01 01.54
Married 61 93.84
Single Parent 00 00.00
Widow/Widower 03 04.62
Educational Attainment
04.62
None 03 00.00
Elementary Undergraduate 00 13.85
Elementary Graduate 09 03.07
High School Undergraduate 02 36.92
High School Graduate 24 01.54
College Undergraduate 01 36.92
College Graduate 24 03.08

Vocational 02


189

Appendix Table 12 continued...
FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)
Occupation
Business Owner 08 12.30
Driver 04 06.15
Employee 03 04.62
Farmer 04 06.15
Government Official 05 07.69
Housekeeper/Caretaker 03 04.62
Housewife 20 30.77
Laborer/Construction Worker 03 04.62
OFW 02 03.07
Retired 04 06.15
Vendor 03 04.62
Other 06 09.23
Number of Children
None 02 06.15
Only 1 06 09.23
2-3 32 49.23
4-9 11 16.92
10 and above 00 00.00
Residence
Purok 1 06 09.23
Purok 2 10 15.38
Purok 3 07 10.77
Purok 4 09 13.85
Purok 5 06 09.23
Purok 6 10 15.38
Purok 7 09 13.84

Purok 8 08 12.31

190

B. Solid waste management practices

Like the respondents from Pansol, the solid waste management practices
of the respondents from barangay Sta. Clara Sur were explored. These include
their segregation, recycling and reusing, as well as, incineration practices.

As shown in Appendix Table 13, almost all of the respondents are
segregating their waste (98.46%). The remaining 1.54% is not segregating their
waste for the reason that they are disposing their waste all together in their field
located in other municipalities like the agricultural upland barangay of
Concepcion.

Those who segregate their waste commonly categorize them into
biodegradable and non-biodegradable (73.44%). A portion sort them into
biodegradable, non-biodegradable, and various wastes including bottles,
cardboard boxes, tin cans, papers, and plastics (18.75%) while another 6.25%
group them into biodegradable, non-biodegradable, and recyclable. The
remaining 3.13% categorize the waste into biodegradable and other waste like
bottles, plastics, and boxes.

The respondents who segregate their waste do so because segregating
waste can hasten and effectively aid in the collection process (37.50%).
Moreover, sorting waste beforehand, facilitate in the exchange of recyclable
waste into cash or heaps of salt (29.69%). Some also group their waste into
categories because through segregation, the respondents can at least maintain

their surroundings clean and ensure orderliness of their disposal of trash

191

(35.77%). The remaining 14.06% claimed that they segregate in conformity with

the municipal ordinance on segregation.

Appendix Table 13. Segregating practice of respondents
from Brgy. Sta. Clara Sur.

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

Are you segregating your solid waste?

Yes, | am segregating my waste 64 98.46
No, | am not segregating my waste 01 01.54
TOTAL 65 100.00
In what categories are you segregating your
waste?

Biodegradable and

non-biodegradable 47 73.44
Biodegradable, non-biodegradable,
others 12 18.75
Biodegradable, non-biodegradable,
recyclables 04 06.25
Biodegradable and others 02 03.13
OUT OF 64 100.00

Why are you segregating your waste?

Easy collection of waste 24 37.50
Ensure cleanliness of surroundings 16 25.00

Ensure orderliness of trash
for disposal 07 10.77
Exchange for money or salt 19 29.69
Follow municipal ordinance 09 14.06
OUT OF 64 100.00

Why are you not segregating your waste?

Disposed all together elsewhere 01 100.00
OUT OF 01 100.00

192

Majority of the respondents also recycle or reuse some of their waste
(81.54%) while the remaining 16.92% rather sell their recyclable and reusable
directly to junk shops (Appendix Table 14). Most of the respondents recycle or
reuse bottles, both plastic and glass (94.34%), as well as, plastic bags (60.38%)
A portion also recycle or reuse cardboard boxes (39.62%) and tin cans (32.07%).
Almost 19% of the respondents also recycle or reuse papers while the remaining
5.66% recycle and reuse various waste like jars, sacks, and eco bags.

Half of the respondents recycle and reuse their waste to make use of the
utmost benefits of these materials. Also, these materials are sold to junk shops
thus serving as a source of additional income like some of the respondents
usually do (34.61%). A few uses the aforementioned waste as decoration and art
project materials in their own homes or for school requirements. Some of the
respondents recycle and reuse waste to reduce the trash to be discarded
(13.46%) and contribute in the municipality's aim to reduce waste for collection

and disposal to landfills.

193

Appendix Table 14. Recycling or reusing practice of respondents
from Bray. Sta. Clara Sur.

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

Do you recycle or reuse some of your

waste?
Yes, | recycle/reuse our waste 53 81.54
No, | do not recycle/reuse our waste 11 16.92
No answer 01 01.54
TOTAL 65 100.0
What are the waste that you usually recycle
or reuse?
Bottle 50 94.34
Cardboard box 21 39.62
Paper 10 18.87
Plastic 32 60.38
Tin can 17 32.07
Others 03 05.66
OUT OF 53 100.00
Why are you recycling/reusing your waste?
xchange for money or salt 18 34.61
Make utmost benefit of recyclables 28 53.84
Project or decoration materials 08 15.38
Reduce trash to be discarded 07 13.46
_ OUT OF 52° 100.00
Why are you not recycling/reusing your
waste?
Selling recyclables "1 100.00
OUT OF 14 100.00

* Tout of 53 (1.89%) did not answer the question

194

In terms of burning waste, only a few of the respondents from Sta. Clara
Sur declared that they burn their waste while the 89.23% attested they do not
incinerate their waste (Appendix Table 15). All of those who burn their waste
burn leaves and 57.14% incinerate paper waste. Common reason for burning is
to avoid the accumulation of trash especially litter fall (80% of the respondents).
The remaining 20% burn to reduce the garbage to be collected.

Those who do not burn their waste mentioned that it is because burning is
prohibited (60.34%) and that it is bad for the health (39.65%), especially for
children (6.89%), for it can cause respiratory diseases. Moreover, the
fespondents answered that burning is bad for the environment and the ozone
layer (13.79%). Another 13.79% said that the fumes from burning waste irritates
the respondents’ noses and make their laundry smoky. A few mentioned that
there is no need for people to burn for the waste are currently being collected
(8.62%) while 6.89% said that they do not have enough space to burn their

waste.

Appendix Table 15. Burning practice of respondents from Bray. Sta. Clara Sur.

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

Are you burning waste?

Yes, | am burning my waste 07 10.77
No, | am not burning my waste 58 89.23
TOTAL 65 100.0


195

Appendix Table 15 continued...

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

What waste are you burning?

Leaves 07 100.00
Paper 04 057.14
OUT OF 07 100.00
Why are you burning your waste?
Avoid litters 04 80.00
Reduce garbage to be collected 01 20.00
OUT OF 05? 100.00
Why are you not burning your waste?
Burning is prohibited 35 60.34
No place to burn garbage 04 06.89
Waste are being collected 05 08.62
Bad for the children 04 06.89
Bad for the environment 08 13.79
Bad for the health 23 39.65
Smoke 08

OUT OF 58
*"Zout of 5 (28.57%) did not answer the question’

The respondents were also asked on their management of unburnt trash
since most of them do not bum their trash (Appendix Table 16). According to
most of them, their trash is being collected by the garbage truck provided by the
municipality (69.84%) and is sold to junk shops in exchange for salt or cash
(84.13%). A few of the respondents opt to bury their waste in their backyard
(4.76%) or use it as fertilizers for their plants (3.17%). To manage their waste,
the entire number of respondents uses sack bags as container for their trash

while some uses plastic bags and containers (16.67%) or trash cans (15%). A

196

few mentioned that they use boxes and old water drums as residential waste

disposal facility (6.67%).

Appendix Table 16. Waste management of respondents
from Brgy. Sta. Clara Sur.

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

What do you do with unburnt trash?

Buried at their backyard 03 04.76
Collected by garbage trucks 44 69.84
Sold to junkshops 53 84.13
Use as fertilizers 02 03.17
OUT OF 63° 100.0
What do you use to manage your
trash?
Plastic 10 16.67
Sack 60 100.00
Trash can 09 15.00
Others 04 06.67
OUT OF 60° 100.00

*Z out of 65 (03.08%) did not answer the question
°5 out of 65 (07.69%) did not answer the question

C. Knowledge on solid waste

Respondents from Barangay Sta. Clara Sur were questioned on their
knowledge regarding solid waste and its management. Appendix Table 17 shows
their response on proper solid waste management schemes. Based on the result,

majority considers composting of waste (98.46%) and segregation of waste

197

(98.46%) as top proper solid waste management schemes. Even the singular
fespondent who does not segregate their waste believe that sorting waste is
proper solid waste management.

Moreover, most of the respondents see reduction of waste through the
use of reusable materials instead of disposable ones is another proper
management scheme, as well as the integration of ecological solid waste
management in the curricula of formal and non-formal education. Some of the
Tespondents also accept the use of plastics as proper management given that
plastic will be used appropriately depending on the given situation. However, the
remaining 7.69% still consider burning waste as proper management scheme
though 1 out of 7 who burns their waste thinks burning is not a proper way of

managing waste.

Appendix Table 17. Knowledge on proper solid waste management of the
respondents from Brgy. Sta. Clara Sur.

WHAT ARE THE PROPER SOLID

WASTE MANAGEMENT SCHEMES? FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

Burning of waste 05 07.69
Composting of waste 64 98.46
Integrating ecological SWM in the curricula 58 89.23
Piling up of waste in the backyard 00 0.00
Reducing waste generation 61 93.84
Segregating waste 64 98.46
Selling of waste to junk shops 65 100.0
Using plastics 10 16.92

OUT OF 65 100.00


198

When asked about the negative effects of improper solid waste
management, the respondents from Sta. Clara Sur thinks that nearly all of the
presented choices are true (Appendix Table 18). Hundred percent of the
respondents said that improper solid waste management can cause diseases like
dengue, diarrhea, asthma, and leptospirosis. Wounds and cuts, caused by
improperly disposed sharp objects, can also be acquired (100%). Improper solid
waste management leads to air, land, and water pollution (100%) as well as
severe flooding due to the clogging of waterways like canals and esteros (100%).
All of the respondents mentioned that putrid smell is usually attributed to
improper solid waste management. However, few of the respondents do not
consider chemical poisoning as an effect of improper management. This option

only garnered 92.3% of the respondents’ answers.

Appendix Table 18. Knowledge on the negative effects of improper SWM of the
respondents from Brgy. Sta. Clara Sur.

EFFECTS OM INCORRECT gwm2 FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)
Acquiring diseases 65 100.00
Acquiring wounds and cuts 65 100.00
Air, land, and water pollution 65 100.00
~~ Chemical poisoning 60 92.30
Severe flooding 65 100.00
Source of foul smell 65 100.00

OUT OF 65 100.00


199

The respondents were asked to classify the following waste into
biodegradable or non-biodegradable: dried leaves and plant cuttings; fruits and
vegetables peelings, glassware; leftover food; metals and tin cans; plastics,
sacks, and Styrofoam; tissue and paper. All the respondents classify dried leaves
and plant cuttings; fruits and vegetables peelings; and leftover food as
biodegradable, as shown in Appendix Table 19. Majority also consider tissue and
paper as biodegradable (83.08%). A few thinks that metals and tin cans
(13.84%), and glassware (1.53%) are biodegradable. According to some these
are biodegradable for they crumble into tiny little pieces after some time.

On the other hand, all of the respondents classify plastics, sacks, and
Styrofoam as non-biodegradable. Most consider glassware as non-
biodegradable as well as metals and tin cans (86.15%). A few also thinks that
tissue and paper are non-biodegradable for there are kinds of paper with

coatings that cannot degrade easily (16.92%).

200

Appendix Table 19. Knowledge on classification of waste of the respondents
from Bray. Sta. Clara Sur.

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

Biodegradable
Dried leaves and plant cuttings 65 100.0
Fruits and vegetables peelings 65 100.0
Glassware 01 01.53
Leftover food 65 100.0
Metals and tin cans 09 13.84
Tissue and Paper 54 83.08
OUT OF 65 100.0
Non-biodegradable
Glassware 61 93.85
Leftover food 03 04.61
Metals and tin cans 56 86.15
Plastics, sacks, and styrofoams 65 100.00
Tissue and Paper 1 16.92
OUT OF 65 100.00

D. Knowledge on laws and ordinances relating to SWM

In Barangay Sta. Clara Sur, 61.33% of the respondents have heard of RA
9003 while the remaining 38.67% do not know what the law is about. All of those
who knew of RA 9003, said that the law aims to reduce waste through 3Rs
(100%) as well as to preserve the environment (100%). Most of the
knowledgeable respondents also mentioned that one of its objectives is to
integrate ecological solid waste management into the academic curricula

(97.44%). Another 97.44% believe that RA 9003 ensures proper segregation,

201

collection, transport, storage, treatment, and disposal of waste. Majority also said
the law protects public health (92.30%)

Moreover, the respondents were questioned on their knowledge on the
prohibited acts of RA 9003. All of the respondents said that it is prohibited to
litter, throw, and dump waste in public spaces. Hundred percent of the
respondents also claimed that, according to the law, it is not allowed to
manufacture, distribute or use non-environmentally acceptable packaging
materials. Majority, though not all, mentioned that open burning of waste is illegal
(97.43%) as well as the collection of non-segregated or unsorted waste
(94.87%).

Like the respondents from Pansol, all of the respondents from Sta. Clara
Sur know that it is every residents’ or business owners’ task to sort their waste
accordingly. Most of the respondents also mentioned that the punishment for
violators of RA 9003 ranges from fine, community service, and imprisonment
(78.95%) while the other 18.42% thinks that violators will immediately be
imprisoned. In addition, nearly half of the respondents understand that anyone
who witnesses violation of the law could report and file a case against violators
(47.37%). The other 42.10% thinks that it is the barangay captain's, together with
the council, to report and file cases for RA 9003 violators while the remaining

10.53% believe that it is the task of the municipal officials and MENRO.

202

Appendix Table 20. Knowledge on RA 9003 of the respondents
from Bray. Sta. Clara Sur

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

Do you know what R.A. 9003 is about?

Yes, | know 39 38.67
No, | do not know 25 61.33
No Answer 01 01.53
TOTAL 65 100.0
What do you think are the objectives of
RA. 9003?
Integration of ecological SWM into
the academic curricula 38 97.44

Proper segregation, collection,
transport, storage, treatment

and disposal of solid waste 38 97.44
Protection of public health 36 92.30
Protection of the environment 39 100.00
Reduction of waste through 3Rs 39 100.00

OUT OF 39 100.00

What do you think are the prohibited acts
under R.A. 9003?

Causing or permitting the collection
of non-segregated or unsorted

waste 37 94.87
Littering, throwing, dumping of
waste matters in public places 39 100.00

Manufacture, distribution or use of
non-environmentally acceptable

Packaging materials 39 100.00
Open burning of solid waste 38 97.43
Open dumping, burying of

biodegradable or non-

biodegradable materials in

flood-prone areas 39 100.00

OUT OF 39 100.00


203

Appendix Table 20 continued...

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

Based on your knowledge, whose
responsibility is it to segregate waste?

Barangay Captains and councils 00 00.00

Individual residents or business
owners 38 100.00
Municipal officials and MENRO 00 00.00
OUT OF 38? 100.0

Based on your knowledge, what are the
penalties for violating R.A. 9003?

Fine, community service, and 30 78,95

imprisonment
Imprisonment 07 18.42
No idea on the penalties 00 00.00
There are no penalties 00 00.00
Other: waste will not be collected 01 02.63
OUT OF 38? 100.00

Based on your knowledge, who can report
and file a case against violators of R.A.

9003?
Anyone who witnessed the violation 18 47.37
Barangay captain and the council 16 42.10
Municipal officials and MENRO 04 10.53

OUT OF 38° 100.00
* 4 out of 39 (02.56%) did not answer the question

The respondents were asked on their knowledge on the municipal
ordinances pertaining to solid waste management. Majority of them said that they
know some of the ordinances of the municipality on solid waste (96.92%) and
only 3.08% have no idea on the ordinances (Appendix Table 21). The

fespondents’ answers are quite diverse. A portion said that the municipality

204

prohibits open burning (68.25%) while 65.08% of the respondents attest that Pila
regulates the use of plastics. Two out of seven who burn their waste knows that
burning is illegal in the municipality. Moreover, according to the respondents
(50.79%), the municipality encourages segregation of waste. Some of them also
‘said that some of the ordinances include the maintaining the cleanliness of one’s
surroundings (17.46%), prohibiting littering (17.46%), and collecting of
segregated waste regularly (17.46%).

‘When asked about the collection of waste in the municipality, all of the
respondents declared that they know that their wastes are being collected. Most
of the respondents said that their wastes are being collected twice a week
(39.06%). Moreover, 25% mentioned the collection days, Mondays and
Thursdays, which is the exact day of collection for Sta Clara Sur. Another
29.69% said that collection of waste happens during Mondays and Thursdays
together with their corresponding waste categories. Some stated that their waste
is only seldom collected (3.12%) and some said it is thrice a week (1.56%).
Another 1.56% said that they know of waste being collected but do not know of
its schedule. Moreover, two out of 44 who declared that their wastes are being
collected got the schedule mixed up. One said that their wastes are collected
twice a week while the other one is not sure of the exact day of collection.

In terms of waste disposal, 76.92% of the respondents said that they
know where the waste are being disposed to after collection while the remaining

23.07% do not know where the waste end up.

205

Appendix Table 21. Knowledge on municipal ordinances of the respondents
from Brgy. Sta. Clara Sur.

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

Do you know any municipal ordinances on

SWM?
Yes, | know 63 96.92
No, | do not know 02 03.08
TOTAL 65 100.0
What are the municipal ordinances on SW?
Littering is prohibited 11 17.46
Open burning is prohibited 43 68.25
Plastics are prohibited 41 65.08
Regular and proper collection
of waste 11 17.46
Segregation of waste is
encouraged 32 50.79
Maintain cleanliness 11 17.46
_ OUT OF 63 100.00
Do you know if your wastes are being
collected?
Yes, | know 65 100.00
No, I do not know 00 00.00
_ __ TOTAL 65 400.00
When are your waste being collected?
Thrice a week 01 01.56
Twice a week 25 39.06
'do not know 01 01.56
Monday and Thursday 16 25.00
Monday (non-biodegradable) and
Thursday (biodegradable) 19 29.69
Seldom 02 03.12
OUT OF 64° 100.0
Do you know where your wastes are being
disposed?
Yes, | know 50 76.92
No, I do not know 15 23.07
TOTAL 65 100.00

“Tout of 65 (1.54%) did not answer the question

206

E. Attitude of solid waste management

Aside from the respondents’ current practices and knowledge on solid
waste management, their attitude was also studied. Most of the respondents
agree that it is easy to segregate waste in biodegradable and non-biodegradable.
Consequently, the lone respondent who does not sort their waste thinks that it is
easy to segregate waste. However, 2 out of the 64 who segregate their waste
find segregating inconvenient. Hundred percent of the respondents believe that
they would be able to help other people if they continue to sort their waste
especially recyclable. Also, all of the respondents take responsibility of
segregating their wastes appropriately even the one who fail to sort their waste
agree that it is one’s responsibility to segregate waste.

In terms of reusing, majority thinks that it is convenient to use reusable
materials like eco bags and bottles (83.08%) while the remaining (16.92%) find it
troublesome. Ironically, all of those who do not reuse or recycle thinks that it is an
easy task (11 out of 11) while 3 out of 53 who recycle or reuse encounter
difficulty in doing so.

Most of the respondents think that it will be advantageous to their
community if they will cumulatively stop from burning their waste (93.85%) while
some disagree with the statement or chose to keep their answers to themselves
(6.14%). Moreover, 7 out the 7 respondents who still burn their waste agree that

it is beneficial if they will refrain from burning waste. Majority of the respondents

207

also agree burning, even the biodegradables, has harmful effects (90.77%) while
the remaining 9.23% thinks that burning biodegradable has inconsequential
effects. Half of the seven respondents who burn their trash also thinks that
burning biodegradable has minimal harmful effects.

All of the respondents also claim that it is their responsibility to bring out
their trash during the schedule date, at the designated place, for it to be collected
by the garbage collector.

Majority of the respondents believe that it is unacceptable to throw
garbage anywhere even if it is as small as candy wrappers (96.92%) while the
remaining 3.08% agrees that it is okay to litter small waste.

The respondents were also asked about their opinion on solid waste
management in general. All of them agree that observing the proper solid waste
Management proposed by the municipality would be beneficial for the whole
community. However, more than half of the respondents said that they will only
manage their waste properly if their peers would do the same (58.46%). Also,
more than half of the respondents mentioned that they would only be motivated
to administer proper solid waste management if there are laws and
corresponding punishments to those who would not do the same (56.92%).

All of the respondents believe that they would be of help to their barangay
or community if they would follow the laws and ordinances on solid waste
management. Only 66.15% of the respondents are willing to report anyone who

violates laws and ordinances on solid waste and are claiming that it is, indeed,

208

their responsibility. The 33.85% left either disagree to take responsibility or
temain neutral on the issue of reporting violators. Even so, majority of the
respondents believe that their neighbors would appreciate it if they would share
their knowledge on proper solid waste management (98.46%). Indeed, all of the
respondents agree that the municipality should attend closely on the

improvement of solid waste management in Pila Laguna.

Appendix Table 22. Attitude on SWM of the respondents from Sta. Clara Sur.

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

1. It is easy to segregate waste in
biodegradable and non-biodegradable

Agree 62 95.38
Disagree 00 00.00
No Comment 03 04.62

TOTAL 65 100.0

2. It is not easy to use reusable materials
like eco bags and bottles

Agree 4 16.92
Disagree 54 83.08
No Comment 00 00.00

TOTAL 65 100.0

3.1 can relatively reduce my waste if]
avoid using disposables like paper plates

and styrofoam
Agree 65 100.0
Disagree 00 00.00
No Comment 00 00.00

TOTAL 65 100.0


209

Appendix Table 22 continued...

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)
4. It will be beneficial for my community if |
refrain from buming my waste

Agree 61 93.85
Disagree 02 03.07
No Comment 02 03.07

TOTAL 65 100.0

5. It will be beneficial for my community if |
follow the proper solid waste management
recommended by the municipality

Agree 65 100.0
Disagree 00 00,00
No Comment 00 00.00

TOTAL 651000

6. | would be able to help in the livelihood
of others if i separate my recyclables from

other waste
Agree 65 100.0
Disagree 00 00.00
No Comment 00 00.00

TOTAL 65 100.0
7. Throwing small trash, such as candy

wrappers, anywhere is negligible and will

not affect the environment

Agree 02 03.08
Disagree 63 96.92
No Comment 00 00.00

TOTAL 65 100.0

8. Burning of waste, especially
biodegradable, does not have any harmful

effects
Agree 06 09.23
Disagree 59 90.77
No Comment 00 00.00

TOTAL 65 100.0


Appendix Table 22 continued..

210

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

9. | will properly manage my waste if only
my peers will do the same

Agree 38 58.46
Disagree 27 41.54
No Comment 00 00.00
TOTAL 65 100.0
70. | will properly manage my waste only if
there are existing laws and corresponding
penalties for violators
Agree 37 56.92
Disagree 28 43.07
No Comment 00 00.00
TOTAL 65 100.0
11. It is my responsibility to segregate my
waste
Agree 65 100.0
Disagree 00 00.00
No Comment 00 00.00
TOTAL 65 100.0
72. It is my responsibility to report anyone
who violates the laws and ordinances
regarding solid waste management
Agree 43 66.15
Disagree 03 04.62
No Comment 19 29.23
TOTAL 65 100.0
13. Itis my responsibility to bring out my
segregated trash for them to be collected
Agree 65 100.0
Disagree 00 00.00
No Comment 00 00.00
TOTAL 65. 100.0

211

Appendix Table 22 continued.

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

14. My neighbors would appreciate if | will
share information on proper solid waste

management
Agree 64 98.46
Disagree 00 00.00
No Comment 01 01.54

TOTAL 65 100.0

15. | will be of help to my
barangay/community if | will abide by the
laws and ordinances on solid waste

management
65 100.0
Agree 00 00.00
Disagree 00 00.00
No Comment 65 100.0
TOTAL
16. Proper solid waste management in my
municipality should be given much needed
attention
Agree 65 100.0
Disagree 00 00.00
No Comment 00 00.00

TOTAL 65 100.0

Solid Waste Management of Barangay Pinagbayanan

Barangay Pinagbayanan is one of the barangays of Pila that lines the
Laguna de Bay. Pinagbayanan has a total land area of 143.31 hectares. The
largest among the lakeshore barangays of the municipality. It has six puroks that

houses a population of 5,562 people as of 2013.

Appendix Figure 3. Spot Map of Barangay Pinagbayanan
(Source: Barangay Profile of Pinagbayanan)

213

As shown in the barangay's spot map (Appendix Figure 3), Pinagbayanan
has vast arigultural fields and are near expanse of bodies of water like Laguna de
bay and the Bulusukan River. Consequently, the major source of income of the
barangay includes farming, fishing, animal raising, fish trading, and selling of
agricultural supplies and goods.

Pinagbayanan is a tagalog term which directly translates to “where the
town formerly was”. Indeed, Barangay Pinagbayanan is one of the early
settlements, according to old folks, which can be considered progressive
compared to its neighboring barangays. It is in Pinagbayanan where ancient
artifacts were dug in 1966 which dates back 400 years ago. These excavation
relics gained Pila Laguna the recognition as one of the National Historical

Landmarks of the Philippines.

A. Sociodemographic characteristics

In September 19 to 23, 2016, the respondents from Barangay
Pinagbayanan were surveyed on the solid waste management. Majority of the
respondents are females (77.14%) and the remaining 22.85% are males. Most of
the respondents are aged 31 to 60 (72.86%) while a portion are aged 60 and
above (14.29%). A few belong in the younger age of 30 to 20 and below
(12.85%). Moreover, majority of the respondents have spouses (78.57%) given

that most of them are of marrying age.

214

A portion are still single (10%) while the remaining are either single parents or
are widow or widower (11.43%). Almost half of the respondents have four to nine
children. A portion have two to three children (31.43%) and 14.29% have only
‘one. The remaining 11.43% have none.

Majority of the respondents have reached tertiary education (45.72%).
Half of them are college undergraduate while the other half is either a graduate of
regular courses (22.86%) or vocational ones (22.86%). A portion reached
secondary school and graduated (31.43%) while a few did not (2.86%). Some
are also graduate of primary education (20%). Most of the surveyed residents are
housewives (45.71%). The others have various source of income working as
employees of private companies (2.86%) while some are bosses of their own
businesses (8.57%). Given the agricultural nature of Pila, a few of the
respondents are farmers or fishermen (4.29%) while some are vendors of
agricultural produce like fish and vegetables (04.26%). As much as possible, the
selected respondents were distributed across the puroks of Pinagbayanan.

Inevitably, one fourth of the respopndents are from Purok 1. Some 17.14%
are from Purok 3 while both Purok 4 and Purok 6 garnered 15.71% respondents
each. The least numbers of respondents are from Purok 2 (12.86%) and Purok 5

(12.86%). This is shown in Appendix Table 23

215

Appendix Table 23. Sociodemographic characteristics of respondents
from Brgy. Pinagbayanan

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

Total no. of respondents 70 100
Gender
Female 54 77.14
Male 16 22.85
Age
20 and below 04 05.71
21-30 05 07.14
31-40 17 24.29
41-50 19 27.14
51-60 15 21.43
60 and above 410 14.29
Civil Status
Single 07 10.00
Married 55 78.57
Single Parent 02 02.86
Widow/Widower 06 08.57
Educational Attainment
None 00 00.00
Elementary Undergraduate 00 00.00
Elementary Graduate 14 20.00
High School Undergraduate 02 02.86
High School Graduate 22 31.43
College Undergraduate 16 22.86
College Graduate 14 20.00
Vocational 02 02.86
Occupation
Business Owner 06 08.57
Driver 00 00.00
Employee 02 02.86
Farmer (and Fisherman) 03 04.29
Government Official 10 14.29
Housekeeper/Caretaker 00 00.00
Housewife 32 45.71
Laborer/Construction Worker 00 00.00
OFW 00 00.00
Retired 00 00.00
Vendor 03 04.26

Other 03 04.26


216

Appendix Table 23 continued...

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

Number of Children
None 08 11.43
Only 1 10 14.29
2-3 22 31.43
4-9 30 42.86
10 and above 00 00.00

Residence
Purok 4 18 25.71
Purok 2 09 12.86
Purok 3 12 17.14
Purok 4 1 15.71
Purok 5 09 12.86
Purok 6 ak) 15.71

B. Solid waste management practices

The respondents were questioned on their solid waste management
practices. It was found that almost all of the respondents are sorting their waste
while the remaining 2.86% said that they are not segregating yet (Appendix
Table 24). According to non-segregators, they are too busy with work (50%) and
that their garbage cans are very limited (50%). Thus, they prefer to bury all their
waste in their respective backyards (100%).

Most of those who segregate their waste sort them into biodegradable and
non-biodegradable (67.64%). Some 13.24% adds recyclables in their category

Though a few (8.82%) categorize their waste into biodegradable, non-

217

biodegradable, and other waste including plastic, tin cans, cardboard boxes, and
paper while the remaining 5.88% sort their waste into biodegradable and various
waste like plastics, tin cans, cardboard boxes, and papers.

The respondents’ reasons for segregating their waste are wide-ranging. A
portion segregate because this make collection of waste easier than if their waste
are unsorted (25%). Also, some like to ensure the orderliness of their trash for
disposal through segregation (22.06%). Some sort their waste for they usually
sell their recyclables to junk shops in exchange for cash or salt (19.11%) while
some separate waste that can still be reused (8.82%). Only few of the
respondents are motivated to segregate their waste for the reason that there is a
municipal ordinance regarding segregation (7.35%). Moreover, some of the
respondents said that they segregate because they would like to help the
environment (4.41%) and reduce their waste for disposal (4.41%). Some of the
respondents segregate for they use some of their waste as fertilizers (2.94%)
while one said that they segregate because some of the waste cannot be

incinerated (1.47%). Another 1.47% segregate to prevent flooding.

Appendix Table 24. Segregating practice of respondents

from Brgy. Pinagbayanan.

218

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

Are you segregating your solid waste?

Yes, | am segregating my waste 68 97.14
No, | am not segregating my waste 02 02.86
TOTAL 70 100.00
In what categories are you segregating
your waste?
Biodegradable and
non-biodegradable 46 67.64
Biodegradable, non-biodegradable,
others 06 08.82
Biodegradable, non-biodegradable,
recyclables 09 13.24
Biodegradable and others 04 05.88
OUT OF 68 100.00
Why are you segregating your waste?
Easy collection of waste 17 25.00
Ensure cleanliness of surroundings 01 01.47
Ensure orderliness of
trash for disposal 15 22.06
Exchange for money or salt 13 19.11
Follow municipal ordinance 05 07.35
Help the environment 03 04.41
Prevent flooding 01 01.47
Reduce waste to be disposed 03 04.41
Separate waste that can be reused 06 08.82
Some waste cannot be burn 01 01.47
Use some waste as fertilizer 02 02.94
OUT OF 68 100.00
Why are you not segregating your waste?
Burying all my waste 02 100.00
Busy with work 01 50.00
No available garbage can 01 50.00
OUT OF 02 100.00

219

Moreover, as shown in Appendix Table 25, majority of the respondents
are recycling or reusing their waste while the 18.57% are not. All those who do
not recycle or reuse their waste said that they do so because they rather sell their
waste to junk shops and that there is no need for them to recycle or reuse for
their waste are usually residuals like snack and candy wrappers (20%).

On the other hand, those who recycle or reuse said that they do this
because they also would like to sell their recyclables to junk shops in exchange
for money or salt (38.46%). Most of the respondents said that they recycle or
reuse because they would like to make use of the utmost benefit of some of their
waste, especially recyclables (34.62%) and consequently save some cash
(5.77%). Some do this to reduce the waste to be disposed ultimately in landfills
(23.08%) as well as to maintain the cleanliness of their surroundings (21.15%). A
few also recycle their waste as materials for school projects and home decor
ideas (7.69%). The remaining 1.92% said that they abide the ordinance of the
municipality to recycle and reuse their waste.

The respondents usually recycle or reuse plastic and glass bottles
(84.21%) as well as plastic bags (35.09%). Most of them also recycles or reuses
tin cans and scrap metals (38.60%). Paper wastes, including newspapers,
(26.21%) are commonly recycled by some of the respondents too. A few also

recycle and reuse cardboard boxes (14.04%).

Appendix Table 25. Recycling or reusing practice of respondents

220

from Brgy. Pinagbayanan.
FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE(%)

Do you recycle or reuse some of your
waste?

Yes, | recycle/reuse our waste 57 81.43
No, | do not recycle/reuse our waste 13 18.57
TOTAL 70 100.00
What are the waste that you usually recycle
or reuse?
Bottle 46 84.21
Cardboard box 08 14.04
Paper 15 26.21
Plastic 20 35.09
Tin can and metals 22 38.60
Others 06 10.53
OUT OF 57 100.00
Why are you recycling/reusing your waste?
Exchange for money or salt 20 38.46
Follow municipal ordinance 01 01.92
Maintain cleanliness of surroundings 1 21.15
Make utmost benefit of recyclables 18 34.62
Project or decoration materials 04 07.69
Reduce trash to be discarded 12 23.08
Save some cash 03 05.77
Others 02 03.85
OUT OF §2° 100.00
Why are you not recycling/reusing your
waste?
Selling recyclables 05 100.00
No need to recycle 01 20.00
OUT OF os? 100.00

*5 out of 57 (8.77%) did not answer the question
°7 out of 13 (53.84%) did not answer the question

221

The respondents were also asked on their incineration practice (Appendix
Table 26). Based on the result, majority of the respondents are refraining from
burning their waste (65.71%) while a portion of them are still practicing
incineration (34.29%). Most of the waste subjected to burning are dried leaves
(78.26%) and papers (34.78%). Some respondents also burn plastics (26.09%)
while the remaining 4.34% said that they burn all their waste.

The reason behind this practice is that most of the respondents want to
reduce waste to be collect by burning some of them (58.82%). Also, some
reasoned that they burn their waste to shoo away insects like mosquitoes
(11.76%) and to encourage the flowering of fruit bearing trees (11.76%). The
respondents burn some of their waste to reduce waste and avoid it from clogging
canals thus preventing flooding (11.76%). Some aiso find convenience in burning
their waste (11.76%).

Those who are not burning their waste reasoned that it is bad for the
environment (33.33%). Most of the respondents also said that they are not
burning because the municipality is prohibiting this practice (35.90%). Moreover,
-according to the respondents, their waste are already being collected, thus,
there is no need to burn their waste (28.21%). A few also mentioned that burning
waste is bad for the health (7.69%) and smoke from burning are irritants and
makes laundry smell bad (5.12%). The remaining 2.56% said that they do not h-

ave enough space to burn their waste.

222

Appendix Table 26. Burning practice of respondents from Brgy. Pinagbayanan.

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

Are you burning waste?

Yes, | am burning my waste 24 34.29
No, | am not burning my waste 46 65.71
TOTAL 70 100.00
What waste are you buming?
All waste 01 04.34
Leaves 18 78.26
Paper 08 34.78
Plastic 06 26.09
OUT OF 237 100.00
Why are you burning your waste?
Avoid flooding 02 11.76
Convenient to burn waste 02 11.76
Encourage flowering of trees 02 11.76
Reduce garbage to be collected 10 58.82
Shoo away insects like
mosquitoes 02 11.76
OUT OF 47° 100.00
Why are you not burning your waste?
Burning is prohibited 14 35.90
No place to burn garbage 01 02.56
Waste are being collected 1 28.21
Bad for the environment 13 33.33
Bad for the health 03 07.69
Source of Smoke 02 05.12
OUT OF 39° 100.00

2"7 out of 24 (4.17%) did not answer the question
°7 out of 24 (29.16%) did not answer the question
*8 out of 46 (17.39%) did not answer the question

Based on the result of the survey (Appendix Table 27), the respondents’

unbumt wastes are usually collected by designated garbage trucks (57.38%).

223

Majority of the respondents also said that their waste are usually sold to junk
shops (57.38%). Some of them said that they buried unburnt waste at their
backyards (14.75%) while some rather recycle them (3.28%) or piled them up in
their backyards (1.64%). Moreover, majority of the respondents uses sack to
manage their waste for these are common in agricultural areas (84.61%). A
portion also reuses large plastic bags as containers for their waste (34.62%)
while some uses trash cans (15.38%). A few uses other management facilities

like wells and old pails (7.69%).

Appendix Table 27. Waste management of respondents
from Brgy. Pinagbayanan.

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

What do you do with unburnt trash?

Buried at their backyard 09 14.75
Collected by garbage trucks 35 57.38
Piled up in their backyard 01 01.64
Recycled 02 03.28
Sold to junkshops 35 57.38
OUT OF 61° 100.00
What do you use fo manage your
trash?
18 34.62
Plastic bags 44 84.61
Sack 08 15.38
Trash can 04 07.69
Others 52° 100.00
OUT OF

*°9 out of 70 (12.66%) did not answer the question
> 48 out of 70 (25.71%) did not answer the question

224

C. Knowledge on solid waste

The residents of Pinagbayanan were also surveyed on their knowledge on
solid waste and its management. They were asked to identify proper solid waste
management schemes. Based on the result of the survey, almost all of the
respondents said that selling waste to junk shops (97.14%) and segregating their
waste in categories (95.71%) are both proper waste management (Appendix
Table 28). Even 1 out of the 2 respondents who do not segregate their waste
thinks that it is proper to sort waste.

Most of them also said that reducing their waste by avoiding the use of
disposables are ways to properly manage trash (74.29%). Another 74.29% of the
respondents consider integration of ecological solid waste management in the
curricula of education can improve waste management. Composting waste also
garnered a portion of the respondents’ response (65.71%).

A few of the respondents, including 4 out of those who bum, consider
burning waste as proper waste management (28.57%). However, some of those
who do not burn thinks that burning is proper way to manage trash (3 out of 46).
Some of the respondents also consider using plastics (14.29%), and piling up of
waste in one’s own backyard (5.71%) are both proper solid waste management

schemes.

225

Appendix Table 28. Knowledge on proper SWM of the respondents
from Brgy. Pinagbayanan.

WASTE MANAGEMENT SCHEMES? FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)
Burning of waste 20 28.57
Composting of waste 46 65.71
Integrating ecological SWM in the curricula 52 74.28
Piling up of waste in the backyard 04 5.71
Reducing waste generation 52 74.29
Segregating waste 67 95.71
Selling of waste to junk shops 68 97.14
Using plastics 10 14.29

__OUTOF 70 100.00

Furthermore, the respondents were asked on the negative effects of
improper solid waste management (Appendix Table 29). All of them mentioned
that improperly managed waste can cause severe flooding. Hundred percent of
the respondents also answered that wastes are source of putrescent smell if they
are not managed properly. Almost all of the respondents mentioned that it
causes diseases like dengue, leptospirosis, asthma, and diarrhea (98.57%). Most
of the respondents also claimed that air, land, and water pollution results from
improperly managed waste (95.71%). Moreover, according to most of the
respondents, unmanaged waste can cause wounds and cuts (94.29%) as well as

chemical poisoning (95.71%).

226

Appendix Table 29. Knowledge on the negative effects of improper SWM of the
Respondents from Brgy. Pinagbayanan.

WHAT ARE THE NEGATIVE EFFECTS

OF INCORRECT SWM? FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

Acquiring diseases 69 98.57

Acquiring wounds and cuts 66 94.29
Air, land, and water pollution 67 95.71
Chemical poisoning 67 95.71
Severe flooding 70 100.00
Source of foul smell 70 100.00
OUT OF 70 100.00

To know their knowledge on solid waste management, the respondents
were asked to classify waste into biodegradable and non-biodegradable as
shown in Appendix Table 30. Under biodegradable, almost all of the respondents
classify fruits and vegetables peelings (98.50%); and dried leaves and plant
cuttings (97.01%). Most of them also mentioned that leftover food (92.54%) are
biodegradable while some include tissue and paper in their list (74.63%).
Moreover, a few of the respondents categorize metals and tin cans (07.46%) as
well as glassware (2.99%) under biodegradable. According to them these
materials accumulate rust and crumble to smaller pieces after some time. When
asked to categorize waste into non-biodegradable, almost all of them include

plastics, sacks, and Styrofoam (94.03%). Most of them also mentioned metals

227

and tin cans as non-biodegradable. Glassware are classified under non-
biodegradable by 86.57% of the respondents.

However, some of the respondents said that tissue and paper (25.37%)
are non-biodegradable because, according to them, some paper does not
degrade easily. Also, a few classify leftovers (11.94%), fruits and vegetables
peelings (4.48%), and dried leaves and plant cuttings (2.99%) for the reason that

they use these as food for their pets and are not usually buried in the soil.

Appendix Table 30. Knowledge on classification of waste of the respondents
from Brgy. Pinagbayanan

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

Biodegradable
Dried leaves and plant cuttings 65 97.01
Fruits and vegetables peelings 66 98.50
Glassware 02 02.99
Leftover food 62 92.54
Metals and tin cans 05 07.46
Tissue and Paper 50 74.63
OUT OF 67? 100.00
Non-biodegradable
Dried leaves and plant cuttings 02 02.99
Fruits and vegetables peelings 03 04.48
Glassware 58 86.57
Leftover food 08 11.94
Metals and tin cans 62 92.54
Plastics, sacks, and styrofoams 63 94.03
Tissue and Paper 17 25.37
OUT OF 67? 100.00

*°3 out of 70 (4.28%) did not answer the question

228

D. Knowledge on laws and ordinances relating to SWM

Apart from the respondents’ solid waste management practices and their
knowledge in solid waste management, their understanding on laws and
ordinances encompassing solid waste were also explored. Most of the
respondents are knowledgeable in RA 9003 (65.71%) while the remaining
34.29% have no idea about the law. Those who know of the law, mentioned that
the objectives of RA 9003 include the safeguarding of the environment (91.30%)
and the protection of public health (89.13%). Another 91.30% of the respondents
‘said that the law aims to reduce waste through reduce, reuse, and recycle or
3R's. Moreover, according to 89.13% of the respondents, proper segregation,
collection, transport, storage, treatment, and disposal of solid waste are
encouraged by the law. Integration of ecological solid waste management into
the curricula of academic curricula is another goal of RA 9003 as stated by
69.57% of the respondents.

‘When asked on the illegal acts under the law, all of the respondents
mentioned that littering, throwing, dumping of waste matters in public spaces as.
‘one of the prohibited acts. Almost all of the respondents also consider open
burning of waste as a violation against RA 9003 (97.78%). According to most of
the respondents, it is against the law to manufacture, distribute, and use non-
environmentally friendly packaging materials (82.22%). Some of the respondents
also mentioned that it is prohibited to collect unsorted waste (73.33 %) as well to

dump and bury waste in hazard-prone areas (73.33 %).

229

Furthermore, majority of the respondents thinks that penalties for violators
against RA 9003 ranges from fines, community service and imprisonment
(93.48%). The other 6.52% claimed that punishment is immediate imprisonment.
A few said that punishment is as simple as waste will not be collected if
unsegregated. This, however, is only applicable in a municipal level ordinance
and only for those who fail to sort their waste correctly.

In connection, Appendix Table 31 shows that most of the respondents
thinks that the responsibility of reporting and filing a case against violators of RA
9003 reside in anyone who witnessed the illegal acts (71.75%). A portion,
though, thinks that it is in the hand of the barangay captains together with their
council. The remaining 4.35% of the respondents believe that it is the municipal
officials’ and MENRO's responsibility to report and file a case against violators.

Additionally, most of the respondents recognize their responsibility to
segregate their own waste as individual residents or business owners (93.48%).
However, some thinks it is their barangay officials’ task to segregate the
community's waste (4.35%) and few believe that the municipal office should

address these issues (2.17%).

230

Appendix Table 31. Knowledge on RA 9003 of the respondents.
from Brgy. Pinagbayanan.

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

Do you know what R.A. 9003 is about?

Yes, | know 46 65.71
No, | do not know 24 34.29
TOTAL 70 100.00
What do you think are the objectives of
R.A. 9003?

Integration of ecological SWM into

the academic curricula 32 69.57
Proper segregation, collection,

transport, storage, treatment and

disposal of solid waste a4 89.13
Protection of public health 41 89.13
Protection of the environment 42 91.30
Reduction of waste through 3Rs 42 91.30

OUT OF 46 __ 100.00

What do you think are the prohibited acts
under R.A. 9003?

Causing or permitting the collection
of non-segregated or unsorted

waste 33 73.33
Littering, throwing, dumping of
waste matters in public places 45 100.00

Manufacture, distribution or use of

non-environmentally acceptable

Packaging materials 37 82.22
Open burning of solid waste 44 97.78
Open dumping, burying of

biodegradable or non-

biodegradable materials in

flood-prone areas 33 73.33

OUT OF 45° 100.00 _


231

Appendix Table 31 continued

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

Based on your knowledge, whose
responsibility is it to segregate waste?

Barangay Captains and councils 02 04.35

Individual residents or business
owners 43 93.48
Municipal officials and MENRO 01 02.17
OUT OF 46 100.00

Based on your knowledge, what are the
penalties for violating R.A. 9003?

Fine, community service, and 42 91.30
imprisonment 03 06.52
Imprisonment 00 00.00
No idea on the penalties 00 00.00
There are no penalties 01 02.17
Other: waste will not be collected 46 100.00

OUT OF

Based on your knowledge, who can report
and file a case against violators of R.A.

9003?
33 71.74
Anyone who witnessed the violation 11 23.91
Barangay captain and the council 02 04.35
Municipal officials and MENRO 46 100.00

OUT OF
#7 out of 46 (2.17%) did not answer the question

Respondents from Pinagbayanan were asked about their knowledge on
their local ordinances. Most of them are knowledgeable on the municipal
ordinances (77.94%) while the remaining 22.06% are still ignorant of the
ordinances on solid waste (Appendix Table 32). Most of the respondents stated

that Pila strongly encourages the segregation of waste (38.46%). According to

232

most of the respondents, open burning is prohibited in the municipality. Another
15.38% of the respondents mentioned that the municipality is currently focusing
on the regular collection of waste while 13.46% said that Pila is regulating the
use of plastics. A few of the respondents claimed that littering is prohibited
(9.61%) thus it is necessary to maintain the cleanliness of one’s surroundings
(5.77%). However, a big chunk of the respondents vaguely mentioned that the
local ordinance of the municipality is the RA 9003 and failed to elaborate more on
this (23.08%).

Furthermore, the respondents were asked if they know that waste are
being collected, majority of them said yes (92.75%). However, when asked on
the schedule of collection, the respondents have various answers. Some of them
said that wastes are collected twice a week (23.44%) while a few mentioned that
it is once a week (1.56%) or everyday (1.56%). A portion of the respondents said
that wastes are being collected during Mondays and Thursdays (28.13%) while a
few said it is only on a Monday (1.56%). A few also thinks that waste are
collected on Tuesdays and Thursdays (3.13%) or Tuesdays and Fridays (3.13%).
Nonetheless, 32.81% of the respondents got the timetable correctly and
completely, non-biodegradable on Mondays and biodegradable on Thursdays, as
scheduled for Pinagbayanan by the municipal office. A few are quite confused
that non-biodegradable are collected on Mondays while biodegradable are
Picked up on a Tuesdays (4.69%). Only 4 out 35 who mentioned that their

wastes are being collected got the schedule mixed up.

233

Moreover, most of the respondents declared that they know where the
wastes are being disposed after collection (71.64%). According to them it is
brought to the MRF somewhere in the upland barangays of Pila while some said

it is in Calamba.

Appendix Table 32. Knowledge on municipal ordinances of the respondents
from Brgy. Pinagbayanan.

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

Do you know any municipal ordinances on

SWM?
Yes, | know 53 77.94
No, | do not know 15 22.06
No answer 02 02.86
TOTAL 70 100.00
What are the municipal ordinances on SW?
Littering is prohibited 05 09.61
Open buming is prohibited 08 15.39
Plastics are prohibited 07 13.46
Regular and proper collection
of waste 08 15.38
Segregation of waste is encouraged 20 38.46
Maintain cleanliness 03 05.77
RA 9003 12 23.08
OUT OF 52° 100.00
Do you know if your wastes are being
collected?
64 92.75
Yes, | know 05 07.25
No, I do not know 01 01.43
No answer 70 100.00

TOTAL


Appendix Table 32 continued...

234

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

When are your waste being collected?

Everyday 01 01.56
Once a week 01 01.56
Twice a week 15 23.44
Monday 01 01.56
Monday and Thursday 18 28.13
Monday (non-biodegradable) and
Thursday (biodegradable) 21 32.81
Monday (non-biodegradable) and
Tuesday (biodegradable) 03 04.69
Tuesday and Thursday 02 03.13
Tuesday and Friday 02 03.13
OUT OF 64 100.00
Do you know where your wastes are being
disposed?
Yes, | know 48 71.64
No, | do not know 19 28.36
TOTAL 67° 100.00

*Z out of 70 (2.86%) did not answer the question
*3 out of 70 (4.26%) did not answer the question
*1 out of 70 (1.43%) did not answer the question

E. Attitude of solid waste management

The attitude of the respondents from Pinagbayanan toward solid waste

management were also studied through the use of the survey. Specifically, their

perception on segregation, 3Rs, incineration, and collection of waste were

explored. Moreover, the respondents’ opinion of solid waste management in

general is included in the study.

235

In terms of segregation of waste, all of the respondents believes that it is
easy to segregate waste into biodegradable and non-biodegradable (Appendix
Table 33). Even all of those who does not segregate their waste said that
segregating is uncomplicated (2 out of 2). Moreover, majority of the respondents
thinks that, through sorting their waste, they are contributing in the livelihood of
other people especially those who buy recyclables (98.51%) while the remaining

1.49% chose not to comment.

Majority of the respondents also believe that it is their responsibility to
segregate their waste (96.96%). Even those two respondents who do not

segregate think so, too.

However, a few of the respondents either think that it is someone else
responsibility (1.52%), including one of the 68 who segregate their waste, or

rather not comment (1.52%).

Most of the respondents, though not all, also claim that it is convenient to
use reusable materials like eco bags and bottles (73.91%) even those who do
not recycle thinks that it is indeed easy to use reusable. However, 10 out of the
53 respondents who recycles or reuses encounter difficulty in doing so
Nonetheless, majority of the respondents understand that they can relatively
decrease their waste generation if they refrain from using disposable materials

like plastic cups and paper plates (98.51%)

236

When asked on their perception on incineration of waste, most
respondents think that it would be beneficial to the community if they will stop
from burning their waste (88.06%). Even some who incinerate their waste share
the same opinion (15 out of 24). The other 10.45%, however, thinks that
refraining from burning waste will not be of help to the community. Moreover,
most of the respondents, including 3 out of the 24 respondents who burn their
waste, believe that it is harmful to burn any waste, even biodegradable like dried
leaves and papers. However, some 5.97% of the respondents think that burning
biodegradable trash is negligible.

In terms of the collection of waste, almost all of the respondents believe
that it is their responsibility to take out their segregated trash and dump them in
designated place and time for the garbage trucks to pick them up (98.48%).
However, 4.48% cannot claim responsibility in bringing their trash out for pick up.
In addition, majority of the respondents believe that it is inappropriate to throw
trash anywhere (94.03%), no matter how small it is while some thinks it is
negligible to throw small trash like candy wrappers anywhere (2.98%).

In general, almost all of the respondents believe that they will be of help to
their community if they will follow proper solid waste management promoted by
the municipality (98.51%). Moreover, all of them think that it will be favorable to
the community if they will abide by the laws and ordinances on solid waste.

Consequently, majority of the respondents are willing to manage their

waste properly even though their peers would not do the same (71.64%). Also,

237

more than half of the respondents agreed that they will properly manage their
waste even without government interventions like laws, ordinances, and
corresponding punishments (59.70%). However, some respondents will only be
motivated to manage their waste if there are existing laws and ordinances
(37.31%). Nonetheless, most of the respondents are claiming responsibility in
reporting and filing cases against violators of laws and ordinances on solid waste
(89.55%) while a few thinks it is not their responsibility (4.48%) and some beg not
to comment (5.97%).

Moreover, all of the respondents thinks that their neighbors and peers will
appreciate their efforts to share their knowledge on proper solid waste
management. Also, all of the respondents believe that the municipality should

focus on the improvement of solid waste and its management.

Appendix Table 33. Attitude on SWM of the respondents
from Barangay Pinagbayanan.

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)

1. Itis easy fo segregate waste in
biodegradable and non-biodegradable

Agree 69 100.00
Disagree 00 00.00
No Comment 00 00.00

TOTAL 69° 100.00


Appendix Table 33 continued...

238

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)
2. It is not easy to use reusable
materials like eco bags and bottles
Agree 15 21.74
Disagree 51 73.91
No Comment 03 04.35
TOTAL 69° 100.00
3. | can relatively reduce my waste if |
avoid using disposables like paper
plates and styrofoam
Agree 64 95.42
Disagree 03 04.48
No Comment 00 00.00
TOTAL 67° 100.00
4. It will be beneficial for my community
if | refrain from burning my waste
Agree 59 88.06
Disagree 07 10.45
No Comment 01 01.49
TOTAL 67° 100.00
5. It will be beneficial for my community
if | follow the proper solid waste
management recommended by the
municipality
66 98.51
Agree 00 00.00
Disagree 01 01.49
No Comment 67° 100.00
TOTAL
6. would be able to help in the
livelihood of others if | separate my
recyclables from other waste
Agree 66 98.51
Disagree 00 00.00
No Comment 01 01.49
TOTAL 67° 100.00


Appendix Table 33 continued.

239

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)
7. Throwing small trash, such as candy
wrappers, anywhere is negligible and
will not affect the environment
Agree 02 02.98
Disagree 63 94.03
No Comment 02 02.98
TOTAL 67° 100.00
8. Burning of waste, especially
biodegradable, does not have any
harmful effects
04 05.97
Agree 59 88.06
Disagree 04 05.97
No Comment 67° 100.00
TOTAL
9. | will properly manage my waste if
only my peers will do the same
Agree 18 26.87
Disagree 48 71.64
No Comment 01 01.49
TOTAL 67° 100.00
10. | will properly manage my waste
only if there are existing laws and
corresponding penalties for violators
Agree 25 37.31
Disagree 40 59.70
No Comment 02 02.99
TOTAL 67° 100.00
11. It is my responsibility to segregate
my waste
Agree 64 96.96
Disagree 01 01.52
No Comment 01 01.52
TOTAL 66° 100.00


Appendix Table 33 continued...

240

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)
12. It is my responsibility to report
anyone who violates the laws and
ordinances regarding solid waste
management
Agree 60 89.55
Disagree 03 04.48
No Comment 04 05.97
TOTAL 67° 100.00
13. Itis my responsibility to bring out my
segregated trash for them to be
collected
Agree 65 98.48
Disagree 01 01.51
No Comment 00 00.00
TOTAL 66° 100.00
74. My neighbors would appreciate if |
will share information on proper solid
waste management
Agree 67 100.00
Disagree 00 00.00
No Comment 00 00.00
TOTAL 67° 100.00
15. | will be of help to my
barangay/community if | will abide by
the laws and ordinances on solid waste
management
Agree 67 100.00
Disagree 00 00.00
No Comment 00 00.00
TOTAL 67° 100.00


Appendix Table 33 continued...

241

FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE (%)
76. Proper solid waste management in
my municipality should be given much
needed attention
Agree 67 100.00
Disagree 00 00.00
No Comment 00 00.00
TOTAL 67° 100.00

*T out of 70 (1.43%) did not answer the question
°3 out of 70 (4.29%) did not answer the question
©4 out of 70 (5.71%) did not answer the questi

242

Appendix 3

Communication Letters

243

SCHOOL OF ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE AND MANAGEMENT
(PAARALAN NG PANGKAPALIGIRANG AGHAM AT PAMAMAIIALA)

GA University of the Philippines Los Baflos
1) Colleye, Laguna, Philippines 4031

August 06, 2016

Hon. Edgardo Ramos
Mayor

Municipal Office

Pila, Laguna 4010

Dear HON. RAMOS:
Good day!

1am Ma, Russell A. Natoza, a graduate student of Master of Science in Environmental Science
from the University of the Philippines Los Banos. | am currently working on my master’s thesis about
the promotion of effective solid waste management through a transactional approach. The study has
the following objectives:

1. Understand the underlying reasons for the constituents’ current solid waste
management practices through transactional analysis by describing their current solid
waste management; identifying their knowledge, attitude, perception toward solid waste
and its management, describing individual's physical setting; and Identifying the temporal
qualities that affects solid waste management

2. Formulate tailor-fitted strategies to further promote Solid Waste Management in the
municipality.

In connection with this, | would like to ask your good office for permission to conduct my
research in Pila, Laguna, My study will require a survey regarding your constituents’ Knowledge,
Attitude, and Practices on solid waste. If deemed necessary, a focus group discussion has to be done
based on the result of survey. Also, a series of Key Informant Interviews and site visits has to be
administered for the holistic understanding of the municipality's solid waste management. Moreover, |
would like to request available secondary documents and information pertinent to my study.

|lam hoping for your cooperation and kind consideration. Thank you very much.

Noted by:

{Gat
Ma. Rushell A. Natoza [Rebancos
MS Envitdnmental Science -UPLB Adviser
mranatoza@gmail.com JL
09172464518 Ap, ppv


244

University of the Philippines Los Baitos
College, Laguna, Philippines 4031

SCHOOL OF ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE AND MANAGEMENT
cy) (PAARALAN NG PANGKAPALIGIRANG AGHAM AT PAMAMAHALA)

‘Aug 06, 2016

Hon. Queen Marilyd Alarva
Vice Mayor

Municipal Office

Pila, Laguna 4010

Dear HON. ALARVA:
Good day!

lam Ma. Russell A. Natoza, a graduate student of Master of Science in Environmental Science
from the University of the Philippines Los Banos. | am currently working on my master's thesis about
the promotion of effective solid waste management through a transactional approach. The study has
the following objectives:

1. Understand the underlying reasons for the constituents’ current solid waste
‘management practices through transactional analysis by describing their current solid
waste management; identifying their knowledge, attitude, perception toward solid waste
and its management, describing individual's physical setting; and Identifying the temporal
qualities that affects solid waste management

2. Formulate tailor-ftted strategies to further promote Solid Waste Management in the
municipality.

In connection with this, | would like to ask your good office for permission to conduct my
esearch in Pila, Laguna. My study will require @ survey regarding your constituents’ Knowledge,
Attitude, and Practices on solid waste. If deemed necessary, a focus group discussion has to be done
based on the result of survey. Also, a series of Key Informant Interviews and site visits has to be
‘administered for the holistic understanding of the municipality's solid waste management. Moreover, |
‘would like to request available secondary documents and information pertinent to my study.

| am hoping for your cooperation and kind consideration. Thank you very much,

Noted by:
Harte —
Ma. Rushell A. Natoza Carmelita M. Rebancos:
MS Envitonmental Science -UPLB- Adviser
mranatoza@gmail.com
09172464518

‘D S. ALARVA


University ofthe Philippines Los Baitos
College, Laguna, Philippines 4031

SCHOOL OF ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE AND MANAGEMENT
o@ z (PAARALAN NG PANGKAPALIGIRANG AGHAM AT PAMAMAHALA)

‘Aug 10, 2016

WOO AORN DO MOnTEZA
Barangay Captain

Barangay Hall

Brgy. Yonct

ila, Laguna 4010

Dear HON. _(UOITTE 2A
Good day!

Jam Ma, Russell A. Natoza, a graduate student of Master of Science in Environmental Science
from the University of the Philippines Los Banos. | am currently working on my master’s thesis about
the promotion of effective solid waste management through a transactional approach. The study has
the following objectives:

1. Understand the underlying reasons tor the constituents’ current solid waste
‘management practices through transactional analysis by describing their current solid
waste management; identifying their knowledge, attitude, perception toward solid waste
land its management, describing individual's physical setting; and Identitying the temporal
qualities that attacts solid waste management

2. Formulate tallor-ttted strategies to further promote Solid Waste Management in the
‘municipality.

{n connection with this, | would like to ask your good office for permission to conduct my
research in Pila, Laguna. My study will require a survey regarding your constituents’ Knowledge,
Atitude, and Practices on solid waste. If deemed necessary, a focus group discussion has to be done
based on the resutt of survey. Also, @ series of Key Informant interviews and site visits hes to be
administered for the holistic understanding of the municipality's solid waste management. Moreover, |
‘would like to request available secondary documents and information pertinent to my study.

| am hoping for your cooperation and kind consideration. Thank you very much.

Noted by:
[V0

Ma. Rusdpil A. Natoza Carmelita M. Rebancos

MS Envirohmental Science -UPLB ASME Ge 5

mranataza@gmail.com (re °

09172464518

245

Mais, eras)

246

University of the Philippines Los Baiios

(PAARALAN NG PANGKAPALIGIRANG AGHAM AT PAMAMAHALA)

‘Aug 10, 2016

frtituy k Dowinogy
Barangay Captain
Barangay Hall
Brgy. Sta. Lana Gun
Pila, Laguna 4010

Dear Hon, DuWinoyd
Good day!

lam Ma. Russell A. Natoza, a graduate student of Master of Science in Environmental Science
from the University of the Philippines Los Banos. | am currently working on my master’s thesis about
the promotion of effective solid waste management through a transactional approach. The study has
the following objectives:

1. Understand the underlying reasons for the constituents’ current solid waste
management practices through transactional analysis by describing their current solid
waste management; identifying their knowledge, attitude, perception toward solid waste
and its management, describing individual's physical setting: and Identifying the temporal
qualities that affects solid waste management

2. Formulate tailor-fitted strategies to further promote Solid Waste Management in the
municipality.

In connection with this, | would like to ask your good office for permission to conduct my
research in Pila, Laguna. My study will require a survey regarding your constituents’ Knowledge,
Attitude, and Practices on solid waste. If deemed necessary, a focus group discussion has to be done
based on the result of survey. Also, a series of Key Informant interviews and site visits has to be
‘administered for the holistic understanding of the municipality's solid waste management. Moreover, 1
‘would like to request available secondary documents and information pertinent to my study.

| am hoping for your cooperation and kind consideration. Thank you very much,

r sede
(
on c Cul eee
Ma, RUksellA‘Natoza Reooyy 9 Carmelite M. Rebancos
MS Envitonmental Science -UPLB Acolan Adviser
mranatoza@gmail.com \
09172464518

9-2 -w

247

SCHOOL OF ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE AND MANAGEMENT
(PAARALAN NG PANGKAPALIGIRANG AGHAM AT PAMAMAHALA)
‘University of the Philippines Los Battos

College, Laguna, Philippines 4031

=

‘Aug 10, 2016

RUSEW ALBAYIA
Barangay Captain
Barangay Hall
Bray. firaapoyanan
Pila, Laguna 4010

Dear HON. ALUBAYDA
Good day!

lam Ma, Russell A. Natoza, a graduate student of Master of Science in Environmental Science
{rom the University of the Philippines Los Banos. ! am currently working on my master’s thesis about
the promotion of effective solid waste management through a transactional approach. The study has
the following objectives:

1, Understand the underlying reasons for the constituents’ current solid waste
‘management practices through transactional analysis by describing their current solid
waste management; identifying their knowledge, attitude, perception toward solid waste
and its management, desoribing individual's physical setting; and Identifying the temporal
qualities that affects solid waste management

2. Formulate tallor-ftted strategies to further promote Solid Waste Management in the
‘municipality.

In connection with this, | would like to ask your good office for permission to conduct my
research in Pila, Laguna. My study will require a survey regarding your constituents’ Knowledge,
Attitude, and Practices on solid waste. if deemed necessary, a focus group discussion has to be done
based on the result of survey. Also, a series of Key Informant Interviews and site visits has to be
‘administered for the holistic understanding of the municipality's solid waste management. Moreover, |
would like to request available secondary documents and information pertinent to my study.

|| am hoping for your cooperation and kind consideration. Thank you very much,

Noted by:
OL.

tae ra ston elle sec,

MS EnWWonmental Science -UPLB Adviser

mranatoza@gmail.com [6

09172464518 18 qe

os

Appendix 4

Guide Questions for Key Informant Interview

248

249

Key Informant Interview

History of Pila (Request for CLUP. Municipal Profile, Maps)

1. How did the municipality of Pila change in terms of land use?
2. How did these changes affect the SW Generation of Pila constituents?

History of SWM (Request for copy of ordinances, records of campaign)

3. What are the existing SWM ordinances in the municipality?

4. How did this evolve thru time? When did it started? How did it improved after the
enactment of RA 9003? (referring to the slides shown during the seminar)

5. How did the people receive/ respond to these laws?

6. How did the ordinances changed Pila Laguna/ effects of the ordinances?

Programs on SWM

7. What are the current programs of the administration to further encourage solid waste
management in Pila?

8.What are your future plans to promote proper solid waste management in Pila?
Technical Facts on SWM

1. Establishment of MRF? (before and after, date of establishment, location)

2. Collection of waste? (route and schedule, disposal in sanitary landfill)
3. Recent result of Waste Analysis and Characterisation?

Appendix 5

Copy of Municipal Solid Waste Ordinances

250

Bus. *
‘3 197.

KiccTUSANG. BAYAN MA HAGBABAMAL NA HAGTAPON SF SASAG WA
RATS AE PAT ATA AT. ANO NANG. URE NG DUNT SA AN HANG
sR OMNO NG RARSADA AT LUPANG PUSLIXO+

TINATADHANA NG_SANGOUNEANG BAYAN SA
KAFULONGAN MA:

vhwonxt 1- Sino meng tno o Grvpe Og Soe of aabigpit
1 int ynbmrelnn an cngtepon ng basag no 0Otoe
Be Peete gkns a ae mang vet Be dual 55 0°
siren jhegi ng karseda nt lupeng pubstkor

gaworar’ 1x - Stuo emnag tnd o grupd 96, 508 0 maglilinis
SS anickontyane tapat an snkop né kesesen SY
ae eeese ne pinngbapavaien no ivenan $8 20
soe Spanagi ng keraade ang age dusts

paNGHAT TIT - Sino mang tao o EURO TS Te maglilinis
To anickaniyone tapet ns sckOp Re Sne°o0h sy
TE eetyagen nia atinven ang dust se. one, TAS
Eanepey ee corsods eubalit ae pgeiatiaP *Y
Riteng duai na matitiras

paNGRAT  TY,= Ang sino mong Inmabeg £8 Kee eTE payang

V5 AnS ceaumulte ng haiaceng LARSEPRASABS OS

(90,00) 0 1AEAKAI TSANG SUAN © poreho
Gen’ea kepnsiyahen ng hukumant

PANORATIG ME, ~_ ang nnonnang kautusens DEY SE, banagi ne
 Gssabing koutusn ne solunce’ oe fadhans ne
nS ueyana 10 ay pinevewsleng BAS")

PANGKAT VI nakokabise ang kautusang boyeng 460 Ce-
ae ee retetyonaa og Sensgnuniang Payee 5°
pegedbryin ne PUNUBAYAN

ppuadiinat, sygnyane ikne3!nerwlilagsre 27)
ag Sengguniong Bayan ng Pile, Lacuna

PINATUTUNAYAN KOy ang kawastuan me Koutusnne bo-
yang ito.

+ arronio Ry Sastuat

Kalinim Pambayon
ATTESTED:

251


252

wikia

4. SecRerany

TAN BIG. 12

aon

EAUTUSANG BAYAN NA SUSUGAN ANG KAUTUSANG BAYAN BILANG 4,
TAQNG 1952 AT BILANG 2 TAONG 1960 NA MAGKAROON NG DEFOSiTO
NG IPA ANG ANO MANG URD NG KISKISAN NG PALAY, PAGSISTLAB
NG IPA SA LOOBAN NA KINATATAYUAN NG KISKISAN’AT PAGTATAPON
NG IPA SA LUPANG PUBLIKO.

ITINATADHANA NG SANGGUNIANG BAYAN NG PILA, LAGUNA
SA KAPULONGAN, AT SA KAPANGYARTEAN KG KAUTUSANG PANG=
KALAHATAN BILANG 13 NG FANGULO NG BANSAg NA:

FANGKAT I - Sino mong tao o grupo ng too nogmnmayari ng
Kiskisan ng palay at bigas ay dapat magpagowe
ng deposito ng §pa bago pnlakarin (operate)
ong nesobing kiskisan;

PANGKAT II - Ipinngbabnwal sn einu mnng tno o grupo ng tro
na nagmomoy-ari ng kiskisan ng play at bigas
ne kung bagamat may deposito ng ipa ay maglo-
gay ng ipn sa Inbas ng deposito;

PANGKAT III - Sino mang tao, tagapangnsiwa, may-ori nt tau-
han ng kiskisan ng palay ay mabigpit no pinngba-
bawelan no mageilab ng ipn ng palay sa looban ng
kiskisan (yard) at lupang png-cari ng pamabalnan;

PANGKAT IV - Sino mang tao o grupo ng tao ay mahigpit na pi-
nagbabnwalnn na magtapon ng ipa ng palay sa alin
mang lugar at lupang pag-nari ng pnmabelaan;

PANGKAT © V - Sino mang tao o grupo ng tno na agg tnpon o mag-
silab ng ipa sa pribndong lupa ay kailangan nn
may pebintulot ang Punumboyan;

VI - Sino mang too no lalabag sa Koutusang Bayang
ito ay magmumultn ng hindi bababa sa bnlngang
LIMANFUNG PISO AT HINDI HIHIGIT SA DALAWANG
DAANG FISO O MAKAKALABOS NG HINDI BABABA SA
ISANG BUWAN AT HINDI IALAMPAS NG ANIN NA BUWAN
© PAREHO ayon sn kaprsynhan ng Hukuman;

PANGKAT VII - Ang nowunang Kautusang bayan o bahogi ‘ng nnsn—

bing Koutusang na salungot sa tadhona ng Kau-
tusang Bayong ito ay pinawawalang bisa;

PANGKAT VIII - Makakabise ang knutusang Baynng ito matapos
pagpneynkon ng Sangguniang Bayan at pngtibayin
ng punumbayan.
PINAGTIBAY, ng Sangguniang Sayan ng Filn, Laguna

253

AIDA A. AGUILAN
‘SB SECRETARY


KoG. PAVIO 5. Faitbanee + KAGAWAD
‘THOMAS. KAGAWAD prervstf
Koos nus Je UY, due" 222 saganad (uusatTou

Sa mungkabi ni Fmg. Fumuabayen pele i. doi io na pinegelevshan
a ses one 2, sattvided ne dpinepbetewe! cir? eatecbex 0
‘a mge Kaloads oo nang bevel Se Paley Deguneg
EAURUSANG BAZAN Ble 18
KAUTUSANG Serane WA@TATAKDA NO PAGBABAWAL NG LAGLATAMBAR B FA@RATAPON BO
DALAT 5A MGA SALOADANG HAGABAKULAN NG BALAN NG FILA, LAGUNA,
Ttinatadhena ng cong. Baye og Filo, Legace on Kapuleagen mas

PONGKAT” «T= aug Sino wang magenseka, ng aga mogsasaka
cy sumagawe tut
atin canteen te

ae D6 palay;
PANGLAT ie Ci ag, i0' Fat aoe ne pagsacmreety s8 2EO
jaatayen eo lenet
ean ee on on

PANGRAT ITI - eng sino mang hegearake o grupo ng mages
‘iagaesaynari o

aa fie ie thlgeng Tone
at paekabilanggo ayon sa. 3

‘PANGKAT ve ‘Reuneng keutusan o baht ag Be
salutes e oa tachanaing ioaeteens bays
aa

FUNAGPIBAY ngayong ike=16 ng Oktubre, 1989,
see, AATAMAMM, HO Mag RanegmaneD. af Kapesizahan. ot Xemaans Deyeng

~ cumpaeri § wwremee


255
TANGGAPAN NG SANGGUNIANG BAYAN Copgy-

SINIPI SA KATITIKAN NG KARANIWANG PULONG NG-SANGGUNIANG BAYAN
NG PILA, LAGUNA NA GINANAP SA BAHAY PULUNGAN Ne IKA-8 NG
DISYEMBRE, 1997. -

MGA DmtALO: ‘SB SECRETARY

Ls APOLO L. DEL RIO « FANG. PUNONG BAYAN
+ ROSAURO R. FRAMIL . + KAGAWAD
KGG. EDGARDO A. RAMOS + KAGAWAD
KGG. RAYMUNDO A. NATIOLA ....... KACAWAD
KGG. SOUR M. PANTUA, ne » KAGAWAD”
ae 2 OGANIA . + KAGAWAD
Xk REYNALDO J. LUCENA ....+22. KAGAWAD
KGG, ALLAN A. MATIEIZO . . unin

» KaGav

KGG. JOVIR P. manTer20-%
DI DUNALO: ‘

KGc. FELIX R. RAVEDAS
KGC. HONOPTO'R. TAMAO 5.

latay™basag na bote at iba't.

ag basura
ea bahngi ng keleeda ct lupang ay -moriging
sanhi ng pagduri ng kepaliggran;
5 multe no itthokdayga nasnbing xoutus eng

napaknbaba at hindd angkep cn panchong ibe Kayalt.
patuley ang marami ns :
ng bdoura ung scan-

xapoe NC. BASURA.O. c
NG SA ALINYANG KALSADA AT LUPANG 0
CA NASASARUPAY NG BAYAN NG PIZA, LAGUNA.

_Itinatadbena ng Sangguninng Bayan sn kapulynconn nar
SEREYCY 1 — ang sineuaag tne © srupe ag aga tye. ay mahignis
ar,

na ivinaebabawal ane magtapen ng anumane 7
basura @ dumi so rlinmnng babagi ng knlend:


256

an nga tao n& naglilinic
ng keni-kenilang tapnt ng bahey/bakeran na cnvop
ng kalsadn ay pinagbabowsizng Iwan 0 aresunog ng
pnoaang uri ng basura sc nlinameng brbnzi ng
knlsada;

SEKSYON 4 - Ang sinonang tno @ crupo ngage tae na luanbeg cm
Keutusang ite ay maguurulte ng:

‘fe..88 wang paglabag ~ P 100.00
Sa pangaloweng pagiabag =P 200,
visa pangatlong paglabag - & 700.!

© pogkabilangge ng pitong (7) araw o ayon £7 bntol
ng kukeaen,

Saksling aga,dateng 412 tamng gulang pabnbn ang Lalabyg
so Knutu: ‘to sila ry papatawnn ng knporusahen gaya ne.
sumisune:

tatawng ang meguleng at bidigyang

abale (warning)

Tkalawang Paglabag - & 200,00 na ang magvlang ng bata

ang siycng magbabeyad

Ikntlong Paglabag - ® 300.00 na ang maguleng ong siyang
mogbabayad at ong bata ry ilnlagay
88 pangangaral at panenngeleca ne
DSWD sa leeb ng 7 araw.

‘nang Paglabage~ ip

SEKSYON § - Ang mga naunang koutusang na sum:
kautusmng ito ay pinrwelong bisa.

‘luneat sn

SERSYON 6 - Ang mgo wogpe

tup2d nite ay che “bymibue ne age
ieksat eig-med Barangey, mea
“Pulls Re Soya ne nee tinelnge ng Pusens Boyan;

SEKSYON 6 - Ipapatupad ang kautusang ite watapes Hapagtibay
ng Sangguniang Penlalawigan.

re 199%.

PINAGDIBAY ngayeng ika-8 ng Disyer

SINANG-AYUNAN|

257

eye ot tries Yes
Province of Laguna AIDA A. AGUILAN

Municipality of Pila
OFFICE OF THE SANGGUNIANG Bayan SB SECRETARY

HON. EDGARDO Av RAMOS ~.
HON. ZALDY Mu. PANTUA,
HON. HONORIO R.. BAMBO.
HON. ALLAN A. MAPIENZO,
HON. DANTE V. OGANIA 2.002...
FRANCISCA.R. AGUDO. 2 °AL COUNCILOR
J. RICARDOA, GATINGAL = 2.5. ‘COUNCELOR

HON. REYRAEDO!J. LUCENA’. COUNCILOR

HON. SABINIANO R. FLORES. UNCILOR (ABC President)
af HON. QUEEN MARILYD: S. “ALARVA. . ILOR (SK President)

sss VICE MAYOR
SK.) MUNICIPAL “COUNCILOR

ABSENT:

HON. ADELINA 0. FERNANDO. +, MUNICIPAL COUNCILOR’

On Vacation Léave

RESOLUTION NO, 042-7-2007

A RESOLUTION, ESTABLISHING ‘FILA EODEQGICAL:, SOLID WASTE, MANAGE
BOARD, DEFINING ITS COMPOSITION, FUNCTIONS, DUTIES
RESPONSIBILITIES.

Whereas, Section 16 under “State Policies” of 1987 Philippine
Constitution states “That the state shall protect and
advance the ‘right of the people for. a balanced and
healthful ecology in accordance with rhythm and
harmony of nature

Whereas, Section 447 of R.A. 7160 otherwise known as the Local
Government Code of 1991, the -Sanggyniang Bayan is
empowered to’ protect the environment and impose
appropriate penalties for acts which endanger the
environment... and such activities which results in
pollution or of ecological imbalance;


258

Whereas, Section 10 Chapter 11 R.A. 9003. known as Ecological
Solid Waste Management Act of 2000 states anong
others, “Pursuant to the relevant provisions of RA
7160. ‘The Local Government Units (LGUs) shall be
primarily responsible for the implementation and
enforcement of the provisions of this Act (RA 9003)
within their respective jurisdiction;

Whereas, Sectiof.12 Chapter 11 of RA 9003, known as the
Ecologill, Solid Waste Management Act of RA 2000
states that“Each city or municipality shal? form a
plan for safé\and sanitary management of solid waste,
Generated in™ageas under geographic and political
coverage; 2

Whereas, an ecoTegical soli
protection. and rehal
green program are

Municipality.

ste management, environmental
‘as well’ as clean and
priorities of this

‘SPECIAL ORDINANCE. No..

‘AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING PILA ECOLOGICAL
BOARD, DEFINING TTS COMPOSITION, FUN
RESPONSIBILITIES.

Section 1 A Municipal Ecological Solid Waste Managemigt body
shall be established to \-be® known as MPSTa
Ecological Solid Waste management Board.”

Section 2 Composition of the Board,
composed of the following

The “Board” shall: be

¥

Chairman: Municipal Mayor
Vice Chatrman: $.B. Chairman
Committee on. Environment

Menbers:

2) $8 Chairman, Comittee on Health and
Sanitation

2) President of ‘the Association of
Barangay Chairman

6) President of the Sangguniang Kabataan
Federation

259

Representative of each concerned
Tocal Government agency or depercnent:

{ Municipal Health office

= Sanitation Office

* Municipal Environment
Office

* District supervisor,
DECS-Piia

* Municipal Engineering

OF Fice

partment of Agriculture

a

* DERGMicoo
*
oO Representatiiies from NGOs whose

Pesrcipal objeMiaives are to promote
Eselpgical SolvPAasce Managenens

2 A representative from Pebble;
Organization.

© A representative From recyeti
‘industry

4) A representative from business seeeor

S211 or invite any ‘concerned ‘agérares ~~
OF Sector'as it may deem necesssry> :
Section 3. Technical Working. Committee: A Technical Working aa
Formate, 1S hereby createa” cegiies by ‘the
Following:

Chairman: $.8. Chairman on
Committee on Environment

Members:

5.8. Chairman,
Com. on Health & Sanitation
Municipal Planning Office
Municipal Health Office
Municipal Engineer's Office
Municipal Environment Office
NGO Representative


Section 4

TheliPila Ecological Solid Waste’ Management Board

The Technical Working group shall
meet from time to time and recommend
program, projects, strategies and
other activities for the approval of,
the Board.

shall have the following duties and functions:

»

B)

EB

4.

Develtep the Municipal Solid waste
Management’ Plan. that’ shal} ensure. the
Tong’ term nanagenent of Solid waste as
well as iptegrate the various Solid
Waste Managehent Plans and Strategies of
the barangay in| its area of
jurisdiction. Tithe development of the
Soft ste sangre Plan, e_ sall
Conduct’ consultation: with the various
Sectors of the conmunitjc

‘Adopt measures to promote aad ensure the
viability and effective ii tation
of Solid Waste Management prams in
‘its. component barangays. 7,

Monitor the implementation of “the
Municipal solid Waste Management Plan,
‘through its various political sub-
divisions and in cooperation with the
private sector and the NGO's.

Adopt specific _revenue-generating
measures to promote the viability of its
Solid Waste Management Plan

Convene regular méetings for purposes of
planning and’ coordinating the
implementation of the solid waste
management plans of the respective
component barangays.

Oversee the implementation of the
Municipal Solid Waste managenent Plan.

260


261

7) Review every two years, as the need
arises, the Municipal’ Solid waste
management Plans for purpose of ensuring
its sustainability, i
effectiveness and relevance in relavioh
fo local and international developmence
in the field of Solid waste Management.

Delglop the specific mechanics and
guidelines for the implementation of the
Municipal Solid waste management plan.

Recommend appropriate

government dlithorities specific measures

©r. proposals franchise or build

operate- goreements with duly
9 iS» Pursuant to RA

Clusive or non

exclusive “authority

transfer, storage, prot

or disposal of Municipal™

The proposals

Consideration appropriate

codes and regulations on

franchises and

agreements.

w)Reconmend measures and "safeguards
against pollution and in. the
Preservation of the natural ecosystem,

4) Coordinate the efforts of its component
barangays in the implementation of ‘the
Municipal Solid waste Management Plan

SECTION 5 Effectivity: This ordinance shall take effect upon
approval of the Sangguniang Bayan of Pila, agune

RESOLVED FINALLY, to furnish LLOA with a copy of this resolution

ADOPTED AND APPROVED this 19" day of Novenber 2007.


I hereby certify to the correctness of the foregoing
resolutions, which was duly adopted by the Sangguniang Bayan
during its regular session held on November 19, 2007 in Pila,
Laguna.

=

AIDA A. AGUILAN,
Sangguniang: Bayan Safretary

262

it por Norge wy

AIDA’
SB SECRETARY
Republic ofthe Philippines
Prowince of Laguna
‘Municipality of Pa

(OFFICE OF THE SANGGUNIANG BAYAN

EXCERPT FROM THE MINUTES OF THE REGULAR SESSION OF THE SANGGUNIANG BAYAN OF PLA,

LAGUNA HELD AT THE SESSION HALL ON APRIL 28, 2009,

PRESENT

HON EDGARDOA RAMOS VICE MAYOR (Presing Omtcen

HON ZALDYM PANTUA MUNICIPAL COUNCLOR

HON ALLAN A, MATIENZO MUNICIPAL COUNCILOR

HON DANTE V OGANIA MUNICIPAL COUNCILOR

HON. FRANCISCA R AGUDO. ‘MUNICIPAL COUNCILOR

HON REYNALDOA LUCENA MUNICIPAL COUNCILOR

HON ADEUNA O FERNANDO... MUNICIPAL COUNCILOR

HON JOSEUTO T MERCADO MUNICIPAL COUNCILOR (ABC Prélong

HON, PRINCESS ANGELIE S ALARVA . MUNICIPAL COUNCILOR (SK Federation Presiden
ABSENT

HON HONORO &BAMBO. MUNICIPAL COUNCILOR - On Vacation Leave

HON RICARDOA BATINGAL MUNICIPAL COUNCILOR - On Offical Business

RESOLUTION NO. 034-52009

[RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR THE REGULATION OF THE USE OF PLASTIC BAGS ON ORY
(GOODS AND PROHIBITION OF ITS UTLIZATION ON WET GOODS $0 AS THE USE OF
STYROFOAM IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF PLA, LAGUNA.

‘Austr: ton RICARDO A BATINGAL

WHEREAS, Ante 2, Section & oY the Prikgpne Consininon promdes inet the Save
Shall protect and advance the "ight of the people 10 a baarced and
heath ecology in accord withthe zhytnm and hermony of nace,

WHEREAS, Section 3) of RA 7160 prondes that Local Government Unis shat share

‘wah the national government the resporsibity in the management and
mantenance of ecological balance wahun ther terttoialjrisacon,

WHEREAS, Sector! 447 (w) of RA 7160 also empowers the Sangguniang Bayan 10
protect tne envionment and impose appropriate penalties for acts that
endanger the enwronmentinciuging acivtes which results in polaon
acceleration or eutrophication of vers and lakes oF of ecological
mbxarce.

Page 2 0f Res. No 03452009

WHEREAS, plac bags are rempanty used 2s packaging materials in the Mursapalty
(oF Pla, Laguna and elsewhere,

WHEREAS, there snow a need to regulate the use of plasic bags to prevent potential
serious ecological imbalance partculaty in the municipality creeks, vers
and other waterways.

‘AN. ORDINANCE REGULATING THE USE OF PLASTIC BAGS ON DRY GOODS AND
PROHIBITING ITS UNUZATION ON WET GOODS SO AS THE USE OF STYROFOAM IN THE

‘ORDINANCE No 01.2009

MUNICIPALITY OF PIA, LAGUNA,

Be & ordained by he Sangguniang Bayan in session assembled tha

SECTION 1

SECON 2

Tide Tres oxdinarce shall be known as “An Ordinance reguiating the
Use of plastic bags on dry goods and prohibting ts utiizad0n on wet
{goods 50 as the use of syrofoam in the Municpaly of Pla, Laguna
‘And prescribing penaties thereof”

Definiton of Terms Fox purposes ofthis ordinance, the folowang terms
‘are defined 2s folows

a

Q

O)

Clan fag (aka Kase) refers to a reusable packaging
‘meteral made of cloth (bodegradable} used in packaging
Offlous, wheat. and other simiar goods

Dry Goods - refers to ary product that does not requare
Feltigeration or freezing (© markain such as texies and
thing

Dry Marker - generally refers 10 the store that does not
Frequite elngeration o freezing to maintan its products for
sale

Plastic Bags - also known as “Sando” bags plastic shopping
‘bags and plastic fm bags Its 2 type of lexble packaging
‘material made of thin plasic fim thats used for containing
2nd transporting goods and other products shal abo
Tefer to thin. gauge packagng medium at is used as bags
‘or wraps.

‘Styrofoam - refers to a nd of packaging material used 2s
food contaners. dsposable cups plates, etc

Plastic Wastes - reers 10 any plastic packaging material
town as waste

264

‘Page 3 of Res No 034-2008

SECTION 3

SECTION 4

SECTIONS

SECON?

SECTIONS

9) Primary Packaging Materials - refers to those (pes of
pactagng for comaning wet products, snack foods,
frozen foods, hardware, et

1) Secondary Packaging Materials - refers 10 those types of
packaging materas for wet goods to provide suppot {0
‘ry primary packaging and intended for convenience of
the handler, as wel

|) Wet Goods - selers 0 any product that requies
‘efngeraton 0 freezing to mamwan such as fish. meat.
poully products, ruts vegetables. beverages, and cooked
foods in carendenayeacenes

J) Wet Matket ~ general refers to the store of products that
require refigetation oF eezng to mantain This incudes
the wet secton im pubic mevkets, supermaries, mn
‘mans, restaurants, carendenas/eateries

1) Woven bags { aka bayong } - refers to biodegradable
ppackagng material made of woven pandan or but leaves
nd other sinter meters

Prohibtion on tne Use of Plastic Bags on Dry Goods - No business
‘establshment shall uulze plastic bags as packaging matetts on diy
goods

Reguating the Use of asic Bags on Wet Goods - Business
estabishmerts dealing on wet goods shat use paste bags as primary
packaging materia,

Prohibtion on the Use of Siyrofoam - No business estabishment shal!
se syrotoams and other similar matenals 2s corvanets for food
products and citer products

Prohibtion on the Seling of Plasic Bags . No business esablshment
(inde shal offer or sett plasic bags to be used as secondary
packaging material on dry goods

Plastic Wastes not to be collected - Pasic bags dscarded oF other
simiar plasuc waste materas wil not be included in the colecion of

radable wastes. These materials must be cleaned and died
tir to submsson fo ther respective barangays for spose

Monitoring of Ordinance «The Municipal Enwronment and Natural
Resource Officer (MENRO} shall monitor the implementation of tis
ordinance ‘The MENKO shall prepare a semiannual teport on the
progress of plementation of hs ordnance

265

Page 4 of Res No 03452009

SECTON

SECTION 10

SECTION 11

SECTION 12

SECON 13

SECTION 14

Information Education and Communication Campaign - upon
approval of this ordinance. the muncipaity shall conduct massive
‘formation education and communication campaigns using quad
‘media and. shall also include tne promotion of akerawve
biodegradable pactagng materia,

Implemenang Ruses and Regulations ~ Within thiny (30} days rom the
approval of this ordinance the necessary rules and reguavons shall be
'ssued by the Mayor Tor proper and effective implementation of thes
ordinance.

Prohibied Acis - Business establishments and/or indwduals are
prohibted from

7 Seling and prowding plasic bags 10 customers 2
secondary packaging materials on wet goods,

2) Seling and providing plac bags to cuiomers as
+ packaging materials on cy goods.

¢)_Seling and proving styrofoam as containers, and
© Ossposing plasic waste
Penates - All business establishments and/or individual who voles

‘any ofthe pronibted acts sated above shall be punshed through the
Immpostion ofthe folowing penalties

Figs Ontense P $0000 fine
Second Offense. 2.00000 ine
Tried Offense. 250000 fine andy o:

lmnpusonment of not more than 3x (6) moc
‘Upon the discretion of the cour and inthe case
of business establishments, cancetanon of ther
Icense to operate for a period of one year

Separabity Cause ~ If any pat of ths ordinance declared 2s
Unconstitutional or unlawful such declarauon shall not affect the
olner pats of sections “hereol tha ale not Uniawiul oF
Unconstitutional

Repeaing Clause - All previous ordinances snconsstent wth this
‘ordinance shal be deemed repeated oF mocied accordingly

266

AIDA A. AGUILAN
Reoublixa ng Pipinas ‘SB SECRETARY
Lalawigan ng Laguna
Sayan naPila

TANGGAPAN NG SANGGUNIANG BAYAN

SA KATITIKAN NG KARANIWANG PULONG NG SANGGUMIANG BAYAN NG PILA LAGUNA
(HARAP SA GAKAY PULUNGAN NOONG IKA-U4 NG PEBRERO 2011.

HAGAWAD ~ Namuno sa Pulong

i KaSAWAD
36 GULeRk *AGAWAD
BS AZ) KABAWAD

"G3 ROWILOS BARASHAR! KAGAWAD

KGS, RICAROO A. BATINGAL, KASAWAD
$3 HONORIO R, BAMBO AGAVAD

F CARRILLO GAWAD

AGAWAD [ABC President)
AGAWAD (SK Federation President)

(TORI R. RELOVA JR. PUNONGBAYAN

KAPASIYAHAN BLG 022-2014

APRSIVAHAING PINAGTITIBAY ANG PAGBABAWAL SA PAGSUSUNOG NG MGA DAYAMI NG
PALA? NG MGA MAGSASAKA DITO SA NASASAKUPAN NG BAYAN NG PILA. LAGUNA.

ag Reaido Satingel

ayain! ay 188 $8 inga murang magaghukunan ng orgsmkong

Soneiscang osyam! ay
4 logramo ng ntroheno 36

tasjum: 26 kilogramo
sien, 2000 Hiogramo ng

una mule dite ng

ng luna $a pamamegitan
3% pineghulunan “ng
aetuaulot cin ng polusyon sa


S\PAGY <7 ang mgs elementong minerai na nskukuha sa aayami ay magagamit
Siang mga sangkep ng orgenikong patabe na siya ding ginegamit ea
Integrates Nuitient Management NN) na may patungkol sa
Daggamit ng kumbinasyon ng mga organiko at drorganikong mga
pataca na idinecame se produtsyon ng mge penanim ne gumagamit
1g MgB angkon na varieves maayos na patubig epektibong
pemamaniala ng pests st cron ratation:

SAPAGKAT ang HUM ay nadalayong medogdagan ang aning pangegrikuttua
ngzlegaen eng Kapaligiren. at mabawasen ang paghawale ng
nt sa Pamamagitan NE manusay na pAgEAMt ng patabe. Ang
gagsesama ng organic felticers ay karagdagang nutients 52

n din ang peggemit ng organic fertilizers ca
Sebuoang iaviar, st naggacabuti sa pisikal at bayolohikong
katangen ng.uoa

SAMIL DITO sa mungkahi ng Lupon ng Batas sa oamumuno ni Kaz Queen
Nery S Merve na at Quang pegkskaloang sinengayunan ng lahat ng bumubuo
ng Sangguniang Bayan ne pinagutioay ang DeRDeoawva! $2 PagsusUNog ng mga
evam ng oslay ng mga ma gakuoan ng Bayan ng Pla
Leguns.

KAUTUSANG BAYAN BLS, 03-2021

AAL/TUSANG BAYAN NA NAGTATAKDA NG PAGRARAWAL SA PAGSLISUNOG NG MGA
DAYAW RG PALAY DITO SA NASASAKUPAN NG BAYAN NG PILA LAGUNA

Hinatadnane £9 kar

nggunang

jen ng Pla Leguna na

Seksyo)

£_ PAPANINTULUTAN Ang keutusang bavang ito ay oinegttibay

gutiong Hodge ng

Pamanaizans Loiai ng 120g 1894 na ato ay sineeaea na

n bilerg lehiclatibong katawan ng

1g mgs ordinance, magpapatibay

‘clusvon para ss pangvalanatang kagalingan ne
nga aaninzenan

1g baeahan #3 negsaregewa ng kavtusang ito
rayon 16 ng Republic Act 7460.


Seksyor

269

mang t30 2! grupo ng mgs to

sutveang to By magmumulte ng ings

‘he guiseunes)

8 500.00/tumaok

1. 509.00/tumpok o
aghsbilanggo ng hingi hinglt
2.6 na buwano nereho ayn

Pinggtibay ngayeng ika-44 ng Pebrero 2014

Kapasiyahong ito ane mea

KALIKIN: na oadaihen ng sip)

0 ang kaweetunan ng Kanesiyahang ito,

AIDA A. AGUILAN
Katihim ng Sanggunieng Bayan


EXCERPT FROM THE MINUTES OF THE REGULAR SESSION OF THE SANGGUNIANG BAYAN OF

Bake,

Republic ofthe Philippines ‘5B SECRETARY
Province of Laguna
Municipality ofP

OFFICE OF THE SANGGUNIANG BAYAN

PILA HELD AT THE SESSION HALL OF PILA, LAGUNA ON APAIL 7, 2014.

PRESENT:

HON, QUERUBIN ANTONIO R. RELOVA, JR.
HON. QUEEN MARILYD S. ALARVA ...
HON. REGGIE MHAR M. BOTE

HON. DARWIN A. QUIAP...
HON. APOLO H. DEL RIO, JR. .

. VICE MAYOR
MUNICIPAL COUNCILOR
MUNICIPAL COUNCILOR
MUNICIPAL COUNCILOR
MUNICIPAL COUNCILOR

HON. REYNALDO J. LUCENA socsnsse ce vsrvesese MUNICIPAL COUNCILOR

HON. RONILO S. BARASHARI ..
HON. DANTE V. OGANIA..
>. MATIENZO

HON. JOVIR P.

ABSENT:

HON, SAMSON M. CARRILLO ..

‘A. RESOLUTION

‘MUNICIPAL COUNCILOR
MUNICIPAL COUNCILOR
‘MUNICIPAL COUNCILOR (ABC President)

MUNICIPAL COUNCILOR
- OnLeave

RESOLUTION NO. 028-T:2014

IMPLEMENTING AN ORDINANCE PROHIBITING OUTDOOR/OPEN

BURNING OF SOLID WASTE IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF PILA, LAGUNA AND PROVIDING
PENALTIES THEREOF.

WHEREAS,

WHEREAS,

Proponent: Hon, Darwin A. Quiap

Section 4 Rule 19 of Republic Act 9003 that was enacted on January 26,
2001 entitled ~ “An Act providing for an Ecological Solid Management
Program, creating the necessary Institutional mechanism and incentives,
declaring certain acts prohibited ond providing penalties, appropriating
funds therefore, and for other purposes, states that - the Local
Government Units shall be primarily responsible for the implementation
‘and enforcement of the provision of this Act within their respective
Jurisdictions.”

Republic Act 7160 otherwise known as the Local Government Code of
199, states that the Sangguniang Bayan is empowered to pass and
adopt ordinances and resolutions to “Protect the environment and
impose appropriate penalties for acts which endanger the
environment....which result in pollution” (Section 447 [1] [vl] )

270

Poge 2 of Res. No. 028-T-2014

WHEREAS,

WHEREAS,

WHEREAS ,

WHEREAS,

WHEREAS,

WHEREAS,

WHEREAS,

WHEREAS,

the Sangguniang Bayan is also tasked to “declare, prevent or abate any
‘uisance” ( Section 447 [4] [i]

the Sangguniang Bayan i also mandated to “regulate the use of
streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalk, bridges, parks and other public
places.” (Section 4473) [7] )

the Sangguniang Bayan shall also “provide for an efficient and effective
system of solid waste and segregated gorboge collection and disposal
‘and prohibit littering and the placing or throwing of garbage ,refuse and
other filth and wastes” ( Section 447 [5] [x] [ii

‘the municipal government continuously provides efficient garbage
collection and disposal for its constituents through its Solid Waste
‘Management Office with its regular collection schedule;

despite the enactment of national and local laws on the handling and
treatment of garbage or solid waste, some irresponsible and callous
citizens nonetheless continue to dump and burn their garbage in their
lots, at street comers, sidewalks, and thereafter leave the ashes and
other remains of the burnt garbage scattered;

today’s trash contalns plastic, metal, and synthetic materials that
create dangerous chemicals when burned, and these chemicals include
dioxins, benzene, PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyls), and other
compounds that are known to cause respiratory allments, stress
‘human immune system, and are potentially carcinogenic;

dioxins is a class of highly toxic and persistent chemicals that are often
formed by certain materials and open burning of domestic waste is
‘one source of dioxin;

it has been determined by environmental experts that buming
‘garbage, leaves, paper or any waste materials cause pollution, harms
the environment and emits a foul smell

Now therefore, BE IT RESOLVED AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED, by motion of the
Committee on Rules chaired by Hon. Queen Marilyd A. Alarva and unanimously

seconded by the august body, to approve;

‘AN ORDINANCE PROHIBITING OUTDOOR/OPEN BURNING OF SOLID WASTE IN THE

‘MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE NO. o+-T-2014

MUNICIPALITY OF PILA, LAGUNA AND PROVIDING PENALTIES THEREOF.

271

272

Poge 3 of Res. No, 028-T-2014

Be it ordained by the Sangguniang Bayan of Pila, Laguna in its regular session
assembled that:

SECTION 1 Title: Prohibition on Open Burning af Solid Waste. Any
‘outdoor or open burning of domestic or solid waste within
‘the Municipality of Pila Laguna is hereby prohibited.

SECTION 2 Definition Of Term: Solid Waste - All discarded commercial
waste, non-hazardous institutional waste, ports/harbor and
Industrial waste, street sweepings, construction debris,
agriculture waste, garden and yarn waste, and other non:
hazardousinon-toxic solid waste;

SECTION3 Any individual or corporation found violating this ©
shall be fined the amount of:

First Offense Reprimand (warning)

Second Offense - 500.00/community service
at MRF-San Miguel for 2-<days

Third Offense - ®1,500.00community servicein

‘the barangay for 2-days and
3-days at the MAF-San Miguel

SECTION 4 Administrative Provisions:

4) The amount collected as imposed by this ordinance shall
'be maintained in a Trust Fund to defray the payment of
‘expenses relative to its implementation. The following,
_acrual of fees will be observed:

Municipal Government of Pla - 30%
Barangay = 50%
Informant + 20%

b) The concemed Barangay Solid Waste Management
Board must validate the evidence regarding a violation.

SECTION 5 The Solid Waste Management Office is hereby tasked to put up
signs in conspicuous public places- preferably those that are
‘commonly used as burning sites-that will contain the following
warning:

Page 4 of Res. No. 028-7014

SECTION 6

SECTION 7

SECTION 8

SECTION 9

SECTION 10

SECTION 1

SECTION 2

“BABALA: Mahigpit na ipinagbabawal ng Municipal
(Ordinance No. 01-2014 ang pagsisiga ng basura sa kahit
‘anong kalye o' bakuran, pribado man o' pampubiiko,
dahil ito ay may masamang epekto so kapalgican,
hangin, kalusugan ng tao at magaring maging sanhi ng
sunog. May multa mula £500.00 hanggang 1,000.00.
Salamat po. - Solid Waste Management Board”

The Local Police, Task Force, Barangay Officials and Tanods are
hereby empowered to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.

Initial Budget allocation in the amount of Ten Thousand Pesos
(#10,000.00) is hereby authorized for the preparation of
signage to be used for dissemination.

The Municipal Environment & Natural Resources Office is
hereby directed to conduct a two-month information campaign
about the major provisions of this Ordinance by way of leaflet
distribution in all the 17 barangays after its approval.

‘The Sanggunian Secretary is also directed to furnish copies of
this Ordinance to all officers of accredited homeowners and
‘community associations, through the assistance of the Business
Permits and License Office and the Barangay Center.

‘Separability Clause. If any Provision of this Ordinance is held
invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected
thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.

Repealing Clause. All existing municipal ordinances, orders and
resolutions inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance
are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

‘This Ordinance shall take effect after the approval of the
Sangguniang Panlalawigan.

{BE IT RESOLVED by the Sangguniang Bayan of Pita, Laguna, in Session Assembled,

‘Unanimously Appraved

273

274

| HEREBY CERTIFY TO THE CORRECTNESS of the abovecited resolution duly adopted by
the Sangguniang Bayan on its regular session held on April, 2014. -

‘AID A. AGUILAN
Sangguniang Bayan Secretary

ATTESTED:

‘APPROVED:

Hon. WILFREDO M. QUIAT
‘Municipal Mayor

Appendix 6

Copy of Municipality’s Leaflet on SWM

276

“MM LION OSTA OU VAN 9 RIN Tu 3 CaN
Sone Gnomon ange PARE OATS 9k HTT

Tom eon
{igen evo TORU Toe: Hee aareamE VaR AY &S

eters |
‘WM ‘ME eT ORT


277

WAVS;VAVS)

[OWSIN{OAVL:
JONOD YE

OUSVT ONY THAVE Vd ¥S

!AVHVSMEVAVH 21 NOASHES
“OLaNdONE VOR ON NVTaISIS ONV TIE
‘Vd OUSYTd ON AVOIBOVA O YONILOVA
ONVIVAVEVEOYNd AY OLWARAASTIEVSa

‘YON LV OVL ONVANNIS ONV'IT NOASHAS
‘Twavaveovnval YN OLNGOU
‘ONVa Vel LY NIVHOVd VON ON
NVIGISIS ONYTIE OLIN THNV YOR

‘AW AVOAOLLS ON LINVODYE ONS NOASHAS
NYIGISIS
‘ONIKVNNONVS ONVTIG NVAQININIVE
NVR LEVY AY SOOD 12M VOR

YS OVE OUSVd ON LINVODVd ONY "b NOASKAS
saooo Ac
YON ON N¥IGISIS ONIHYNNONVA
‘ONVTIS O¥@ OUSVId ON LURVOYD

NV OLNEN@ASITAVISS ONVIVI "E NOASYES

‘M00 EU SS a OT ERE Th

{UPA A TT
6002-100 ‘914
NVAVE
ONVSNLOVH

amare

sone

sonst

SVLVE ON 101VH VS NOAV 0.
MVAV LON OSDNVIEVIOVE
00°00ed

DVAVIDVd ONOTLVHI'E
(00'00z4

DVAVIDVd DNVAVIVONVd'Z
00°0014.

DVaVIDVd ONVNA‘T

| ___DVAVIDVd VSVLIOW |

VAOOVT 'PIld OM NVAVE OX UONVEVSVH VS

OWITEAd OUVAOT LV VOVSTV OM IOVEVE

‘NVRMTTY 8 TING OW TAO DUVAIY 0 VanSVE OM

NOIVLOVA Vii TVAVEVEOVK Vi NVVE DAVSLOVH

L6710'D14 NVAVE DKVSALOVY)

