Biology and Ecology of Toxorhynchites splendens (Wiedemann) (Diptera: Culicidae: Toxorhynchitinae) and Its Voracity Against Aedes spp. (Diptera: Culicidae: Culicinae)

JUSTINE BENNETTE H. MILLADO

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Entomology

JUNE 2016

ABSTRACT

The elephant mosquito collected from UP Los Banos, UP Visayas, and
Bulabog Puti-an, Iloilo, was identified and confirmed as Toxorhynchites splendens
(Wiedemann) (Diptera: Culicidae: Toxorhynchitinae). Under laboratory conditions, the eggs hatched in 1.77 and 1.87 days,
respectively for the males and females. Developmental period was shorter in males
(36.16 ± 15.57) compared to females (38.30 ± 16.23). The four larval instars, from first
to 4ᵗʰ, respectively, lasted for 2.32 ± 0.9 and 2.35 ± 0.95 days, 2.90 ± 1.98 and 2.96
± 1.25 days, 6.15 ± 2.94 and 6.98 ± 3.24 days, and 17.5 ± 12.6 and 19.21 ± 13.59 days
for the males and females, respectively. Males live shorter (12.9 ± 10.44) than females
(18.38 ± 14.76). Number of preys offered to 7x. splendens larvae positively correlated to
duration of the stages for both males and females. Higher juvenile mortality and
shorter adult longevity were observed at higher prey densities. Resulting adults of
larvae fed with 10 to 20 preys daily, lived longest. Organic matter in the breeding container shortened larval development by half. Average fecundity was 19.80 eggs, with 96.60% viability over a reproductive
period of 14.80 days, about 15.30 days after mating. Oviposition occurred either in
flight or on water surface. Tx. splendens occurred in the wild throughout the monitoring period (August
2013 - July 2014). It was most abundant in September. Eggs peaked in April 2014.
Larvae were collected from various water containers. Tx. splendens larva preys on larvae of Aedes aegypti (Linnaeus), Ae.
albopictus Skuse, Culex quinquefasciatus Say, Cx. pipiens Linnaeus, Ochleratus sp.
(Skuse), Tipula sp. Linnaeus, and ephydrid larvae. Adults were observed to feed on
Pachystachis lutea Nees, Ixora sp., and Justicia sp. Tx. splendens possess a type II functional response. Relative voracity of 7x.
splendens was tested in the laboratory. One larva can consume a total of 328.75 Ae.
aegypti and 316.97 Ae. albopictus larvae. Fourth instar was the most voracious,
consuming 59.23 - 68.08% and 58.6 - 69.9% Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus,
respectively. Tx. splendens preferred Ae. aegypti over Ae. albopictus and Cx.
quinquefasciatus. Tx. splendens devours prey in proportion to its own body size and
instar. Larval cannibalism was observed in Tx. splendens especially at lower prey densities.

INTRODUCTION

Dengue, including Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever (DHF), is considered to be the
world’s most rapidly spreading arboviral disease by the World Health Organization
(2012). Every year, an estimated 100 million people suffers from this infection. About
40% of the world’s population is considered to be at risk (Deen ef a/. 2006). The highest
incidences of these diseases are recorded in the Carribean, Latin America, and tropical
Asia, which include the Philippines (WHO 2012).

Since the establishment of the Dengue Prevention and Control Programme
(DPCP) of the Department of Health, various entomological surveys of communities
around the country have been initiated especially during vector surge in the wet months
of August to November (Shultz 1993). Attempts in controlling this disease have been
challenging since vaccines are expensive and still for improvement and therapy is only
symptomatic. Control strategies have instead been focused on the mosquito vector of the
genus Aedes (Diptera: Culicidae: Culicinae) (WHO 2007). In the Philippines, four
species are considered vectors of DHF- the most widespread being Aedes aegypti
(Linnaeus) (Diptera: Culicidae: Culicinae) and Ae. albopictus (Skuse) (Diptera:
Culicidae: Culicinae), which abound in all areas in the country. Failure to fully control
the vector populations has been a major burden of the country’s health sector despite
utilization of various approaches. Several constraints were identified; lack of knowledge
and problems of resistance have plagued the country (WHO 1984; Bull 1982; Horstick et

al. 2010).

Alternative control measures using biological agents such as predators, parasites
and parasitoids have recently gained the interest of the public. Biocontrol agents
especially aimed at eliminating pre-adult stages are considered to be more effective and
ideal because they kill the mosquito pest before it reaches the adult stage which is able to
transmit the disease. The predatory elephant mosquitoes, Toxorhynchites spp., have
shown great potential as larval carnivores of many immature mosquito species (Chan
1968; Annis et a/. 1989; Choochote ef al. 1985; Focks 1985; Rawlins ef al. 1991; Miyagi
etal. 1992).

Toxorhynchites spp. are considered ideal biocontrol agents because of the
following reasons: (1) all larval stages are carnivorous and prey upon larvae and pupae of
other mosquito species (Padgett and Focks 1981); (2) carnivorous larval stage may last
for three weeks or more (Rubio and Ayesta 1984); (3) larvae are able to withstand
desiccation and starvation for long periods and are able to survive on non-prey diets
(Dodge 1964; Trpis 1979; Steffan and Evenhuis 1981); (4) larvae nearing pupation
exhibit a “killing without eating” behavior in some species (Corbet and Griffiths 1963;
Taylor 1989; Collins and Blackwell 2000); (5) adults are highly mobile and non-
hematophagous; (6) adult females may live up to 7 weeks and have a lifetime egg
production (Focks ef al. 1979) and; (7) females oviposit on small natural and artificial
water containers where target prey breeds and can be used in tandem with chemical
control (Collins and Blackwell 2000).

Toxorhynchites spp., as breeders in habitats with small or contained water, are

especially helpful in reducing Aedes populations which are able to transmit the viruses

that cause DHF. Because of their preference for small containers, they have also been
used together with chemical applications which areunable to reach tree holes and other
small containers (Jones and Schreiber 1998).

Biocontrol attempts using 7oxorhynchites spp. have been carried out with some
success in the past among many species of Aedes (Engber er a/. 1978; Panicker and
Geetha Bai 1983; Chuah and Yap 1984; Vongtangswad e/ al. 1983; Paine 1934; Toohey
et al. 1985). Mass releases of this predatory mosquito through inoculation, or
augmentation can be used to introduce or boost naturally occurring populations in the
environment without causing any detrimental effect.

Eggs and larvae are easily collected from artificial water containers usually
among forested areas while adults are mobile (Steffan and Evenhuis 1981). They can be
easily reared in the laboratory on a diet of mosquito larvae as prey for the larvae and
sugar or honey for adults (Focks and Hall 1977; Furumizo et al. 1977; Choochote ef al.

2002).

Objectives

The general objective of this study was to determine the biology and ecology of
Toxorhynchites splendens and assess its voracity against Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus
larvae under laboratory conditions.

Specifically, this study aimed to:

1. Identify the most predominant Toxorhynchites species and its associated prey

from selected sampling sites in UP Los Bafios campus;

2. Verify and confirm the identification of the collected 7x. splendens by
Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA) barcoding using the Cytochrome Oxidase |
(COI) gene;

3. Obtain basic information on the biology of 7x. splendens particularly on its
life history, growth, reproduction, and behavior;

4. Obtain basic information on the ecology of 7x. splendens mainly on the
seasonal abundance, habitat, feeding habits, host range, natural enemies,
andother associated organisms; and

5. Determine the voracity, functional response,and host preference of 7x.

splendens larva for Ae. aegypti, Ae. albopictus, and Culex quinquefasciatus.

In line with the aforementioned objectives, 7x. splendens is predicted to be a
potential biological control agent for controlling Dengue-causing mosquitoes in the
Philippines. The studies were conducted at the Crop Protection Cluster and other areas of
the University of the Philippines Los Banos, College, Laguna and selected places in Iloilo

from August 2013 to April 2016.

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

Taxonomy of Toxorhynchites

Before the first recognition of Toxorhynchites spp. as a distinct mosquito group,
the taxonomy was quite neglected partly because most studies in the past were focused
more on mosquito species that transmit disease. Nonetheless, the genus was first
proposed as Megarhinus by Robineau-Desvoidy in 1827. Later, revisions on the
nomenclature were made by Theobald (1901) and Edwards (1932) on their review of the
family Culicidae.

Based on the maxillary palpi of the adult females (Figure 1), Edwards (1932)
grouped the 52 known Toxorhynchites spp. into three: 20 neotropical species were
assigned to (A) Megarhinus group, two species from Brazil were placed on (B)
Ankylorhynchus group, while the remaining 30 species from the Old World were
assigned to the (C) Toxorhynchites group. However, fifty years later, Stone et al. (1959)
and Stone (1970) assigned the 66 species into the subgenera Ankylorynchus, Lynchiella
and Toxorhynchites. More recently, the work of Steffan and Evenhuis (1985) introduced
the classification of Toxorhynchites spp. in the Australasian, East Palearctic, and Oriental
regions with seven species-groups basing on pupal and adult morphological characters.
The 37 species in these regional areas were assigned to one of the following groups: (1)
Tx. acaudatus group, (2) Tx. ater group, (3) Tx. christophi group, (4) Tx. leicesteri group,

(5) Tx. magnificus group, (6) Tx. minimus group, or (7) Tx. splendens group.

Figure 1. Adult female Toxorhynchites sp. without wings
and legs showing strongly decurved proboscis (Smart
1948).

The taxonomy of the Toxorhynchites group has met many difficulties due to
unclear interspecific relations and almost identical species such that many species have
been described more than once under different names. These confusions have been
considered with great dilemma ever since the biocontrol effort of introducing Tx.
splendens in Hawaii and the Pacific islands which was later identified to be Tx.

amboinensis (Steffan 1975).

Life History of Toxorhynchites

Newly laid Toxorhynchites eggs are oblique, white to yellow in color, and
hydrophobic. They are usually seen floating on the water surface. Embryologic

development is temperature-dependent and usually takes 40 to 60 hours at ambient

temperature. Egg hatchability varies depending upon the age of the female where it
ranges from 100 to 57% as the female ages (Steffan and Evenhuis 1981).

First to fourth instar larvae of Toxorhynchites spp. are carnivorous and are
assumed to live on a diet of mosquito larvae and any other moving prey. In most
laboratory rearings, Toxorhynchites larvae are fed with prey wrigglers about the same
size or instar as themselves although there are also observations of smaller larvae feeding
on prey twice their size. In absence of usual prey, they feed on detritus (Steffan and
Evenhuis 1981).

Focks (1982) noticed that one Toxorhynchites larva can consume about 5,000 first
instar prey larvae and 300 fourth instar prey larvae. Voracity and predator efficiency
during this stage is largely affected by factors such as intensity of light, temperature of
habitat water, prey type, prey size, and container type (Steffan and Evenhuis 1981).
Aside from this, the larvae of two species, Tx. amboinensis (Taylor 1989) and Tx.
brevipalpis (Corbet and Griffiths 1963), nearing pupation have shown a behavior in
which prey larvae are killed but not eaten. It is theorized that the pre-pupal larva kills any
potential predator in the habitat before the larva reaches the vulnerable stage (Corbet and
Griffiths 1963).

Many species of Toxorhynchites also display cannibalism in all instars. Studies on
conspecific carnivory in different species have shown this behavior to be determined by
the number and behavior of the prey, size of the prey larvae relative to Toxorhynchites

larvae, and the number of hiding places in the container (Focks 1982).

The duration of the larval stage of Toxorhynchites spp. depend on the species,
temperature, and density of prey, but may take up to 91 days before pupation. The pupae,
on the other hand, may take from 3 to 12 days until adult emergence and is affected
mainly by temperature (Steffan and Evenhuis 1981).

Observations of adult Toxorhynchites in the wild, especially on males, are few
since most studies have focused on the oviposition behavior of the females. Limited
observations in the wild have shown that both the male and female adults are non-blood
feeding and instead live on nectar and other plant sugars. A mark-release-recapture study
of Tx. brevipalpis in a tire dump in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania was used to estimate the
population in the wild showing a male to female ratio of 1:1.76 per hectare (Trpis 1973).
Another study was devised to track the dispersal of released adults through 32° labeling
of Tx. rutilus rutilus (Coquillett). This could also be used to monitor egg dispersal from
released females since 32° is passed unto eggs, however, no field trials were performed to
date (Smittle and Focks 1986).

One well-studied behavioral aspect among adults is oviposition. The oviposition
behavior of female Toxorhynchites spp. is more advantageous compared to other
biocontrol agents because the latter needs to be manually introduced into the vector larval
habitat in order to attain control that requires maintenance. Since Toxorhynchites
wrigglers are predatory on other mosquito species, gravid females need to seek out the
same aquatic habitats to lay eggs. Studies using electroatennogram and oviposition
bioassays reveal that females of both groups are attracted to the same compounds present

in water with decaying organic debris (Collins and Blackwell 2000).

The oviposition flight of Toxorhynchites was fully described by Linley (1987)
wherein the female performs a flight consisting of six to 43 elliptical loops before
releasing the eggs at the final loop without landing on the surface of the water. This
behavior makes it possible for females to deposit eggs on small and contained
microhabitats such as tree holes.

Peak oviposition varies among Toxorhynchites species. Laboratory reared Tx.
amboinensis has a major oviposition peak between 1200h and 1500h, and a smaller peak
at 0800h and 1000h (Linley 1987) while that of 7x. moctezuma occurs between 1200h
and 1700h (Jordan and Hubbard 1991). There is no clear explanation, however, for these
patterns but they are presumed to be associated with humidity and rainfall (Jordan and
Hubbard 1991). Oviposition among Toxorhynchites spp. in the field occurs during the
rainy season. During the dry season, they survive as fourth instar larvae and eclose at the

start of the wet season where prey density is high (Bradshaw and Holzapfel 1984).

Distribution and Habitat of Toxorhynchites

Toxorhynchites spp. abound most areas in the tropics with the distribution
extending to 40° north and south of the southern tropics (Horsfall 1972). While most are
tropical, some species are also found in subtropical and temperate areas (Parker1977;
Jenkins and Carpenter 1946).

Although Toxorhynchites spp. are commonly found among tropical and
subtropical forests, some species such as Tx. splendens have been found to inhabit coastal

palm belts in India, Sri Lanka, Malaysia, Thailand, Papua New Guinea, and the


Philippines (MacDonald 1958). This unlikely habitat may have been facilitated by the
introduction of the mosquitoes via artificial containers on ships.

Collections of eggs and larvae of Toxorhynchites spp. have been recorded in
many literatures. They are found to inhabit various natural and artificial containers such
as tree holes, rock pools, coconuts with rat hole, tin cans, used vehicle tires, water drums,
canals, etc. while some are found in specific habitats such as Nepenthes pitchers (Belkin

1980).

Toxorhynchites as Biological Control of Mosquitoes

Trimble (1983) highlighted the potential of Toxorhynchites spp. as an ideal
biocontrol agent. This is considering the premise that wrigglers are carnivorous, feed on
other mosquito species, exhibit pre-pupal killing while adults are non-blood feeding, and
females are able to oviposit into mosquito habitats which are likely to escape from
chemical spraying.

Biocontrol using some species of Toxorhynchites have been carried out with some
success. Although difficulties arose due to some factors such as misidentification and
habitat selection, control efforts were considered a success in the long run (Focks 1982).

The first introduction of Toxorhynchites spp. was carried out on Hawaii using
three species Tx. brevipalps from Africa in 1950, followed by Tx. theobaldi from Panama
and 7x. splendens from Manila (later identified as Tx. amboinensis) in 1953 (Steffan
1975). Although Tx. amboinensis have been established thirteen years after, this was not

able to fully control its target organism Ae. albopictus (Nakagawa, 1963). However,


greater success against Ae. polynesiensis Marks was recorded in the American Samoa
after the introduction of Tx.amboinensis (initially identified as Tx. splendens) and Tx.
brevipalps in 1955. Engber et al. (1973) made a continuing study which revealed the
establishment and effective control of Tx. amboinensis against the target mosquito.
Another introduction of Tx. splendens (Paine 1934) and Tx. inoratus (Walker) (Lever
1938) to control Ae. polynesiensis in Fiji in 1934 was faced with a problem on a
mismatch of oviposition sites. Tx. splendens became established but was unable to
effectively control the target mosquito since their habitats did not coincide. However,
with the introduction of Tx. amboinensis in 1979, reviews in 1985 showed control efforts
have been successful (Toohey et al. 1985).

Other than the South Pacific, some control attempts were also successful in other
parts of the world. For example, number of Ae. aegypti, Armigeres subalbatus
(Coquillett), and Cx. quinquefasciatus (Say) breeding in domestic water containers in
Pudapet, India showed a significant reduction six months after the introduction of Tx.
splendens (Panicker and Geetha Bai 1983). The same results were also reported in
Malaysia where Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus were successfully suppressed by
introducing second-instar Tx. splendens into water containers (Chuah and Yap 1984).
However, Ae. aegypti population remains unaffected when first instar Tx. splendens were
introduced in Jakarta, Indonesia in 1987, probably because first instars are unable to
withstand starvation (Annis ef al. 1989). On the other hand, the population of Ae. aegypti
was successfully reduced in Sa-Med Island, Thailand in 1979 using the fourth instar of

Tx. splendens (Vongtangswad et al. 1983).


Studies were also carried out to evaluate the suitability of Toxorhynchites spp. as
biocontrol agents in Africa and North America. Some of these were supported by
Muspratt (1951) using 7x. brevipalpis, Corbet (1963, 1964) and Semapala (1983), Tx.
brevipalpis conradti and Tx. kaimosa in Uganda. Successful reports were also published
by Focks et al. (1979) by releasing adult Tx. rutilus rutilus in Gainsville, Florida to
control Ae. aegypti. Although the released population moved out of the urban area into
the forested areas, adequate control was still achieved since there were still enough
ovipositions into target sites. A 74% reduction in Ae. aegypti and Cx. quinquefasciatus
was also recorded after the release of first instar Tx. rutilus rutilus in an urban area in
New Orleans, Louisiana (Focks et al. 1983). However, one release in 1983 (Focks et al.)
was less successful because adults deposited more eggs on tree holes than target artificial
containers. On the other hand, a 50% reduction in Ae. aegypti populations were also
reduced by introducing 7x. rutilus rutilus larvae into used tires in a tire dump in
Jacksonville, Florida (Bailey 1983).

Control attempts in the Carribean were also successful through introduction of Tx.
brevipalpis (Gerberg and Visser 1978) on St. Maarten and the augmentation of a native
species Tx. moctezuma in Trinidad and Tobago (Chadee 1985) and Union Island

(Rawlins et al. 1991; Tikasingh and Eustace 1992; Tikasingh 1992).


Functional Response of Toxorhynchites

Biological control programs are carefully assessed to determine the predator’s
impact to the pest populations. Mathematical models are used to describe the behavioral
response of predators and parasitoids to changing densities of prey (Hubbard et al. 1988).
There are four general types of functional responses, Type I, II, III, and IV. Individuals
with a type I response has a linear relationship where feeding increases with increasing
prey density until a maximum is reached. Type II individuals, on the other hand, have an
inversely density dependent reaction where the proportion of prey killed decreases. Type
III is somehow similar to Type II where at higher prey densities, the response curves as it
reaches the satiation point. The major difference is that the Type III predator adjusts itself
in cases of low prey densities and resumes normal feeding rates when prey becomes

abundant (Holling 1959).

The functional response of the predatory larvae of Toxorhynchites spp. have been
found to belong to Type II using the famous Holling’s disc equation and derivations from
this (Hubbard et al. 1988; Griswold and Lounibos 2005). Rogers (1972) Random
predator equation was derived from the disc model and is being used to further express
the functional responses while considering the effect of the predator’s attack rate and

prey handling.

Juliano and Williams (1987) simulated experiments to compare Rogers’
linearization model, non-linear least squares, and a non-parametric space method in

estimating random predation. The linearization model was found to be highly biased


giving far estimates of the parameters compared to the two models. With these findings,
efforts have been made to improve the model by fitting standard non-linear least squares
method into Rogers’ random predator equation which gave satisfactory estimates using

data for Tx. rutilus (Hubbard et al. 1989).

Toxorhynchites in Integrated Pest Management (IPM)

With the introduction of IPM, it has been a practice to test the suitability of
biocontrol agents in combination with various agents such as Bacillus toxins and
traditional chemicals used for mosquito control.

Studies have shown some difficulty with combining B. thuringensis israelensis
and B. sphaericus with some Toxorhynchites spp. because Bt doses lethal to pest
mosquitoes such as Ae. aegypti were also lethal to first and second instar Tx. rutilus
rutilus although not to the third and fourth instars (Lacey and Dame 1982). However, this
lethal damage was not observed with other species including Tx. theobaldi, Tx.
brevipalpis and Tx. amboinensis (Lacey 1983).

Insecticidal application dosages used to kill the mosquito prey were also found to
be lethal to the predator except for a few species. For example, Ae. aegypti larvae were
found to be more susceptible to the insecticide naled than Tx. splendens (Tietze et al.
1993) and both naled and chlorpyrifos than Tx. amboinensis larvae in a laboratory study.
Tx. moctezuma can also withstand low doses of the organophosphate temephos (Rawlins

and Ragoonansingh 1990). In Florida, a release program of Tx. splendens in combination


with ULV applications of malathion have shown better control of Ae. aegypti (96%
reduction) compared with the use of malathion alone (26%) (Schreiber and Jones 1994).
With these observation Djam and Focks (1983) suggests an alternation in the use of
insecticides and release of Toxorhynchites spp. in order to lower selection pressure on

insecticides among mosquito populations.

Mosquito Hosts of Toxorhynchites

Toxorhynchites spp. have been noted to prey on many insect immature in the
wild. However, studies have been focused on mosquitoes of medical and veterinary
importance such as Aedes and Culex spp.

Biology of Aedes. The life cycle of the mosquito, in general, can be classified as a
holometabolous or a complete type of metamorphosis composed of four distinct stages:
egg, larva, pupa, and adult or imago. Gravid female Ae. aegypti adults lay their eggs
singly on sites that can hold water for seven to ten days. The larvae are aquatic and
usually feed on water mites, water fleas, algae, protozoans, bacteria, and minute organic
debris by sweeping food particles into their mouths using a pair of brushes specialized for
feeding.

Like the larvae, mosquito pupae also live in aquatic environment and breathes
through a pair of trumpets on the pupa’s anterior. Unlike the other stages, the adult
mosquito is terrestrial. Most are about 1/8” long and weighs about 2.5 mg, with a single

pair of membranous wings, with the hindwings modified into special balancing organs


called “halteres”. The life cycle of Aedes mosquitoes from eggs to adults can be as short
as 7 days in warm climatic conditions, while the normal range is from 10 to 12 days
(Service 2003).

Unlike the eggs of anopheline mosquitoes, eggs of culicine mosquitoes to which
the genera Aedes belong, are not equipped with floaters and are elongate and oval.
Compared with the genus Culex, Aedes eggs are laid singly and often in batches. The
outer covering of the eggs have minute reticular patterns and have a shiny jet black
chromogenesis (Linley 1989).

Gravid females can lay up to 3000 eggs and prefer to lay them on damp
substrates or on dry places above the water where the eggs remain viable until the area
becomes flooded and stimulate hatching (Service 1996). These include damp mud, leaf
litter pools, rock pools, tree holes, and man- made artificial containers (Service 2003).
Aedes eggs do not usually hatch at the same time, but in installments which require
repeated flooding separated by short periods of dryness (Gillett 1951).

Aedes larvae have been readily observed to be found on still waters. This is due to
their incapability to withstand wave action on turbulent or running waters (Bates 1970).
Larval movement is achieved by jerking of the body and propelling the mouth brushes.
Most larvae prefer to stay near the top portion of the water with the siphon in contact
with the surface. However, the wrigglers will immediately dive into the bottom whenever
there is disturbance (WHO 1972).

Under normal conditions, a mosquito requires 5 to 10 days to undergo all larval

instars. The time required for completion varies depending on the surrounding


temperature and the larva’s nutrition (WHO 1972). After the egg hatches, the larva will
undergo four larval instars with each instar preceded by a molt. Molting is about to occur
when the dark bands composed of the lateral hairs of the next instar can be observed on
the thorax. First instar larvae are about Imm in length and grows rapidly to twice its
original size. First instars have a characteristic egg breaker found or the dorsal part of the
head composed of pointed cones used to form a circular escape on the egg.

The second instar emerges after the first molt and appears almost similar to the
length of a full grown first instar only that it has a bigger head and a more massive body.
During this stage, they will grow from 2mm to 3 mm in length and the body will be more
cylindrical with a larger terminal siphon.

After the second molt, the third instar emerges with a prominent tail comb-spine.
The head size can be variable in different situations but it is generally larger than the
previous instar.

After which, the fourth instar larva can be observed with a stouter body form due
to accumulation of fat body needed for pupation and the presence of the thoracic imaginal
buds. Rudiments of the future respiratory trumpets of the pupal stage can also be noted at
this stage.

After the fourth larval instar approaches completion of its development, the body
will become plump and turgid. There will be cessation of feeding and activity is lessened.
When the pupa emerges, the body resembles a comma (,) and are referred to as
“tumblers” due to its active movement unlike the pupal stage of other insects which are

quiescent(Goddard 1993). This stage is quite short and will only last for 24 to 48 hours.


Identification of Aedes and Culex. Adult mosquitoes belonging to the genera
Aedes are easily distinguished through the patterns of their dorsal thoracic scales. The
two common dengue vectors are differentiated from each other by the lyre shaped pattern
of Ae. aegypti and the single broad line of Ae. albopictus situated on the dorsal centerof
the thorax (WHO 1995). Adult Culex, on the other hand, are brown without any
conspicuous markings and can readily be distinguished from Aedes if placed on the same

container.

Figure 2. Adult female a) Aedes albopictus and
b) Ae. aegypti showing distinct thoracic
scale patterns (WHO-OMS, 1995).

During the larval stages, the shape of the comb scales located on the eight
abdominal segment and that of the pectin teeth on the siphon are essential distinguishing

factors of the two species. In (b) Ae. albopictus, the comb teeth have no lateral denticles


but the pecten teeth have three well developed and pointed ones, in contrast to that of (a)
Ae. aegypti where the comb teeth possesses well developed lateral denticles and the
pecten teeth with less defined ones (Figure 3). Larval Culex are easily be separated from

Aedes larvae through the long breathing siphon and fast movement in the water.

mb scales P Teeth]
Comb scales Pecteh Teeth Col : ecten Tee!

=

) fom —— (5
4 a. Pa y|/

\
\

Ventral Brush

Figure 3. Terminal end of the a) Aedes albopictus and b) Ae. aegypti larvae
showing distinguishing characteristics (WHO 1995).

Distribution of Aedes. Ae. aegypti is usually found between latitudes 35°N and
35°S (WHO 1997). During the warm season, Ae. aegypti were found expanding its
geographic distribution to more northern and southern latitudes (WHO 1997). Estimates
of Ae. aegypti distribution and density are affected by the life limiting factors of latitude,
altitude, temperature, rainfall, humidity, season, habitat, and dispersal (Schultz 1993).

Seasonal variation in population density and distribution is common for Ae.

aegypti since these are sensitive to changes in temperature and available moisture.


Essentially, low mosquito populations are evident in dry and cool seasons and they
increase when temperatures increase and the wet season commences (Schultz 1993).

A model which is able to predict Ae. aegypti abundance in Puerto Rico using
climatological data (Moore 1985) showed that temperature was not a good indicator of
larval abundance. This is affected by the amount of rain and number of rainy days over a
given period. The average temperature during the rainy season was also found to relate
strongly with the estimated risk of dengue infection to the community in Mexico

(Koopman et al. 1991).

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Collection of Toxorhynchites splendens

Various stages of Tx. splendens were collected from three sites namely a) College
of Forestry and Natural Resources (CFNR), University of the Philippines Los Banos
(UPLB), College, Laguna, b) University of the Philippines Visayas (UPV), Miag-ao
Campus, Iloilo and c) Bulabog-Puti-an National Park (BP), Dingle, Iloilo from August

2013 to February 2016.

Figure 4. Collection sites for Toxorhynchites splendens a) CFNR
grounds, UPLB, b) UPV Miag-ao Campus grounds
(http://sulugarden.com/arts/arts/exhibitionsworkshops/exhibition
-002-15-landscape), c) BLPT grounds (Caratao, 2009).


Each collection site was marked on a geographic map by obtaining coordinates on
a Global Positioning System (GPS) device. Sampling was done by scooping the eggs into
a water-containing vessel using a plastic spoon while larvae and pupae were transferred
using a modified asepto-syringe fitted with a rubber extension especially for contained

water habitats (tree holes, used tires, etc.) (Figure 5).

Figure 5. Modified asepto-syringe used in
collecting Toxorhynchites splendens.

Ten oviposition traps made of 24-cm wide 8-cm deep black pans fitted on top of
a 3-ft wooden block (Figure 6) were also set-up for gravid females at various locations
around CFNR, UPLB. Mobile adults, on the other hand, were collected using an insect

net.


Figure 6. Black pan trap used for
attracting gravid females of
Toxorhynchites splendens.

All collected larvae were brought to the laboratory in Crop Protection Cluster
(CPC), College of Agriculture, UPLB, Laguna for examination. For samples collected
outside UPLB campus, only immature larvae were brought to CPC. Adults, pupae, and

eggs were left to develop in their respective habitats.

Description and Identification of Toxorhynchites splendens

Dead adults were pinned then dried in an oven at 40°C until properly desiccated.
The pinned specimens were examined under a dissecting microscope to observe their

general morphology. Descriptions from literature and taxonomic keys (Dyar and Shannon


1925; Bohart 1945; Newkirk 1947; Barraud 1954; Belkin 1962; Steffan 1968; Berlin
1969; Steffan et al. 1982; Evenhuis 1986; Lee et al. 1988; Ribiero 1997) were utilized to
classify the Toxorhynchites spp. into respective genera/species.

From the three populations collected, the species Tx. splendens was identified.
And the most successfully reared Tx. splendens from UP Los Banos was utilized for all
the subsequent studies. Characters which can help distinguish between larval instars for
this species, specifically changes in the siphon and saddle of the larva (Figure 7) and

trumpet and paddle in the pupa (Figure 8), were also noted.

—)

Figure 7. General dorsal habitus of Toxorhynchites splendens larva. Abbreviation: siphon
(si), siphonal hair (s-/s), saddle (sa), upper dorsal brush (upd), lower dorsal brush
(/db), and ventral brush (vd).


. SF

Figure 8. Lateral habitus of Toxorhynchites splendens pupa showing trumpet (tr) and
paddle (pa).

Rearing and Mass Production

Predator (Tx. splendens). Eggs and larvae from CFNR, UPLB, College, Laguna
were grown to maturity and together with the captured adults, they were used to establish
a colony. Laboratory rearing procedure by Trpis and Gerberg for Tx. splendens (undated)

was followed.
Larvae were kept in individual containers to avoid possible cannibalism and fed

with Ae. aegypti larvae of the same instar or of appropriate size until pupation. Upon


emergence, adults were placed in a cylindrical mylar cage with a diameter of 22 cm and
height of 36 cm for mating and oviposition and kept at room temperature. Each cage was
provided with cotton soaked in diluted honey as glucose source and water for additional
fluids. A wet towel was also hung on the sides to provide more moisture and a black
plastic cup filled with water was also placed for oviposition. The cups were checked daily
and eggs were collected. The eggs were kept singly in individual sections of an ice tray

with water for 1 to 2 days to complete embryonic development (Figure 9).

Figure 9. 60-well ice tray for individual egg hatching.

Hatched eggs were the transferred and reared individually in small plastic
containers with a diameter of 10 cm at the base and filled with water to a depth of 1 cm.
Ten freshly hatched Ae. aegypti larvae were given to each predator as food. Since first
instar Toxorhynchites larvae are unable to kill 3™ instar Ae. aegypti larvae, it was

necessary to supply first instar prey for two days until the predator reached the third


instar. Preys were reared in a staggered manner to ensure constant supply. After the
predator had reached the third instar, 10 third to fourth instar prey larvae were provided

until pupation.

Preys (Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus). Eggs of Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus on
paper strips needed in the study were obtained from the laboratories of Dr. Barbara L.
Caoili (Insect Pathology Laboratory, CPC, UPLB) and Dr. Pio A. Javier (Postharvest
Laboratory, CPC, UPLB). Eggs and larvae were maintained in microwavable plastic
containers with dechlorinated tap water. Larvae were fed with Brewer’s yeast. Rearing
water were replaced every two days or when cloudy. At pupation, pupae were separated
and placed inside a cage for eclosion. Adults were provided with honey-soaked and
water-soaked cotton for food and additional moisture. Food was replenished everyday
and replaced every other day to prevent growth of molds which may affect adult growth.

A guinea pig was introduced into the adult Aedes cage for one hour every two
days to provide blood meal needed for egg development. Adult mosquitoes were starved
12 hours earlier to ensure increased feeding.

After blood feeding, the guinea pig was removed and two black pans lined with
strips of filter paper were placed inside the cage as oviposition media for the adult
mosquitoes. After 24 hours, the pans with the paper strips with eggs were removed. The
strips were kept moist for another 24 hours for embryonic development, then desiccated
later at room temperature until ready for storage. Larvae need were obtained by soaking

the strips with the eggs in 500 ml chlorine-free water.


Molecular Characterization

DNA isolation and barcode gene amplification (COI). DNA from representative
specimens were extracted for amplification and sequencing to verify and confirm the
initial identification of 7x. splendens from UPLB and Iloilo. Mosquito DNA extraction
was carried out using Jena Bioscience© Animal and Fungi DNA Preparation Kit adjusted
according to the weight of the specimen used. Two to three legs on one side of the
pinned adults were removed for extraction. The remaining specimens with the other legs
intact were kept as vouchers. Forty pl (40 pl) of total DNA was extracted and amplified
to ~750 base pair fragments of cytochrome oxidase I (COI) using 30uM of the forward5’-
GGATTTGGAAATTGATTAGTTCCTT-3’ and reverse primer,
5°AAAAATTTTAATTCCAGTTGGAACAGC 3’ (Kumar et al. 2007).

Each 25ul PCR mixture contained12.5u1 Taq Master Mix (0.05u/ pl Taq DNA
Polymerase, 2X Vibuffer A, 0.4mM dNTPs, 3.0mM MgCl), 30.0nM (pl) ofeach
primer, 3plof DNA template (50ng/pl),0.5ul1 MgCl, and9 yl nuclease-free water.
Amplification was carried out using an Eppendorf® Mastercycler (Perkin — Elmer Co.,
Germany) using the PCR thermal regime consisting of 5 min initial denaturation at 95°C,
followed by 5 cycles of 40s at 94°C, 1 min at 45°C and 1 min at 72°C and another 35
cycles of 40s at 94 °C, 1 min at 51 °C, | min at 72 °C, and a final cycle extension of 10
min at 72 °C.

Gel electrophoresis. 3 1 of the PCR product was mixed with 11 6x loading dye

and run on a 1% agarose gel in 0.5x TBE buffer for 43 mins (Enduro©) to confirm


success of DNA amplification. The gel was stained in Gel Red© for 40 mins and viewed
under UV light. Successfully amplified DNA fragments were stored at - 20°C until
forwarded for sequencing at 1° Base (Axil Scientific Pte Ltd. Singapore Science Park II,
Singapore, www.base-asia.com) through AsiaGel (Quezon City, Philippines).

COI gene nucleotide sequence analysis. Generated DNA sequences were then
aligned and edited using BioEdit ver. 7.1.10 (Hall 1999). The consensus sequences
inferred for each isolate were compared to those in the NCBI database using
MegaBLAST (Zhang ef a/. 2000) and aligned using ClustalW2 (Larkin et al. 2007). A
consensus sequence was generated from all three populations and this was aligned with
other Culicidae sequences in GenBank. A phylogenetic tree was also constructed to show

its placement using Molecular Evolutionary Genetic Anaylsis (MEGA) 5.2.

Biological Studies on Toxorhynchites splendens
Superimposed with Voracity Tests

A. Life History

A total of newly laid 150 eggs of Tx. splendens, in two separate trials, were
individually monitored daily for hatching, larval and pupal development, adult
emergence, mating, fecundity, oviposition, and adult longevity.

The studies were done as follows (summarized in Table 1):

Five treatments, which correspond to the number of larval preys (Ae. Aegypti)
provided to the individual Tx. splendens larvae, with 15 individual Tx. splendens larvae

in separate containers (as replications) were set-up. As the Tx. splendens larvae develop


into the different instars, the same number of preys was provided and stopped only when

they have pupated.

Table 1. Treatments for the life history studies of Toxorhynchites splendens.

TREATMENT (T) NO. OF LARVAL PREY NO. OF REPLICATONS?

PROVIDED/ DAY'
Tl 5 15
T2 10 15
T3 20 15
T4 40 15
TS 60 15

Ae. aegypti, age of larvae same as Tx. splendens.
2 Tx. splendens larvae, individually placed in separate containers.
Two trials were conducted, n=75/trial

Details on the activities and data collected are presented below.

Egg. Eggs were collected in batches from each female, counted, and placed
individually on a 60-cell ice tube mold containing 5 ml dechlorinated tap water. The first
batch of 15 eggs was labeled T1-1 to T1-15, the second batch T2-1 to T2-15, and so on
until the fifth batch, TS-1 to T5-15. These eggs were monitored every day until they

hatched into larvae.

wesw e.t BALE 31

Larva. After the eggs hatched into larvae, they were transferred individually to
round plastic containers 11.0 cm in diameter filled with 200 ml dechlorinated tap water
and fed with prey larvae of the same instar or a proportionate size daily. Live prey
remaining after 24 hours were counted and a new set of the same density were
replenished. This continued until the larva molts into the next instar and until pupation.
The total number of instars and their durations were determined by examining each
container for exuviae (proof of molting). The exuviae were removed promptly to avoid

confusion. Survival of Tx. splendens larvae was recorded throughout the study.

Figure 10. Experimental set-up for life history
using fourth instar Toxorhynchites
splendens fed with 40 preys per day.


Pupa. Date of pupation was recorded. Pupae were then removed from each
container and placed in a smaller container with dechlorinated tap water for adult
emergence. Time from pupation to eclosion was recorded.

Adult. After eclosion, newly emerged adults were sorted by sex. Males have
plumose antennae while females have pilose antennae. A pair of newly emerged male and
female of the same set was placed inside a cylindrical cage 0.30 m x 0.46m and kept until
mating occurs. A black container with 100 ml water used in rearing Ae. aegypti larvae
was placed inside the cage. The dates of adult emergence, start of mating, first
oviposition, until last oviposition, and death, were recorded. Daily batches of eggs laid by
each female 7x. splendens were counted. A total of 31 females that emerged were

observed.

B. Length of development of Toxorhynchites splendens
given prey and organic matter

The following test was conducted to determine if the duration of development of
the immature stages were affected or not by the presence of detritus or organic matter in
the habitat. A set of 15 first instar Tx. splendens larvae were singly placed in containers
containing 20g of detritus composed of decomposed leaves and other organic matter
taken from one of the ovitraps and given 10 preys daily. The time between each molting
and pupation was recorded and compared with the previous life history data without

organic matter.

C. Egg Viability Test

Eggs collected 24 hours after laying were subjected to drying or refrigeration for a
number of days to determine its maximum shelf life (Table 2). Percent hatchability was
then determined by placing the eggs in dechlorinated tap water after the drying/

refrigeration period was over. Each treatment was composed of fifteen (15) eggs.

Table 2. Treatment for the viability test on Toxorhynchites splendens eggs.

TREATMENT (T) EXPOSURE TIME (DAYS)

Refrigeration (~4°C)
Tl
T2
T3
T4

NYNUwW—

Air-Drying (Room Temp. ~28°C)
TS
T6
T7
T8

NUAw—

n=60

D. Cannibalism
Two set-ups were used to observe the cannibalistic behavior of Tx. splendens

larvae, these were: a) Toxorhynchites alone and b) Toxorhynchites with prey.


With prey. The first set-up (T1-T5) consisted of starved, four newly hatched or
molted Toxorhynchites larvae of the same age together in 200 ml of dechlorinated tap
water. This was conducted using a) first instar, b) second instar, c) third instar, d) fourth
instar larvae, and e) combination of all instars. Each container was examined after 24
hours and the number of surviving larvae was noted. Body remains/ parts were also
noted. 15 replications were done per treatment.

Without prey. The second set-up (T6-T10) was carried out as the same procedure
above, but with each treatment added with forty Ae. aegypti larvae of the same instar as

Tx. splendens. Each treatment was also replicated 15 times.

E. Pre-pupal Compulsive Killing Behavior

Experimental set-ups for the life history were observed daily for prey which were
partially eaten and/ or killed but not eaten until pupation. This was done to determine if
the collected population of Tx. splendens also exhibit pre-pupal compulsive killing or

“killing without eating” behavior.

Ecology of Toxorhynchites splendens

Observations on the ecology of Tx. splendens focused on its habitat, seasonal

abundance, feeding habits, host range, natural enemies and other associated organisms.


a. Seasonal Abundance

The seasonal abundance of Tx. splendens was determined by regularly examining
possible breeding sites such as tree holes, artificial containers, leaf axils, etc. twice a
week for one year. This was complemented with 10 black oviposition traps placed on
predetermined collection sites. Collections were done from August 2013 to July 2014.
The respective numbers of eggs, larvae, and pupae collected were recorded per container.
These were reared to adult stage, and the sex ratio per container was determined after
adult emergence. Sites monitored for this study are presented in Table 3. Possible effects
of meteorological factors such as rainfall, relative humidity, and temperature to the

abundance in the field were also considered.


Table 3. Monitored habitats for the seasonal abundance of Toxorhynchites splendens in

CFNR, UPLB.
BREEEDING
SITE LOCATION COORDINATES ELEVATION
1 Maria Makiling | N 14°09.826, E 121°14.324 54m
2 Maria Makiling 2 N 14°09.818, E 121°14.314 59m
) UHS N 14°09.691, E 121°14.294 83m
4 MNH (Tree) N 14°09.398, E 121°14.166 119m
5 MNH (Gabi) N 14°09.380, E 121°14.187 125m
6 Welcome Arch (Anahaw) N 14°09.430, E 121°14.192 112m
7 Welcome arch (Tree) N 14°09.455, E 121°14.203 107m
8 CPAf N 14°09.632, E 121°14.242 82m
9 CPC Greenhouse N 14°09.950, E 121°14.388 47m
10 CPC (Incinerator) N 14°,09.956 E 121°14.395 48m
11 Used tire 1 (old house) N 14°09.571, E 121°14.248 94m
12 Used tire 2 (old house) N 14°09.566, E 121°14.251 95m
13 Used Tire 3 (old House) N 14°09.566, E 121°14.251 95m
14 Used Tire 4 (old House) N 14°09.566, E 121°14.251 95m
15 Tree hole 1 (Housing) N 14°09.414, E 121°14.171 117m
16 Tree Hole 2 (Housing) N 14°09.469 E 121°14.210 106m
17 Bamboo | (MNH) N 14°09.389, E 121°14.182 122m
18 Bamboo 2 (Forestry Lib) N 14°09.247, E 121°14.179 139m
19 used container 1 (CFNR lib) = N 14°09.219, E 121°14.137 150m
20 used container 2 (pulp) N 14°09.384, E 121°14.141 Ura
b. Habitat

The habitats or oviposition sites (i.e. tree hole, bamboo, plastic container, etc.)

(Figure 11) in which egg, larva, or pupa were collected were recorded together with their

corresponding coordinate locations, elevation, and estimated amount of habitat water. For

the adults, sites of collections and sightings (Figure 12) were noted.


Figure 11. Micro-habitats where immature stages of
Toxorhynchites splendens were collected. a) used tire,
b) tree hole, c) bamboo stump, and d) empty paint
cans.

Figure 12. Trees on which resting adult Toxorhynchites splendens
were often observed. a) “Philippine Teak”, Tectonis
grandifolia (Lamiaceae), b) “Tuai”, Bischofia javanica
(Phyllanthaceae), and c) “Mabolo”, Diospyros blancoi
(Ebenaceae).



c. Feeding Habits and Host Range

Organisms which co-existed with Tx. splendens in the collection sites were also
collected and offered as food for the Toxorhynchites larvae to determine if they really
served as prey. Samples were identified at least to family level. The stage of the collected
prey was also noted.

Flowers of plants found around collection areas were also collected and offered as

food sources for the Toxorhynchites adults in the laboratory (Figure 13).


Figure 13. Flowers of plants gathered around the collection sites.
a)“Pandakaki Puti”, Tabernaemontana sp. (Apocynaceae), b)
“Golden Shrimp”, Pachystachis lutea (Acanthaceae), c)
“Kalachuchi”, Plumeria sp. (Apocynaceae), d) “Brazilian
Plume”, Justicia sp. (Acanthaceae), and e) “Santan”, /xora
sp., (Rubiaceae).

d. Natural Enemies
Suspected predators, parasitoids, and microbial pathogens of Tx. splendens were

also collected and brought to the laboratory for identification and evaluation.


Voracity and Host Preference of Toxorhychites splendens
for Aedes spp. and Culex sp.

The voracity and host preference of Tx. splendens were investigated using a “No

choice” and a “With choice” set-up.

A. Voracity

Voracity for Aedes spp. larvae. For the “without choice” set-up, the daily
consumption rates were determined using the larval set-up for life history studies (Table
4). A newly-hatched Toxorhynchites larvae was given 5 Ae. aegypti or Ae. albopictus
larvae (T1) of the same instar daily. After 24 hours, the number of eaten larvae was noted
and the same number of prey was replenished. This was also done at prey densities of 10
(12), 20 (T3), 40 (T4), and 60 (TS). This was continued throughout the larval period.
Two trials were conducted for each density and prey species with at least 15 replicates

each.

Table 4. Predator voracity (“without choice”) test for Toxorhynchites splendens.*


TREATMENT Tx. splendens LARVAE INSTAR**
I II Ii IV
No. of preys given

Tl 5 5 5 5
T2 10 10 10 10
T3 20 20 20 20
T4 40 40 40 40
TS 60 60 60 60

Treatments = T(5)...T(60) = No. of preys per treatment

*Set-up was also done using Aedesaegypti and Ae. albopictus

** n= 15 Tx. splendens per treatment

Voracity for Ae. aegypti pupae. Ten Ae. aegypti pupae were given to a set of first

to fourth instar Toxorhynchites to determine if Toxorhynchites larvae consume pupal prey

(Figure 14). Pupae consumed in a 24-hr period were recorded. Each set-up had 30

replicates.


Figure 14. Experimental set-up for voracity of
Toxorhynchites splendens \arvae for
Aedes aegypti pupae.

B. Functional Response
Data obtained in voracity studies was fitted using non-linear least squares

(Hubbard et al. 1988) into Rogers’ (1972) random predator model expressed as:

Neat= No[] — exp {-a (TP — b Nea)}]

Where No= number of prey given; Nea=Number of prey consumed; T=Total time
available for searching; P=Predator density; a=Searching efficiency; and b=Handling
time per individual prey.

Data was edited and entered into R (ver. 3.1.1, 2014) and simulated using Frair
package for Rogers Type II functional analysis version 0.5 (Pitchard et al. 2016). Starting

values were set at a=0.12 and b=0.015 as standard. Functional response graphs and


succeeding values for searching efficiency and handling time were generated using actual

data for each instar.

C. Host Preference

The “with choice” set-up was divided into two parts. First, larvae of Tx. splendens
were exposed to a set of larvae composed of different Ae. aegypti larval instars. Second,
another set of predator larvae was exposed to a set of preys composed of a mix of three
different species. Methods are detailed below.

Preference for prey instar. For the first set-up, a single first instar predator was
introduced into a container with 20 Ae. aegypti larvae - five individuals from each of the
four larval instars. Uneaten prey after 24 hours are then counted and recorded. This was
repeated until the predator molted and reached pupation. 36 replicates were observed.

Preference for prey species. For this set-up, in a single container, each
Toxorhychites larva was given five individuals per species of larval prey belonging to the
same instar. Forty-two Tx. splendens larvae were observed.

Uneaten preys after 24 hours were removed, killed, processed, and mounted on
glass slides for species determination. Identification of larvae of Ae. aegypti and Ae.
albopictus larvae was done based on the following characters (Figure 15): a) anal comb,
forked and simple; b) pecten, long and short spine; c) anal gills, even and uneven lengths;
and d) thoracic spine for the wrigglers, present and absent; and e) paddles for the pupa,
barbed and hairy. This was carried out until the larva molted into the next instar and later

pupated.

Figure 15. Characters used for determining Aedes aegypti and Ae. albopictus respectively: a) anal comb, b) pecten, c) anal
gills, d) thoracic spine for the wrigglers, and e) pupal paddles.

St

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Collection of Toxorhynchites splendens

A total of 571 Toxorhynchites sp. were collected from site A (CFNR, UP Los
Banos, College, Laguna) from August 2013 to July 2014, twenty-three larvae from site B
(UP Visayas, Miag-ao, Iloilo), and nine larvae from site C (Bulabog Puti-an National

Park, Dingle, Iloilo) on June 2015.

Description and Identification of Toxorhynchites splendens

Using identification keys for known Philippine Toxorhynchites, the specimens
collected from all three sites were initially identified as Tx. splendens based on the 1-S
hair on the fourth instar’s siphon (Figure 16a). They have 4-6 bristles compared to the
short bristles of Tx. nepenthis and single bristle Tx. gigantulus. The combination of
rounded pupal paddles with short, well-developed marginal spicules and flared trumpet
and short rm crossvein in adult also restrict the identity to the Tx. splendens group. Adult
females are generally difficult to distinguish from other species, hence, males were used.
Male Tx. splendens were distinguished from its morphologically-close counterpart, Tx.
amboinensis, by the dark caudal tufts on the 8" abdominal segment (Figure 16b).

Conversely, tufts of Tx. nepenthis of the Tx. acaudatus group are short or absent.


Figure 16. Morphological characters used for species identification of
Toxorhynchites splendens. a) Siphon of 4" instar larvae, b) terminal
abdomen of an adult male showing black and c) yellow-brown caudal
tufts.

However, some erroneous observations were noted on the coloration of the caudal
tufts. Some samples possessed yellowish-brown tufts (Figure 16c) and appeared closer to
Tx. amboinensis with a tawny tuft instead of the entirely black description for Tx.

splendens.

Among the Australasian, east Palearctic and Oriental species-groups proposed by
Steffan and Evenhuis (1985), pupal characters serve well to distinguish most
assemblages. These characters include paddle shape, presence of sub-basal mottling, and
margin spicules. Among the three characters, variation was only noticed on the shape of
the pupal paddles with those from UPLB having a rounded tip (Figure 17a) while those
from BLPT has a narrower medial section and a quadrate lateral section (Figure 17b).
This quadrate shape was not yet encountered in previous studies and could hint for a new

subspecies within Tx. splendens.


Genetic variations, such as these, are common especially among geographically
isolated island archipelagos (Emerson 2008) such as the Philippines. Variations in the
stress encountered as well as differences in the sources of nutrition locally, even between
major island provinces in the country, could attribute to the morphological variations of
the specimens collected. Changes in the temperature, nutritional stress, population
density and other environmental pressures in addition to geographic distances pushes
individuals to adapt (Clarke 1993). According to Jabines and Inventor (2007), Philippines
is a climate hotspot which experiences climatic changes in extreme extents. Different
regions in the country are subject to varying degrees of climatic risks including droughts,
storms, and extreme precipitation. “Buffon’s Law” (Sloan 2014), explains that different
regions, has unique biotas, even if exposed to the same climate and other conditions. This
was also true for Charles Darwin (1909) who focused on the interplay of geological
barriers and their roles in the formation of new species. Although arising from a common
ancestor, populations, in time, could evolve as different species when separated by

barriers and subject to pressures brought about by natural selection.


Figure 17. Pupal paddles of Toxorhynchites splendens from a)
UPLB and b) BP with variations in shape.

Hence, to complement morphological observations and confirm initial

identification, molecular methods were utilized.

Molecular Characterization

DNA isolation and barcode gene amplification. The COI gene has been widely
used to establish genetic barcodes for many species of insects due to its conserved size
and structure making it appropriate for discrimination of closely related species (Hebert
et al. 2003). It has also been utilized to reveal cryptic species among morphologically
identical dipterans, such as mosquitoes (Smith ef al. 2006). Figure 18 shows
representative samples from the three collection sites with successful COI gene PCR
amplicons. Using a 100Bp Plus ladder, the PCR product was estimated to be around 750

base pairs (bp). This amplicon size was similar to the expected product by Kumar et al.


(2007) indicating that the target region was successfully amplified. PCR products of

successfully amplified samples were then sent for sequencing.

A — Toxorhynchites sp. from UPLB
LB? LB3 LB+ LBS LB6 LB? LBS LBS LB
bp —>|
« Obp
bp >|
b  Toxorhynchites sp. from Visayas
UPV1 UPV2 UPV3 UPV4 BP! BP? BP3 BP4 BPS
j<—~750 bp
500 bp —v|

Figure 18. PCR amplicons of COI gene region from three populations of Toxorhynchites
splendens from (a) UPLB, (b) UPV and BP; run in 1.0% Agarose and
visualized under UV light. Size of amplicons was estimated using a VC 100
bp Plus DNA Ladder (Vivantis, Malaysia).

COI gene nucleotide sequence analysis. Out of the 27 successfully amplified
genomic DNA samples from suspected 7x. splendens (15 for UPLB, 7 for BP, and 9 for
UPV), 24 were successfully sequenced. The deduced nucleotide (nt) sequences generated
ranged from 572 (BP 3) to 678 nt (UPLB 8 and 9). Table 5 presents the BLAST search
for the obtained sequences in the GenBank database (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank).
Comparisons of nucleotide sequences with sequences from GenBank confirmed that the

samples from all three sites were Tx. splendens specimens with the most significant


BLAST hit 97 to 98% identical to the voucher specimen obtained in a tree hole in Kerala,
India by Kumar et al. (2007). The curtailed CO/ nt sequences used in the further analysis

were aligned using ClustalW and presented in Appendix Figure 1.

Table 5. Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) results of COI gene amplified
from genomic DNA of three populations of Toxorhychites splendens.

SAMPLE LENGTH OF % NT MOST GENBANK AUTHOR COUNTRY
ID DEDUCED IDENTITY SIGNIFICANT ACC.NO.
COI GENE BLAST HIT
UPLB | 659 97 Tx. splendens
UPLB 2 620 98 Tx. splendens
UPLB 3 661 97 Tx. splendens
UPLB 5 674 98 Tx. splendens
UPLB 6 674 97 Tx. splendens
UPLB 7 677 97 Tx. splendens
UPLB 8 678 97 Tx. splendens
UPLB 9 678 98 Tx. splendens
UPLB 10 620 98 Tx. splendens EU259307 Kumar et India
UPLB 11 661 98 Tx. splendens al. 2007
UPLB 12 661 98 Tx. splendens
UPLB 13 660 98 Tx. splendens
UPLB 14 675 97 Tx. splendens
UPLB 40- 627 98 Tx. splendens
5 572 96 Tx. splendens
BP 3 627 98 Tx. splendens
BP 5 647 97 Tx. splendens
BP6 659 97 Tx. splendens
UPV 5 659 97 Tx. splendens
UPV 8

A partial consensus of 223 to 231 amino acids of the cytochrome oxidase I of Tx.

splendens was obtained by translating the deduced nucleotide sequences using ExPASy


Bioinformatics Resource Portal (web.expasy.org). From the different open reading
frames generated, the translation with the widest coverage was selected for each
sequence. Results (Appendix Figure 2) indicate that correct nucleotide sequences were
obtained because not stop codons within the amino acid sequence was observed.
Furthermore, the single nucleotide substitutions noted earlier could be classified as silent
mutations and these did not affect the amino acid translation. Meanwhile, the
dissimilarity in the 5’ and 3’ terminal regions were expected because uncut nucleotide
sequences were used and the chromatograms for these portions were poor. The identities
of the translated proteins were also searched in GenBank using protein BLAST. The
highest percent homology for all samples was the same sample from Kerala, India

(Genbank Acc. No. ACA64240, Kumar et al. 2007) (Table 6).


Table 6. Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) results of amino acid of COI gene
translated genomic DNA of three populations of Toxorhynchites splendens.

SAMPLE ID LENGTH OF % MOST GENBANK AUTHOR COUNTRY
TRANSLATED IDENTITY SIGNIFICANT  ACC.NO.
AMINO ACID BLAST HIT

BP type 1 223 99 Tx. splendens

BP type 2 225 99 Tx. splendens

BP type 3 223 99 Tx. splendens

UPLB type 1 225 99 Tx. splendens

UPLB type 2 231 99 Tx. splendens

UPLB type 3 229 99 Tx. splendens ACA64240 = Kumar ef India

UPLB type 4 223 99 Tx. splendens al. 2007

UPLB type 5 225 99 Tx. splendens

UPLB type 6 226 99 Tx. splendens

UPV type I 230 99 Tx. splendens

UPV type 2 233 99 Tx. splendens

A phylogenetic tree (Appendix Figure 3) was constructed to show the closeness of
the collected samples. The constructed tree was generated using samples from successful
amplicons in this study and sequences from GenBank as used by Mitchell et al. (2002).
Maximum likelihood ratio analyses revealed that the most appropriate model for the data
was the General Time Reversible Model (GTR) which had a likelihood score of —In
L=1934.260. The resulting tree shows that the samples are most closely related to the Tx.
splendens from India (Genbank Acc. No. EU259307) followed by Tx. splendens from
Vietnam (HQ398877). This closeness in identity supports the classification of Steffan and

Evenhuis (1985) of placing Toxorhynchites species collected along the west border of the


Wallace’s line and south border of the Watase line into one group — the Oriental region

(Figure 19).

Palaearctic Region

, ~
( . ge” > Watase Line

a
Oriental Region SS Watiece’s Line

| . % “Ele

\ 7
SY (A Kistsaasian Region

Figure 19. Type localities (dots) of all Toxorhynchites species in
the Palearctic, Oriental, and Australasian Regions (Steffan
and Evenhuis 1981).

Furthermore, the samples branched off separating the two Iloilo populations from
the population coming from UPLB. The generated tree also complemented the study of
Mitchell et al. (2002) where analyses of the coding sequences of the CO/ gene were used
to suggest that the genus Toxorhynchites belongs well within the subfamily Culicinae.
Moreover, it could be also used to support the morphology-based placement of the genus

(Harbach and Kitching 1998) into a tribe rather than a separate subfamily.


Biological Studies on Toxorhynchites splendens

A. Life History

The life history data of Tx. splendens are presented in Table 7.

Egg.eggs hatch in about 1-2 days for both males (X=1.77) and females (1.87).
After eclosing from the eggs, the insect underwent four larval instars for both sexes.

Larva. The respective average duration of the first to fourth instars of the males
and females are as follows: First instar, 2.32+0.90 and 2.35£0.95; second instar, 2.90 +
1.98 and 2.96 + 1.25; third instar, 6.15 + 2.94 and 6.98 + 3.24; and fourth instar, 17.5 +
12.6 and 19.21 + 13.59. The entire larval stage took about 28.94 + 15.45 days for males
and 31.94 + 16.03 days for females before pupating.

Pupa. The pupal stage lasted 4.76 + 0.72 and 4.96 + 0.64 days for males and
females, respectively. Total developmental period (from time the egg was laid until adult
emergence) was generally shorter in males with 36.16 + 15.57 compared to females with

38.30 + 16.23 days (Figure 20).


pL=u
LOSI ¥%9'96 %O01 - %9I1 Anqiqera 33g
OV 91F8'61 0°9L-0'1 Aypunoa.
ETL F8'bl OLr-O'1 Pollad aanonposdoy
66 €FE'ST 077-001 pouisd uontsodiaQ-alg
OL bl F881 OEL-O'1 rr Ol F671 0'ss-0'7% Ayaasuo7y ynpy
polad
E791 ¥ OL'8E 0°06 — 0°72 LSSL F9L9E 0°98-0'°S1 [euourdojaaag [e10L
19'0 ¥ 96'p 09-0€ CLO FOLD OL-O'€ ednd
€0°91 ¥ 6'1E O'€8-0'S1 StS ¥ 6'8Z 06L- 071 Pollo [BAe] [BOL
6S EL F IZ 61 0°s9-0'8 OTL FS LI 065-08 JeISU] yb
pT F869 091-07 p67 FST'9 0'S1-07% JeqSU ,€
STI F967 08-01 86'1 + 06'7 Ost-O'1 IRIS] LZ
$60 ¥ SEZ 09-01 60F7E7 0S-O1 zeISUY 4.1
PAIeT
97 0FL8'I 07-01 SEOFLL'I 07-01 polled uoreqnouy
ues osuey uray asuey ADVIS
FTVWWad FIV IVINAWNdOTIAAG

“(skep ul) sontsuap ydaésav
Sapay Wwalajjip ym pay sdn-jas Woy wep aytsodwioo Buisn (uuRWapal MM) suapuazds sajiyoudysoxoy Jo KioyslYy aI] “LZ FQeL


30 =Male Female
c
2 15
s
id
£
Ej
2 10
em l €
. wa td
Astlarval 2ndlarval 3rdlarval 4th larval Pupa Adult
instar instar istar instar
Life Stages

Figure 20. Development time of male and female Toxorhynchites splendens under
laboratory conditions.

Adult. While adult males took less time to complete development, they also lived
shorter than their female counterparts with 12.9 + 10.44 for the former and 18.38 + 14.76
for the latter. Between sexes, the medians were found to be significant at 95% confidence
interval for the total larval period (Mann-Whitney, P=0.0316), pupal period (P=0.0174),
total development period (P=0.0145), and longevity of the adults (P=0.0164).

Mating was observed twice under laboratory conditions. This occurred when the
male, while in flight, swiftly approached the resting female from the back and made
efforts to link the ends of the abdomen. Oviposition commenced about 15.3 + 3.99 days

after adult emergence. During the reproductive stage, which lasted up to 14.8 + 11.23


days, a female oviposited, in batches, a total of 19.8416.16 eggs with 96.6% + 15.67
hatchability.

Chan (1968) who worked on Tx. splendens from Singapore observed that eggs
hatch in one to two days. Given Ae. aegypti as prey, the total larval period ranged from
13.5 to 52 with a mean of 34.6. The first, second, third and fourth instars lasted for 1-3
days, 1.5-4 days, 3-8 days, and 8-37 days respectively. Pupae, on the other hand, lasted
for 4-12 days. Close figures were also noted by Furumizo and Rudnick in 1978, adding
that adults lasted for 28 to 35 days. These figures fit well into the values obtained for Tx.
splendens in the Philippines. However, the current data has a wider range mainly due to
the amount of prey offered which ranged from 5 to 60 per day. Other factors such as prey
capturing and searching ability, light, temperature may also vary at some extent.

Studies of Timmerman and Briegel (1999) on Ae.aeygpti revealed that protein
reserves increases in relation to body size. Larval growth, in relation to time, could be
effectively observed using measurements of the larva’s thoracic width, while
measurements using the head capsule is more helpful between the larval instars
(Timmerman and Briegel 1998). No significant difference was noted between proportions
of males and females and the smaller size of males was the only indication of
dimorphism. In case of starved larvae and those reared in crowding, the proportion of
protein followed the same trend although fourth instar larvae stopped growing earlier
resulting to smaller larvae and adults compared to their well-fed counterparts. Aside from
the general size, starved larvae can be distinguished from well-fed larvae based on the

more translucent appearance of the abdomen due to accumulation of lipids throughout the


body. On the other hand, well-fed larvae do not shrink in size but instead lose the opacity
of its abdomen when starved. At the same time, well-fed larvae had low survival (27%)
after being starved immediately after ecdysis.

The average number of deposited eggs were lesser in this study compared to those
recorded by Steffan et al. (1980) for Tx. amboinensis which averaged to14.3 eggs per day
with gradual decline on the hatchability as the female ages. Two separate studies by
Focks et al. (1977a, 1979) revealed that differences in individual fecundity of females
could be due to the rearing method used. Trimble (1979) explained that the confinement
of females in small cages during rearing could affect the dispersal behavior of the female
which were intended to oviposit over a wide area. Females may exhibit high fecundity
during initial release, however, subsequent dispersal of multiple females may reduce
deposition over the same containers. This behavior prevents crowding and ensures that
other potential sites could also be covered.

Oviposition on the water was done either in flight or by resting on top of the water
surface. For in-flight oviposition, the female first performs six to 54 backward flight
loops, with a second or shorter per loop, above the water and ejects an egg into the water
surface at the end of the loop. Normally, the female performed shorter loops in between
eggs while loops during oviposition were generally longer. Other females were observed
to rest on the water surface and deposit an egg by pushing it outwards its genitalia (Figure

21). Newly laid eggs bounce as it hits the water’s surface.


Figure 21. Gravid female Toxorhynchites
splendens depositing eggs while resting on
the water surface.

Female Toxorhynchites usually deposit one to three eggs and over a wide number
of sites to reduce crowding and cannibalism among siblings with depleting prey. Egg
production in Toxorhynchites is achieved through a continuous production of egg
follicles. This autogenous process allows females to produce batches of eggs without a
bloodmeal and even with water as food source. Unlike other Culicines, gravid females
are also able to interrupt deposition which allows them to store eggs until an appropriate
habitat becomes available (Steffan and Evenhuis 1981). Additionally, the unique looping
behavior exhibited by the gravid females allows them to access contained habitats which
would be impossible with conventional surface deposition (Furumizo and Rudnick 1978).
This also reduces the risk of predation from spiders and other predators commonly found

around mosquito habitats (Trimble 1979).


Life History of Toxorhynchites splendens at different prey densities

Based on Table 8, larvae of Tx. splendens fed with five Ae. aegypti larvae daily
has a larval period lasting 50.38 + 22.09 for males and 56.06 + 22.63 for females. At 10
preys per day, the length of the larval development shortens abruptly to almost half with
27.10 + 2.88 for males and 29.07 + 4.36 for females (Table 9). A gradual decrease was
then recorded for those fed with 20 preys (Table 10) (Males=22.71 + 2.23,
Females=26.71 + 3.29), 40 preys (Table 11) (Males=17.43 + 5.86, Females=21.33 +
3.17), and 60 preys (Table 12) (Males=17.8 + 0.45, Females=22.0 + 2.36).

The foregoing data show that larval development of Tx. splendens is hastened by
increasing its prey density. This result jibes with the findings of Steffan and Evenhuis

(1981).


Table 8. Different developmental stages of male and female Toxorhynchites splendens fed
with five Aedes aegypti per day.

DEVELOPMENT
STAGE MALE FEMALE
Range XxX Range x
Egg 1-2 1.85+0.38 1-2 1.9440.25
Larva
I 2-5 3.3140.95 2-6 3.44+1.03
ll 1-15 4.00+3.61 2-7 2.88+1.41
Il 2-15 9.1544.58 2-16 10.56+4.07
IV 12-59 33.92+19.79 12-65 39.19+20.21
Total Larval Period 20-79 50.38+22.09 23-83 56.06+22.63
Pupa 3-6 4.5440.97 3-6 4.56+1.03
Total Developmental 27-86 $6.77£22.58 29-90 62.56+23.26
Period
Adult Longevity 2-15 8.38+3.88 3-53 19.38411.85

n=29


Table 9. Different developmental stages of male and female Toxorhynchites splendens fed
with ten Aedes aegypti per day.

DEVELOPMENT MALE FEMALE
STAGE
Range x Range x
Egg 1-2 1.79+0.42 1-2 1.89+0.31
Larva
I 1-3 2.30+0.80 1-3 2.10+0.84
II 1-7 2.80+1.47 1-8 2.73+1.41
Ill 3-9 5.95+1.54 3-14 6.7742.43
IV 10-24 15.00+3.73 9-26 16.17+4.20
Total Larval Period 23-34 27.10£2.88 20-38 29.0744.36
Pupa 4-5 4.80+40.41 4-6 5.10£0.40
Total Developmental 28-40 32.65+3.18 25-46 34.7745.01
Period
Adult Longevity 3-53 18.90+10.60 3-73 22.33416.33

n=52


Table 10. Different developmental stages of male and female Toxorhynchites splendens
fed with twenty Aedes aegypti per day.

DEVELOPMENT
STAGE MALE FEMALE
Range x Range x

Egg 1-2 1,88+40.33 1-2 1.9340.27
Larva

I 1-3 1.8840.47 1-3 2.00+0.55

Il 2-5 2.53+0.80 1-5 3.0740.10

Il 4-10 5.59+1.46 3-11 6.434£1.95

IV 10-16 12.7142.23 12-24 15.2141.89
Total Larval Period 20-26 22.71+£2.23 23-34 26.7143.29
Pupa 4-6 4.47+0.62 4-6 4.79+£0.58
Total Developmental 25-33 29.06+2.19 30-40 33.4343.08
Period
Adult Longevity 2-55 14.71+12.47 2-71 23.29+18.63

n=31


Table 11. Different developmental stages of male and female Toxorhynchites splendens
fed with forty Aedes aegypti per day.

eee MENT MALE FEMALE
Range xX Range x
Egg 1-2 1.67+0.52 1-2 1.9240.28
Larva
I 1-3 2.1440.69 2-3 2.08+0.29
II 1-3 2.0£0.82 2-4 2.5840.79
Il 3-7 3.86+1.46 3-12 5.6742.46
IV 9-16 11.86+2.19 10-13 11.25+0.97
Total Larval Period 5-23 17.4345.86 15-28 21.3343.17
Pupa 5-7 5.5740.79 5-6 5.2740.39
Total Developmental 12-29 24.7145.99 22-35 28.3343.14
Period
Adult Longevity 2-11 5.5743.26 3-19 10.17+5.37

n=32


a

Table 12. Different developmental stages of male and female Toxorhynchites splendens
fed with sixty Aedes aegypti per day.

eve MALE FEMALE
Range X Range x
Egg 1-2 1.6740.52 1-2 1.67+0.50
Larva
I 1-2 1.60+0.55 1-3 2.20+0.92
II 2-4 3.0+1.0 3-5 4.10+0.57
Ill 3-5 4.2040.84 2-5 4.2040.92
IV 8-10 9.0+1.0 8-14 11,541.84
Total Larval Period 17-18 17.840.45 18-24 22.042.36
Pupa 5 5.0 5-6 5.2040.42
Total Developmental 23-25 24.40+40.89 25-32 28.942.42
Period
Adult Longevity 2-9 4,843.11 1-18 7,945.09
n=32

The differences in responses across the varying prey densities could be similar to
the findings of Schmidt ef al. (2005) in wolf spiders, Pardosa milvina (Hentz)
(Arachnida: Araneae: Lycosidae). Here, the dietary history of the predator determined its
response to changes in prey density. Spiders with same nutritional intake histories killed
the same number of preys regardless of its quality. Predators who were previously

exposed to high quality diet eventually killed and consumed more preys than those given


low quality diet in prior. In this study, the amount of preys given to each set of
Toxorhynchites larvae was uniform all throughout. Thus, 7x. splendens larvae given five
preys per day adapted to consume less than those given 40 to 60 preys daily. Also,
predators needed to accumulate a certain amount of proteins and lipids to complete
development. Higher prey density results to higher consumption and eventually allowing
the larva to attain the needed protein and lipid requirement faster. This explains why
those given lower number of preys took longer time to develop than those fed with more
preys.

The faster development and early pupation by males in light of competition and
survival in the field was discussed by Crans and Slaff (1977) as a reason for compulsive
killing. As males develop faster than females, they are also expected to exhibit surplus
killing earlier than their female counterparts to protect themselves from their siblings that
develop days later.

Development at higher prey densities also produced larger larvae resulting to

larger adults (Figure 22).


Figure 22. Adult male Toxorhynchites splendens whose larvae were fed with a) 5, b)
10, c) 20, d) 40, and e) 60 Aedes aegypti larvae per day.

Conversely, the rate of larval mortality was also higher in immatures and adults

fed with more preys (Figure 23).

35.0
30.0
25.0
= 200
5 15.0
=
= 10.0
oo | =
5 10 20 40 60

Prey Density

Figure 23. Percent mortality of immature Toxorhynchites splendens at different
Aedes aegypti densities.


Larger adult mosquitoes resulting from larvae fed with more preys eventually
have more lipid, carbohydrate, and protein reserves and are expected to live longer and
produce more eggs at a shorter amount of time (Briegel 1990). However, in this study,
mortality was high on both immatures and adults fed with more preys than their smaller
counterparts. As observed under laboratory conditions, mortality of larger adults was
mainly because they were unable to detect the honey-soaked cotton balls inside rearing
cages without manual intervention. Smaller adults however, had less difficulty finding
their artificial food source. This, however, is not reflective of field conditions.
Timmermann and Briegel (1999) explained that when well-fed mosquito larvae and
adults are subjected to continuous starvation, their lipid and protein reserves decline
tremendously resulting to 73% mortality than larvae with restricted food sources.

Adult longevity for both males and females in this study was optimal at prey
densities 10 to 20 per day since densities lower or higher than this range resulted to more
short-lived individuals (Figure 24). This could be regarded as the optimum values for

mass production for future laboratory and field studies.


‘apeys 101431] ‘sojeulo.y ‘apeys JayZep ‘sje :puedo’]
‘solyisuap aesey déSan sapap yuelajjip ye suapuazds sajiyoudysoxo] Jo AyAdBuo] ynpe pue sadeys ajt] Jo suing “pZ am3ij

Ayisuag Aaig
09 ov oz oT Ss

| ra i)

| oT

0z
ot §
2.
°
s
es
ovr 2
£

os

Aynasu07 Npy & pouag jedngO deysul jee] Yip B Md

Jejsul jevue| Pie B 4eysul jee] puz @ Jeysul jevue| sto 3338

oz


Description of Life Stages

Tx. splendens has a holometabolous metamorphosis or development and it passes
through an egg stage, four larval instars, and a pupal stage before reaching the adult
stage. Each life stage is described below:

Egg. Laid singly, prolate spheroid, 0.112+0.0038 mm long and 0.083+ 0.0036
mm wide, and appears as small, cream “rugby-like balls” floating horizontally on the
water surface (Figure 25a). Freshly laid eggs appear white with papilliform
ornamentation (Figure 25b) which gradually turn cream to ecru nearing hatching.
Hydrophobic nature of the eggs is attributed to the small protrusions in the eggshell
which are suspected to hold air and prevent breakage of the water’s surface tension.
Cross section of hatched eggs held by a narrow piece of chorion could be observed

floating above the water surface.

Figure 25. Hydrophobic eggs of Toxorhynchites splendens floating on water-filled
black oviposition cups (a=62x, b=375x).


First instar larva. 2.46mm long. Newly hatched larva appears translucent white with
the dorsal aorta and trachea clearly visible and hefts of long spicules surrounding its body
(Figure 26a). After a few minutes, the larva’s body began to sclerotize and assumed its
general robust form with the large, round, prothorax coupled with a cylindrical abdomen
terminating into two branches - the breathing siphon and the ventral brush. The head is
round with two black eye spots (Figure 26b). The siphon is short and stout with no
apparent siphonal hair. Saddle has no dorsal and ventral brush as well (Figure 26c). Soon

after hatching, the first instar larva would be capable of movement and feeding.

Figure 26. a) Dorsal habitus of a newly hatched first instar Toxorhynchites splendens
larva (20x),b) head (61x) and c) siphon and saddle(61x).

Second instar larva. 3.08mm long, cylindrical, body light purplish-red in color
with initial appearance of brown-purple pigmentation of the thorax, and spicules dark

brown to black. Head is light brown with dark buccal area (Figure 27a). Siphon with one


hair on each side. Saddle with three branches of upper dorsal brush on each side and two

branches on the lower dorsal brush. Ventral brush also appeared on this instar.

Figure 27. Second instar Toxorhynchites splendens. a) Head (41x), and b)
terminal area (41x).

Third instar larva. 8.12mm long, generally a larger version of the second instar,
however, unlike the latter, the former has a larger head-prothorax ratio and the color is
deeper brown-red. At this stage, the larva appeared to have a larger body but with a
smaller and more quadrate head dorsally. Head is more round compared to the second
instar (Figure 28a) but siphon has 3-4 lightly barbed branches. Upper portion of the
dorsal brush of saddle with 4-5 branches each and lower portion with three branches each

(Figure 28b). Ventral brush same with previous instar but hairs are coarser.


Figure 28. a) Head (20x), and b) terminal area (20x) of third instar
Toxorhynchites splendens larva.

Fourth instar larva. The fourth and last larval instar was the largest among the
four, about 13.63 mm long (Figure 29). Body is robust with dense but short spicules at
the lateral portion of each tergite. Head-pronotum ratio is lesser than the third instar, body

deep purple-red, and the head is more quadrate.

Figure 29. a-d) Larval instars of Toxorhynchites
splendens (1.8x).

7s

Siphon hair has 4-7 barbed branches each while saddle hairs appear fused with
10-12 branches on the upper dorsal brush and 8-10 branches on the lower dorsal brush

Figure 30).

Figure 30. Siphon and saddle of fourth instar
Toxorhynchites splendens (36x).

From the purple-red color, older larvae appear darker and brownish-red with a
patched-like exterior around the dorsal part of the thorax. The lateral portion of the
thoracic area also appears whitish as the cuticle loosens in preparation for pupation
(Figure 31). The same characteristic was observed by Breland (1949) for Tx. rutilus

rutilus.


Figure 31. a) Early (3.8x) and b) late fourth instar (4.1x) Toxorhynchites
splendens showing changes in appearance nearing pupation.

Pupa. The pupa is comma-shaped like that of other Culicine mosquitoes but
larger (Figure 32). Freshly pupated ones appear light brown while those nearing

emergence are dark brown to black.

Figure 32. Toxorhynchites
splendens’ (a) pupa with (b)
cast 4" instar exuviae.


Breathing trumpets (Figure 33a) conspicuous on the dorsal portion of the thorax
and shaped like that of Tx. leicesteri and Tx. quasiferox. Paddle (Figure 33b) broad and

round with midrib dividing each unevenly.

Figure 33. Pupal a) trumpet and b) paddle of Toxorhynchites
splendens.


Taking sex into consideration, Table 13 presents the Mann-Whitney test of
different development stages of Tx. splendens exposed to varying prey densities. The
duration of development had no significant difference between males and females from
the first to the third larval instars where the development is about the same, regardless of
the sex of the predator.

The duration of the fourth instar, total larval period, and total development period,
on the other hand, were varied significantly between males and females fed with 20 and
60 larvae per day. Compared to other densities, the longer development of females
compared to males was more pronounced in densities 40 and 60.

The pupal period was also found to be considerably distinct on individuals given
10 preys per day, where males emerge one day than the females. Consequently, adult
longevity was longer in larvae fed with 5 preys per day. Compared to other densities
where the difference is minimal, at five preys per day, females live twice as long as their

male counterparts.

Table 13. Mann-Whitney non-parametric test on the life history of male and female
Toxorhynchites splendens at different prey densities.

DEVELOPMENT STAGE DENSITY P-VALUE

8) 0.846

10 0.408

First Instar 20 0.653
40 0.837

60 0.254

5) 0.503

10 0.983

Second Instar 20 0.109
40 0.227

60 0.055

5 0.351

10 0.274

Third Instar 20 0.118
40 0.056

60 0.953

5 0.199

10 0.398
Fourth Instar 20 0.003*
40 0.650

60 0.019*

5 0.268

10 0.083

Total Larval Period 20 0.001*
40 0.083

60 0.003*

5 0.846

10 0.015*

Pupal Period 20 0.173
40 0.340

60 0.594

5 0.288

10 0.113

Total Development Period 20 0.001*
40 0.167

60 0.001*

5 0.001*

10 0.579

P 20 0.200

Adult Longevity 40 0.068
60 0.206

*significant at 95% confidence interval, **significant at 99%


However, regardless of sex, the durations of each stage at different prey densities
were found to be highly significant; (Kruskall-Wallis, First to fourth stadium, p-value=
<0.0001, 0.004, <0.0001, <0.0001; total larval period, p-value=<0.0001; pupal period, p-
value=<0.0001; total development period, p-value=<0.0001, and adult longevity, p-
value=<0.0001). As reflected in the previous figure (Figure 24), the mean development
of Tx. splendens from hatching until pupation was greatly shortened as the prey density

offered increased. Conversely, adult longevity was reduced at higher prey densities.

B. Length of Development with Prey and Organic Matter

The rate of development was also evaluated in the presence of organic matter
and larval prey. As seen in Figure 34 below, the duration of each life stage was
significantly shorter (Mann-Whitney, P=<0.0001) in individuals with additional detritus
compared to individuals given prey larvae alone. The results of this test support the
statement of Steffan and Evenhuis (1981) that Toxorhynchites larvae can feed on detritus
in the absence of prey. Observations with other diets such as liver powder (Focks ef al.
1978) have resulted to slower development and smaller adults. In this study, however,
the combination of detritus and prey larvae resulted to shorter development time and

adults similar to those fed with 10-20 Ae. aegypti alone.


18.0
16.0
14.0
@ 12.0
ES
= 10.0
§
= 8.0 mw/oOM
a 60 =w/OM
4.0
co | Mien es
0.0
1st larval 2nd larval 3rd larval 4th larval Pupal Pd
instar instar instar instar

Figure 34. Duration of life stages (in days) of Toxorhynchites splendens given 10 preys
daily with and without organic matter.

When grouped by sex (Table 14), the only significant difference was observed in
the pupal period (Mann-Whitney, P=0.001) where males emerge sooner (X=3.91+0.54)

than females (X=4.44+0.72) regardless of the presence of additional organic matter.

Table 14. Development time of Toxorhynchites splendens* (in days) in a container with
organic matter and fed with 10 Aedes aegypti as prey daily.

DEVELOPMENTAL MALE FEMALE
STAGE
Range Mean Range Mean

Incubation Period 1.0-2.0 1.90 1.0-2.0 1.90
Larval Stage

1" Instar 1.0 1.0 1.0-2.0 1.11 + 0.33

2" Instar 1.0-2.0 2.90 + 0.52 1.0-2.0 1.33 + 0.50

3" Instar 1.0-4.0 2.55 + 1.13 1.0-4.0 2.114117

4" Instar 7.0 - 10.0 9.00 + 1.34 8.0 — 12.0 9.44 + 1.67

Total Larval Period 11.0 - 18.0 15.90 + 2.49 12.0 — 19.0 15.9 + 2.74
Pupal Stage 3.0 - 5.0 3.90 + 0.54 3.0-5.0 4.44 + 0.73
Total Developmental 16.9 - 22.9 19.81 + 2.30 16.9 — 24.9 20.34 + 3.17
Period

*n=20

b. Egg Viability Test
The viability of eggs of Tx. splendens was tested after drying or refrigeration at
4°C for a number of days. In both set-ups, only those eggs taken out of the water and
desiccated or cooled for 24 hours were able to produce viable eggs. 67.0% of eggs
refrigerated for one day was able to hatch compared to 20.0% in eggs that were dried

(Figure 35). Eggs exposed to both circumstances longer than one day failed to hatch.


Refrigerated eggs were still kept moist by placing them in a slightly dampened paper
towel. Without the damp towel, both dried and refrigerated eggs lost shape and failed to
hatch after the two-day expected incubation period.

Similar findings were reported by Newkirk (1947) on Tx. (Megarhinus)
splendens. From a batch of eggs coming from a single female, half were taken out of the
water and left to dry for 24 hours and returned to the water after. Eggs that were dried
failed to hatch, while the other half left on the water surface hatched in two days. In
addition, Trpis (1972) observed that temperatures lower than 14°C and higher than 37°C
are considered lethal for developing eggs. Under these situations, the hydrophilic inner
chorion of the egg becomes rigid and hatching larvae are unable to eclose (Dodge 1964).
Since eggs are fragile and transport of floating eggs in water is difficult, unlike other

aedine mosquitoes, the best stage for shipping is still the larva.

80%
70%
60%
50%

40% @ Air-Drying

%Hatchability

30% @ Refrigeration
20%
10%

0%

Days exposed

Figure 35. Percent viability of Toxorhynchites splendens’ eggs exposed to refrigeration
and drying.


C. Cannibalism

Table 15 presents the number of cannibalized Tx. splendens in the presence or
absence of larval prey. In both occasions, cannibalism decreases in relation to the age or
instar of the predator. In the absence of prey, a greater risk of cannibalism was observed
for all instars compared to set-ups with available prey. In a mix of different larval
instars, the fourth instar always predominates among younger larvae. The percent
cannibalism (No. of cannibalized larvae/Total no. of larvae per container) was plotted in

Figure 36.

Table 15. Average count of cannibalized Tx. splendens larvae.

Tx. splendens INSTAR*
I Il Ill IV Mix
0.8 1.4 2.4 2.8 2.8
w/o prey
0.6 1.0 2.0 2.8 3.0
with prey
18.0 30.6 33.6 40.0 40.0
Prey eaten

*15 replicates/ instar


——Prey eaten


% Cannibalism

iT tl V Mix

Tx. splendens instar

Figure 36. Percent of cannibalized Toxorhynchites splendens \arvae with or
without presence of larval prey.

The same observations were noted by Steffan and Evenhuis (1981) where 7x.
splendens tend to cannibalize when large numbers of the predator were placed on a
small container even at the presence of copious prey. Fox (1975) explains that
cannibalism serves as a regulatory mechanism to limit competition for available
resources. This trait aroused as a response to the selective pressure of limited food
supply in the field and competition with conspecifics, often, siblings (Russo 1986).

Annis et al (1990) further explains that this behavior is determined by a
combination of the following factors: prey density, container size, water volume,
predator’s age and density, size difference, and hunger level. Based on prey density
alone, cannibalism was reduced if there were at least 20 preys available for each
predator. However, high number of Toxorhynchites larvae present in the same container

will still result to higher instances of cannibalism even at the presence of 20 preys per


predator. On the contrary, less cannibalism was observed on containers with a large
surface area compared to narrow containers with the same water volume which increases
the likelihood of predator contact. This was especially evident in habitats such as
bamboo stumps where the presence of two or more Toxorhynchites larvae is highly
unlikely compared to used car tires. They have also noted that cannibalism is more
likely to occur between dissimilar-sized individuals with at least 5 mg weight difference,
although belonging to the same instar. This was even higher among different instars
where younger instars are highly at risk (Russo 1986). Cannibalism and pre-pupal
killing ensure the pupating Toxorhynchites larva that other potential predators, most
probably from another batch of eggs, does not reach the stage where it is able to pose a
threat to it and its siblings’ highly vulnerable stage.

The collection of more than one larva in the field even from small containers
could be mainly attributed to the presence of detritus which serve as additional food

source and debris where the larvae can hide (Focks 1982).

D. Pre-pupal Compulsive Killing Behavior

Successfully reared Tx. splendens from CFNR, UPLB, College, Laguna,
exhibited pre-pupal killing of prey larvae especially those nearing pupation starting at
prey density of 20 Ae. aegypti per day. Here, Figure 37a and 37b presents a newly
pupated predator with the prey cadavers intact at the bottom of the container. Some
preys were half-eaten while some were still intact suggesting that the behavior is not

solely for feeding. Additionally, Russo (1986) also observed that preys for surplus


killing were released within 5 seconds of successful strike whether it is alive or dead.
Live prey released after this period eventually died minutes after. After release,
Toxorhynchites larvae exhibit a unique wiping of the mandibles across the marginal
spicules of its saddle or aciculae to clear remaining debris as humans would with a
toothpick.

The same conditions were observed by Chan (1968) where all instars around the
molting period exhibit the behavior and only become more pronounced as pupation
approaches. According to Corbet and Griffiths (1963), this behavior of killing other
organisms in the habitat ensures that the predator will be safe during a period where it is
most vulnerable, especially from other Toxorhynchites larvae. Aside from this, killing of
available prey would also deprive younger Toxorhynchites present in the same container
the needed food requirement to reach the instar where it would pose a threat (Russo

1986).

Figure 37. a) Newly pupated Toxorhynchites splendens with prey
cadavers and b) a close-up of cadavers showing half-eaten
and completely uneaten preys.


Luonibos (1979) explained that this killing behavior is related to larval weight.
Studies using Tx. brevipalpis revealed that compulsive killing only occurred when a
certain weight threshold was attained. Larvae which weighed less than 30 mg were
rarely observed to exhibit the behavior. As the amount of prey given increased, the more
likely did the larva reach its threshold and displayed more intensive killing-without-
eating until it reached a plateau at weights more than 40 mg. In 7x. splendens, Russo
(1986) noted the threshold to be 31 mg. This behavior often intensifies as the larva ages
and nears pupation. Compared to other species, the onset of this act in Tx. splendens is
delayed and only starts on day 12 after it has ensured itself that it has reached the

minimum requirements for pupation.


Ecological Studies

A. Seasonal Abundance

The different stages of Tx. splendens were observed to be present throughout the
monitoring period (August 2013-July 2014). Considering all stages, the insect was most
abundant in September and December 2013 and April 2014 (Table 16). Population was
already high in August especially for the fourth instars. It reached a peak in September at
93 individuals (Figure 38). This indicates that the insect has been present in the collection
site earlier. During the first quarter of the following year, Tx. splendens’ population was
quite low, with March having the lowest. During this period, the water in the natural
breeding sites, such as bamboo stumps and tree holes (listed as ‘other sources’ of the
insect) was fast evaporating, thus limiting the number of available oviposition sites. Only
a few larger containers had water and served as oviposition sites. The population surged

in April. Then it decreased in May and decreased until July.

Table 16. Monthly field population count of Toxorhynchites splendens per life stage in CFNR, UPLB, College, Laguna,
August 2013 — July 2014.

2013 2014

AUG SEPT OCT NOV DEC _JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUN __ JUL

2.0 4.0 2.0 4.0 18.0 16.0 3.0 0.0 106.0 36.0 3.0 2.0

Ege
Larva
first instar 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 7.0 2.0 3.0
second instar 3.0 1.0 2.0 1.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 1.0 5.0 3.0 7.0 1.0
third instar 1.0 30.0 7.0 3.0 2.0 1.0 1.0 0.0 1.0 3.0 1.0 4.0
fourth instar 19.0 50.0 35.0 24.0 17.0 6.0 2.0 2.0 6.0 11.0 23.0 17.0
Pupa 5.0 6.0 5.0 9.0 13.0 8.0 5.0 1.0 1.0 4.0 1.0 3.0
Adult 4.0 2.0 4.0 3.0 3.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 2.0 0.0
Total 34.0 93.0 55.0 44.0 53.0 34.0 12.0 4.0 119.0 65.0 39.0 30.0
Mean 486 13.29 7.86 6.29 7.57 4.86 1.71 0.57 17.0 9.29 5.57 4.29




Population Density
ro
N > a eo f=) N
o o o cr} c=) o

°

AUG SEPT OCT NOV DEC JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL
Collection Period

Figure 38. Total monthly field population count of Toxorhynchites splendens in CFNR,
UPLB from August 2013 to July 2014.

Immature stages (eggs, larvae, pupae) were collected regularly during the one-
year monitoring period (Figure 39). Fourth instar larvae, especially from June to
December, were predominant mainly due to its long stadium which could last up to 9
weeks compared to the | to 15 days of younger instars (Table 7). Although compared to
the values obtained in the laboratory set-ups, development in the wild could have been
faster due to the presence of large amounts of organic matter. Thus, first to third instars
could have already developed into the fourth instar in between collections. Cannibalism
of younger instars by the larger fourth instars could also be a factor.

Eggs were most abundant in December to May. A few adult males were sighted

occasionally from August to December, mostly resting together on tree trunks where the


surroundings are damp in the afternoon. Adult females were rarely observed except for a
few times in the mid-afternoon while performing flight loops on some of the ovitraps.
This could be attributed to the general role of males and females in a community where
the roles of males have been only limited to provision of sperm. Females, on the other
hand, spend most of their time meticulously seeking suitable oviposition sites which
would be advantageous to the young since no other parental care is given once the eggs

have been deposited (Price et al. 2011).

ven adult “pupa fourthinstar mthirdinstar first instar secondinstar M® egg

120.0
100.0
80.0
60.0

40.

°

20.

o

0.0

pace S Bex
Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb n Jul

Aug Sept Mar Apr May Jui

Figure 39. Monthly field population count per stage of Toxorhynchites splendens in CFNR, UPLB, College, Laguna from
August 2013 to July 2014.



The numbers of collected Tx. splendens from August 2013 to July 2014 was
evaluated in relation with the average monthly data for rainfall (RF), relative humidity
(RH), and temperature (T) recorded during the same period by the National
Agrometeorology Station, College of Engineering and Agro-Meteorological Industry,

UPLB (Table 17).

Table 17. Population of Toxorhynchites splendens in relation to meteorological factors.

SAMPLING pcg FARVAEAND putt roraL (RF RH.
April 2 28 4 34 4794 87.0 27.8
September 4 87 2 93 433.3 89.0 27.7
October 2 49 4 55 108.3 83.0 27.3
November 4 37 3 44 324.9 85.0 27.2
December 18 35 3 56 75.7 87.0 26.8
January 16 15 0 31 6.8 82.0 24.6
February 3 9 0 12 2.6 82.0 25.6
March 0 4 0 4 29.2 81.0 27
April 106 20 0 126 15.6 75.0 29.1
May 36 23 1 60 60.3 76.0 30.4
June 3 35 2 40 160.2 82.0 29.3

July 2 25 0 27 505.7 83.0 28.9



Spearman correlation (Appendix Table 2) revealed that population of immature
stages was significantly influenced by rainfall (Sig.=0.025). Relative humidity, on the
other hand, affected the number of both immatures (larvae and pupae) (Sig.=0.015) and
adults (Sig.=0.020) observed. By plotting the number of collections with meteorological
factors in Figure 40, it can be deduced that the population of the immature stages was
directly proportional to the amount of rain. An increase in the cumulative millimeter of
rain for the preceding and the particular month eventually resulted to an increase in the
population of 7x. splendens. The result was expected since rainfall was the only source of
water for the oviposition sites.

The surge of eggs in April 2014 could be explained by the unique egg
development behavior in Toxorhynchites. Unlike blood-feeding mosquitoes of other
genera, Toxorhynchites are phytophagous thus oogenesis is autogenous (Steffan and
Evenhuis 1981). Roubaud (1929 in Steffan and Evenhuis 1981) explained ‘autogenous’
in a sense where females are able to produce viable eggs even when allowed to feed on
water. To adapt to the short availability of plausible habitats and short life cycle of most
prey species, egg development in Toxorhynchites is asynchronous. Gravid females are
able to stop oviposition in absence of breeding sites and could immediately resume egg
laying during sudden availability of suitable habitats. In this study, the accumulated rain
in March 2014 could have possibly triggered gravid females to oviposit in the presence of

water in the breeding sites.

lami egg lm immatures Gam adult ——RF ——RH —T

120 600
100 + 500 |
80 400»
Fa
°
< £
5 ie
¥ 60 - 300 &
3 s
:
40 + 200 = |
20 100
0 a 0

Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul

Figure 40. Total population of Toxorhynchites splendens in relation to meteorological factors in UPLB, College, Laguna from
August 2013 to July 2014.


Figure 41 shows that collections from small habitats such as tree holes, paint cans
under ‘used containers’, and cut bamboo internodes drastically declined in December to
March as rainfall became scarce. With no other water source aside from natural rain,
water in these habitats easily evaporated compared to larger vessels, such as used tires
which are protected from direct heat due to their chambered nature. Alternatively, pan
traps, with their wide aperture, have to be routinely refilled with water to keep them from
drying out.

Likewise, relative humidity also significantly affected the population of immature
(Spearman, p=0.015) and adults (p=0.020) in the field. The drop in relative humidity, or
the decrease in the amount of dissolved water in the air from January to May has also
resulted to a lower number of immature and adults spotted in the field. Conversely,
fluctuations in temperature did not seem to affect the population during the observed

period.

used containers milli cut bamboo lm tree hole lam Used Tires

Gam Pantrapping ——RF —RH —_—T
140 600
120 500
400 e
So
.
5 80 &
é 3
g 300
8 2
60 &
=
0 — 0
apr sep oct nov dec jan feb mar apr may jun jul

*used containers — cans, ceramic

Fig 41. Toxorhychites splendens collected from different habitats in relation to Los Banos meteorological data from August
2013 to July 2014.


B. Habitat

Various stages of Tx. splendens were collected from different habitats in the three
collection sites (Table 18). Eggs and immature stages were commonly observed in traps,
used tires (Figure 42), tree holes, and bamboo stumps. Other possible breeding sites such
as leaf axils of taro and banana, bromeliads, and Nepenthes pitchers were also searched,
but none were found. Artificial containers included mugs, paint cans, and plastic boots
discarded near forested areas. The same observations were also made by Steffan and
Evenhuis (1981) where the most common natural containers are tree holes and bamboos.
However, they observed larval Tx. splendens in leaf axils and Nepenthes pitchers.

Collections have been observed from habitats placed in and near the ground to
tree holes located up to 2 meters high. Conversely, no individuals have been observed in
containers located in areas with an elevation under 54 meters. In general, more eggs and
larvae have been collected from larger vessels such as pantraps and tires, while smaller
habitats with lesser amount of water harbored fewer individuals.

The preference for a certain type of habitat is decided upon by the gravid female.
Laboratory simulations by Benzon et al. (1988) showed that female 7x. splendens
generally preferred habitats containing water where the prey, Ae. aegypti, was previously
reared. Also, habitats with high humidity, low reflective properties such as dark-colored
containers, and more water content were chosen over containers which are dry, light-
colored, and low water content. In Kenya, 7x. brevipalpis was also found to be most

abundant near forested vegetation and uncommon in open areas linked with humans. No


obvious preference for height was also observed with habitats between | to 10 meters
above the ground (Lounibos 1979).

Most sightings were of males resting on the damp trunk, oftentimes, of Bischofia
javanica. Seldom and in fewer numbers, they were also observed in Tectonis grandifolia
and twice in Diospyros blancoi. Adult males were observed to occur on these trees most

often after a rain shower or when surroundings were moist.

Table 18. Habitats which yielded Toxorhynchites splendens.

AMOUNT OF

HABITAT WATER (mL CFNR, UPV, BULABOG
IN ea UPLB MIAG-AO PUTI-AN

Pantraps 800-1000 239 - -
Used tire 500 — 2000 237 3 9
Leaf Axils 20-30 0 0 0
Bromeliads 10-30 0 0 0
Nepenthes pitchers 5-20 0 - -
Tree hole 5-600 40 6 0
Rock Hole 10-100 0 - -

Cut bamboo 30-500 18 17 0
internodes

Other artificial 50-800 8 0 0
containers

Tree Trunks * 19 0 0
(Adults)

0 =No 7x. splendens collected
- =absent in such habitat
* = not measured


Figure 42. Toxorhynchites splendens \arva
collected from a used tire in Bulabog
Puti-an National Park, Dingle, Iloilo.

C. Feeding Habits and Host Range

Larvae of several species of mosquitoes and other organisms have been found
together with larval 7x. splendens during collections (Table 19), although in many
instances, habitats were observed to be devoid of any larvae aside from the larval
Toxorhynchites itself. Also, in many cases, first to second instar Tx. splendens were
observed together with large fourth instar prey; conversely, fourth instar Tx. splendens
were often seen with first instars of mosquito prey. Aedes and Culex wrigglers were most
common, followed by larvae of Tipulidae. Consequently, a tree hole in UPV, Iloilo where
many eggs were collected, contained larvae of Ochleratus sp. (Dipetra: Culicidae) only

(Figure 43).

Table


19. Confirmed and potential prey species collected along with larval

Toxorhynchites splendens in various habitats.

ASSOCIATED ORGANISMS*

HABITAT

UPLB

UPV BP

Pantraps Ae. aegypti
Ae. albopictus
Cx. quinquefasciatus
Cx. pipiens
Tipula sp.
Psychodidae larvae
Chironomus sp.
Used tire Ae. aegypti
Ae. albopictus
Cx. quinquefasciatus
Cx. pipiens
Nematode
Tipula sp.
Chironomus sp.
Tree hole Ae. albopictus
Cx. pipiens
Ephydrid larvae
Tipula sp.
Psychodidae larvae

Cut bamboo
internodes

Ae. albopictus
Cx. pipiens

Ae. aegypti
Ae. albopictus
Cx. pipiens

Other artificial
containers

Ae. aegypti
Ae. albopictus

Ae. aegypti
Ae. albopictus
Tipula sp.
Stratiomyidae larvae

Ochleratus sp.

*larval and pupal stage


Figure 43. Ochleratus sp. collected from a tree
hole containing Toxorhynchites splendens
eggs in UPV, Iloilo (x16).

When offered as prey, fourth instar 7x. splendens devoured all fourth instar
mosquito larvae as well as ephydrid and Tipula sp. larvae of approximately its size.
Larvae of Chironomus sp., however, were not eaten even after 48 hours. Although Rubio
et al. (1980) noted Toxorhynchites larvae to prey upon the ceratopogonid, Atrichopogon
sp. (Diptera: Ceratopogonidae), and psychodid, Telnatoscopus albipunctatus Williston
(Dipetra: Psychodidae), in Venezuela aside from Ae. aegypti and Cx. quinquefasciatus.

Steffan and Evenhuis (1981) pointed that all larval instars of Toxorhynchites prey
upon all live and active invertebrates, preferably of their same size or smaller where in
most cases, mosquitoes were the most common. Paine (1934) also noted predation on
larvae of Tipulidae, Syrphidae, and even small tadpoles.

Predation by the larva is mainly through ambush. 7x.splendens larvae generally

stay still under the water surface and project its body on a C or S shape until a potential


prey comes close within its range. With one quick strike directed laterally, it grasps its
prey within the mandibles and begins swimming backwards in an effort to immobilize the
prey. When the prey begins to cease moving, it is devoured whole, in most cases,
including the head capsule.

Russo (1986) observed that 7x. splendens larvae attack prey within a 5 mm
striking distance in a span of 2 minutes. Attacks are often directed 45° perpendicular to
the Toxorhynchites larva’s body axis. This S-shaped striking position was said to aid in
prey digestion probably to push the previously digested larva into the hindgut (Rubio and
Ayesta 1984). Fourth instar Tx. splendens was noted to exhibit an average of 26.8 strikes
per day, lesser than Tx. amboinensis (36.9) and Tx. brevipalpis (34.1) and more than Tx.
rutilus (18.4). No specific region of the prey is targeted during attacks and ingestion was
often finished within five minutes (Russo 2986).

While these laboratory observations were made in high illumination, responses
could be different in the field where most habitats are primarily dark (Goma 1962). Sato
(1961) as cited by Steffan and Evenhuis (1981) explains further that in the wild,
predation would mainly be based on mechanoreception since the developing compound
eyes are not visually capable in the younger stages until pupation.

For the adults, among the five flowering plants offered, only Pachystachis lutea
(Figure 44), Jxora sp., and Justicia sp. were observed to be fed upon by the caged adults.

Although other flowers were rested upon, no feeding actions were made in three hours.


Figure 44. An adult male Toxorhynchites splendens
feeding on Pachystachis lutea in the
laboratory.

D. Natural Enemies

No case of predation or parasitism was observed in the field, however, in the
laboratory, a number of deaths was attributed to consumption by an Asian House Gecko,
Hemidactylus frenatus (Squamata: Gekkonidae), and Harvestmen, Leiobunum sp.
(Opiliones: Sclerosomatidae), accidentally entering the adult rearing cage. Larval deaths
during rearing, on the other hand, could be attributed to fungal, viral or bacterial

infections. However, no further studies were made to confirm suspicion.


Voracity and Host Preference of Toxorhynchites splendens for
Aedes spp. and Culex sp.
A. Voracity

Ae. aegypti. The predatory consumption of Tx. splendens against Ae. aegypti was
statistically significant (Kruskal-Wallis, Sig.= <0.0001; Appendix Table 3) in such a way
that the number of Ae. aegypti larvae consumed increased as the density is increased for
all instars of Tx. splendens (Table 20). Consequently, the Tx. splendens larva was able to
consume an average of 80.17, 133.58, 175.55, 258.67, and 328.75 prey larvae when given
a daily amount of 5, 10, 20, 40, and 60 preys respectively.

The fourth instar was the most voracious of the larval stages at all densities which
consumed a total of 47.48 to 221.66 prey larvae over the whole duration of its stadium
(Figure 45). The number of individuals eaten by the fourth instar constitutes 59.23 to
68.08% of the total number of prey consumed during the entire larval period. This was

followed by the third, second, and first instar.


(skasd 09) Z€ “(skoad Oy) O€ “(shard QZ) 1€ “(shard QI) ZS “(SKard ¢) 67=U
EEE

SL8ZE ODL FHTLI 99177 88 IFOO'IZT I8bS  6E EF6r'ET 83° by 6b 70S E1 9971 LT EFLIOL 09
L9°8ST $6 0F09 71 LOPLI LOTFES PL LO'9F 96 0F78'6 06°61 SL I¥78'6 Ost LO 1F91'6 Ov
SS°SLI ST IF6PL cS6lT OS 1616 IL be 7 1*06'S er it IO'T#SS'p O16 OC 1F POD 07
8S EE L9°0*80'S £106 68'0FL8'S 06°SZ v6 0FS0'P L388 £0 1FEL'E £L'8 Lv'7F80'S ol
L108 97 0F0P'7 8 Lb Or OF PHT Orel 6 OFS 6S°L v9 0F8ET 00° 6LIFELVE S
[eoy, x [eioL x [e10L x [eioy, x Te1oL, x aa

V.LSNI HLYNOA UVISNI GUIHL iV.LSNI GNOOAS UVISNI LSaA
eee

“satysuap Aaid juarayjip 3e dav sapay 10y suapuayds sapiyoudysoxoy Jo AWoeI10A Apleq ‘OZ GFL


@ 1st instar 2ndinstar m3rdinstar ® 4thinstar
250.00

200.00

150.00
100.00
50.00 J
0.00 == a: ae Pal ‘ae cd
5 10 20 40 60

Prey Density

Prey consumed

Figure 45. Total number of Aedes aegypti larvae consumed by each instar of
Toxorhynchites splendens at different prey densities.

Looking at the daily consumption (Figure 46), the fourth instar prevails over other
instars by consuming 5.87, 9.19, 14.83 and 21.00 larvae at daily prey densities 10, 20, 40,
and 60 respectively. However, at 5 preys per day, voracity is lower with only 2.44 larvae
consumed which about the same as those consumed by other instars. The daily mean
consumption rates of the second and third instars were also comparable especially at

higher prey densities of 40 and 60.


®@ 1st instar 2ndinstar m3rdinstar  4thinstar
25.00

20.00

ooo | a |
5 10 20 40 60

Prey Density

bo
o ou
e& 68
8 8

Prey eaten

Figure 46. Mean daily consumption rate of larval Toxorhynchites splendens at different
densities of Aedes aegypti larvae.

Although the mean consumption of the Tx. splendens larva daily and in total was
positive in relation to density, the percentage of the eaten prey over the total number of
prey given was actually descending for all instars. Although in the fourth instar, the
decrease started in the density 10 preys. This could be the point where the larva has
reached its satiation.

After emergence, the replicates were sorted into their respective sexes. The male
and female 7x. splendens did not vary in the mean number of consumed prey in all larval

instars as pictured in Figure 47.


12 @ Female Male
S
we 6
a
Fy
E E : .
ie}
First Second Third Fourth

Larval instar of Tx. splendens

Figure 47. Daily consumption of Aedes aegypti larvae by male and female
Toxorhynchites splendens during the larval stage at all prey densities.

Aedes albopictus. The number of Ae. albopictus larvae consumed by approximately the
same instar of Tx. splendens increased with increasing density (Kruskal-Wallis, Sig.
=<0.001). In Table 21, the average number of wrigglers eaten by each Tx. splendens
during its entire larval stage were 66.66, 94.10, 144.00, 276.633, and 316.97 when given
5, 10, 20, 40, or 60 Ae. albopictus larvae. These were lesser than those consumed when
offered Ae. aegypti except for those with a prey density of 20.

The fourth instar was able to consume the most number of preys during its
stadium with a minimum of 39.09 and maximum of 221.56 wrigglers (Figure 48). This
was followed by the third (12.23-56.03), second (7.51-22.77) and first (7.88-16.6) instars.
The total prey eaten by the fourth instar essentially constitute 58.6 to 69.9% of the total

larvae consumed by the predator during its entire larval stage.


(skaad 09) o€ “(sAaud Op) 1¢ “(shoud 02) €€ “(shoud OI) p€ *(shaud ¢) Se=u
ES __________________—__—______}

S8-Op  €€0'9S St O€ €F0S EI O€-ST LL@Z LL7T OT CFOOEL §«=ET-OL «99TH BI) = bBTFLO'II 09
LO-8E LOtS =9VOE = SH 7FBT ZI 9e-81 Est SESt IEIFOVOL 7-81 E€1% €99% $8 OFS9'OI Or
ve-Il tv 0e = 777 6 1FSb'b 12-7 SSEL 8972 PHIFISb CZ-Il 9T9T CH9E 9OTFBTL 4
97-9 TLOL «=«989E = GT 1F89°E 8I-r 8h6 8 =€709 =877F~O9 =—bI-b 7H SHEL «= EG IFHEL Ol
8c- E771 Lue vS'0FL8'1 £I-b ISL @l@p SOOFITZ TI-h B88L 9819 76 0F6E'E s

ald
aduey [R10 % x asuey [210], % x asuey = [eo], % x JOON

V.LSNI GaIHL UV.ISNI GNOOAS UVLSNI LSU
eee

“saiyisuap Aaid yuasayyip 38 snjoidogin ‘ay 10} suapuayds “xj Jo Ayovsoa Ayteq *1Z 2192.


PLt-6L7 LOOIE fT 1FLL v1 LL7-v61 LS'1% SVE SS 1¥88°07 09
60€-PIZ £9°9L7 LL 0¥7@0'T71 861-671 LOLLI 6S°LE 9€ 1FP0'ST ov
981-901 vel LL'0F98'S 6£1-19 L8°€6 86SE SETFOTL 0z
£TI-EL 16 ZO 1FL8'S 66-9F s9'v9 £99 06 0F7'9 or
C8-€E 99°99 6€ OFLE'T c9-€l 60°6£ l6'lp Ch OFOL'T Ss
skoid
asuey [B10 x asuey [eI0L % x JOON
TVLOL UVLSNI HLYNOA

““-panuyquod 0Z 31921


ah @ 1st instar 2nd instar @ 3rd instar @ 4th instar

5 5 10 20 40 60

Prey Density

Prey eaten

Figure 48. Total number of Aedes albopictus consumed by each instar of Toxorhynchites
splendens at different prey densities.

Looking at the prey eaten daily (Figure 49), average prey consumed within a 24-
hour period increases with increasing prey density and predator age. However, at
densities 10 and 20, the consumption of second and third instar Tx splendens, although
still a bit higher than the preceding density, were still lower compared to that of the first

and the fourth instars.


5 @ 1st instar 2nd instar @ 3rd instar @ 4th instar

§ 15
i
a
>
& 10

a

5 5 10 20 40 60 s
Prey Density

Figure 49. Mean daily consumption of Aedes albopictus larvae for each Toxorhynchites
splendens instar.

For the proportion of the eaten prey, the same figures were observed as with Ae.
aegypti where the percent of prey eaten lessens with increasing density. However,
compared to that of Ae. aegypti, where the trend was gradually decreasing from the
lowest prey density, here, the percent eaten increased at density ten before gradually
decreasing.

Consequently, between males and females, the mean number of consumed prey

did not also vary in all instars (Figure 50).


12 Male @ Female
ce 8
o
s
o 6
>
a 4

first second third fourth

Instar of Tx. splendens

Figure 50. Mean daily consumption of Aedes albopictus by Toxorhynchites
splendens \arvae grouped according to sex.

The findings in both preys were comparable to that obtained by Begum ef al.
(1988) for Tx. splendens where the average number of prey eaten during the larval-life
span was 256.64+20.88. In Tx. brevipalpis in Kenya, Trpis (1973) also noted that the
predator was able to eat 154-358 Ae. aegypti during the course of its larval stage. On the
other hand, a lower number was obtained for Ae. albopictus in comparison to the 389
prey larvae eaten by 7x. splendens in a study by Toma and Miyagi (1992).

Differences in the minimum range could be attributed to the number of larvae
offered and effects of ambient temperature. Although Corbet (1963) stated that fourth
instar Tx. brevipalpis condrati was able to reduce feeding at low food availability, the set-
up in the current study involved replenishment of eaten prey. Thereby, even at a lower

density, Toxorhynchites larvae still had a constant supply of prey.


The same figures for voracity were also observed by Trimble and Smith (1978) in
Tx. brevipalpis where the minimum amount of prey consumed by the fourth instar
Toxorhynchites larva should be between 60 to 70% of its total consumption during the
larval stage in order to reach pupation. Difference in the consumption was only more
evident in the last two stadia and were more uniform in the first and second stadia in both
males and females (Rubio and Ayesta 1984).

The large number of preys consumed by the fourth instar compared to the
younger instars was due to its higher nutritional requirement, especially the energy
needed, during the non-feeding pupal period (Crans and Slaff 1977). This last instar was
considered to have the most intense phagoperiod according to the rate of biosynthesis
across many species of mosquitoes (Timmerman and Briegel 1999).

Foraging theory suggests that predators learn to adjust consumption based on the
energy content and size of the prey in light of its specific nutritional requirements. In a
study by Schmidt et al. (2012). in generalist predators such as the wolf spider, it was
found that the previous nutritional experience of the predator pre-determines its choice of
prey. It has long been understood that the potential energy provided by the target prey is
the major factor influencing predator foraging behavior (Whelan and Schmidt 2007).
However, as Schmidt et al. (2012) compiled, more in depth studies revealed that it could
be further broken down into the prey’s impact on the predator’s growth, development,
distribution, and survivorship. As a result, most predators regulate food intake to

maximize nutrition and prevent excessive consumption of prey with less nutritional


value. Even after capture, predators still regulate ingestion to match their metabolic
intake (Mayntz et al. 2005).

In the field, the Toxorhynchites larva’s food source is limited by the rate at which
potential prey hatch and develop. These are highly influenced by the prey’s oviposition
rate as well as the water level (Russo 1986). The low rate of consumption exhibited by
Tx. splendens in Russo’s study compared to other species, such as Tx. theobaldi, could be
attributed to the habitat in which this species thrives. Unlike Tx. theobaldi which has
adapted to drier environments, and therefore, must consume large amounts of food during
the short time it is available, Tx. splendens has a constant supply of food items in the

wetter tropical countries.

Voracity for Ae. aegypti pupae. Fourth instar Tx. splendens consumed an average
of 6.17+1.60 pupae with a minimum of 3 and a maximum of 9 individuals over a 24-hour
period. This constitutes 62.00% of the total number of pupae offered. Comparing the
results obtained with the average value for the fourth instar Ae. aegypti at density 10
(Table 16), pupae were favored over fourth instar preys with an average of 5.87+0.89
daily and a percent consumption of 58.71%.

The same results were also obtained by Lounibos (1979) in Tx. brevipalpis where
pupae were selected over fourth instars by a ratio of 3.49:1 probably owing to the sessile

nature of the pupa.


B. Functional Response

Standard non-linear least squares method fitted to Rogers’ (1972) random
predator equation indicated that larval instars of Tx. splendens exhibit a Type II
functional response for both Ae. aegypti and Ae. Albopictus (Figures 51-54). The non-
linear line shows that the predator’s responses resulted from negative density dependence
(Holling 1959). This is when the number of prey consumed increase as the density is
raised but with the proportion of eaten prey decreasing in relation to the number of prey
given. In type II, variations at higher densities levels off, indicating that the predator has
reached satiation.

The resulting graph confirms the fitness of the predicted proportions by plotting it
against the observed actual mean scores. The same responses can be deduced from the
first, second, third, and fourth instars. However, graphs for the third and fourth instars
appeared more linear compared to the first instar indicating that the satiation point was
not yet reached or was about to be reached at this level. Here, the line appeared to even
out somewhere between densities 40 and 50.

The study by Hubbard (1988) with 7x. rutilus and same-instar Aedes larvae also
showed Type II functional response using the same derived model from Rogers (1972).
Early fourth instars were found to have the highest feeding activity since food
requirement s were higher especially that needed for pupation.

The same study by Griswold and Lounibos (2005) using cubic models (Juliano,

2001) with 7x. rutilus resulted in the same graphs for both O. Triseriatus and Ae.


albopictus with the plateau drastically levelling off at 40 preys for the first instar.

However, simulations for other instars were not made.

No Eaten
|

Density

Figure 51. Functional response of first instar Toxorhynchites splendens to a)
Aedes aegypti and b) Ae. albopictus showing mean number of preys
consumed in 24 hours.

Figure 52. Functional response of second instar Toxorhynchites to a)
Aedes aegypti and b) Ae. albopictus showing mean number of
preys consumed in 24 hours.



Figure 53. Functional response of third instar Toxorhynchites
splendens to a) Aedes aegypti and b) Ae. albopictus showing
mean number of preys consumed in 24 hours.


Figure 54. Functional response of fourth instar Toxorhynchites splendens
to a) Aedes Aegypti and b) Ae. albopictus showing mean number
of preys consumed in 24 hours.

Fitting the actual data to the derived Rogers equation also yielded estimates for
the searching efficiency and handling time (Table 22) for each larval instar. Figure 55
shows that the estimate searching efficiency was highest for the first instar followed by
the fourth, third and second for Ae. aegypti. The same results were obtained using Ae.
albopictus only that the second instar was higher than the third. In contrast, the values

obtained by Hubbard et al. (1988) using Tx. rutilus rutilus, showed that the early fourth


instar had the highest searching efficiency and gradually declines as the stadium
progresses. However, the data obtained only started in 3-day old 7x. rutilus rutilus where
it has already reached the second instar. Therefore, figures for the first instar were not
estimated.

In a different study by Griswold and Lounibos (2005), first instar Tx. rutilus had a
searching efficiency of 0.084+0.07 and a handling time of 1.29+0.16 for Ae. albopictus,
which were less than half of the values obtained in this study. Aside from differences on
species, responses may have also varied due to a higher range offered in Griswold and
Lounibos’ study with a density range of 12-250 preys as well as the larger 400-ml
containers compared to 200-ml containers used in this study. Also, first instars used in the
previous study were introduced to the arena not more than eight (8) hours after hatching,
while first instars used in this study were starved for 24 hours and were used until the

stadium has been completed.

Table 22. a) Estimated searching efficiencies and b) handling times of Toxorhynchites
splendens for each experimental treatment on voracity using Rogers (1972)
Random Predator Equation.

PREDATOR PREY
AGE
Ae. aegypti Ae. albopictus
rr re ao
first instar 0.048 2.121 0.085 1.96
second instar 0.021 0.978 0.03 1,28
third instar 0.024 1.058 0.019 0.683

fourth instar 0.037 0.644 0.029 0.467



BAe. aegypti ®@ Ae. albopictus
0.09

0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01 a
i?)

first second third fourth
Tx.splendens instars

Estimated searching efficiency

Figure 55. Estimated searching efficiency of Toxorhynchites splendens in
relation to predator age.

Approximate handling times (Figure 56), on the other hand, showed a steep
decline as the larval Tx. splendens aged. This was expected for Toxorhynchites since the
increasing difference between predator size and prey size becomes more pronounced with
increasing predator age (Hubbard et al. 1988). Larger fourth instar Tx. splendens would
have a shorter time devouring a similarly-aged mosquito wriggler compared to the same
situation using a second or a third instar predator. Also, predators with larger bodies
would have greater reach and scope on the same —sized container compared to its smaller

and younger counterparts.


25 BAe. aegypti @ Ae. albopictus
ev
Le
=
oo
=
= 15
c
£
3 1
$
ro
£
_ i
first second third fourth

Tx. splendens instars

Figure 56. Estimated handling time of Toxorhynchites splendens in
relation to predator age.


C. Host Preference

Preference for prey instar. Table 23 shows that first instar Tx. splendens were
able to consume 3.36 first instar Ae. aegypti but did not consume any fourth instars or
pupae. Second and third instar Tx. splendens, were already able to attack fourth instar and
pupae of Ae. aegypti, however, still to a smaller extent. Fourth instar Tx. splendens, on
the other hand, has readily preyed upon fourth instar and pupae of Ae. aegypti, and
attacked first to second instars to a lesser degree. Non-parametric test using Kruskal-
Wallis indicated that the voracity of different instars Tx. splendens is not the same for the
different instars of Ae. aegypti (Sig.=<0.0001). A graphical representation of the data in
Figure 36 shows that as the age of the larval Tx. splendens increases, it also favors late
instars of Ae. aegypti. Conversely, younger Tx. splendens larvae also preferred to attack
younger instars of Ae. aegypti. Figure 57 shows the relative comparison of the body size
of a fourth instar Tx. splendens and a fourth instar Ae. aegypti prey.

The preference for a prey of the same instar or bodily proportion was also
observed by Lounibos (1979) in Tx. brevipalpis, where in presence of younger instars,
fourth instar Toxorhynchites deviated to the third and fourth instar larvae and pupae.
Also, a similar study by Padgett and Focks (1981) observed that the consumption of
fourth instar Ae. aegypti was higher than pupae and dramatically higher than first instars
when offered altogether. Although, offered separately, Tx. rutilus rutilus was able to eat
93.3 first instars compared to 9.8 fourth instars and 7.0 pupae.

Toxorhynchites larvae behave in such a way that it does not actively seek out

prey. Therefore, prey capture mostly relies on the collisions between itself and its prey.


ge =u
O'S-0'0 7@Z1IF9D' O'S-07% BOIFSZ'P O'F-0'0 OF IFZL'E O'S-00 CSIFSLI 05-00 7S OF6I'0 JBISUI YMOY
OS-0'0 BSTFIST OF-0'0 COIF8OT O'F-0'0 OLIFZ7Z 0'S-0'0 OSIFZEZ 05-00 LE IFH9T Teysul pny
07-00 EFOFEEO O'F-0'0 88 OFESO O'F-0'0 ETIFZLI O'S-00 ETIF8ZE 05-00 791FHET  IBISUI pucoag
00'0 00°0 00°0 00°0 O1-0'0 B8E0FLIO OF-O0 ELIFEST OS-07% C60F9E'E 7eySUT ISM
asuey es osuey es osuey eg asuey es oduey x suapuayds x]
edng JeISUI Up Jeysul pig Je]Sul puz JeqSUI 3S]
AWAd ydddan sapay

‘ud&Ban sapay Jo ednd pure sieysut yuasayyIp 10} suapuards sajryoudys0xo J JO SIe\SUI JUdIAJJIP JO SOUdIIJOIg “EZ 21GeL


= Tx splendens 1st Tx splendens 2nd Tx splendens 3rd Tx splendens 4th

4.50
4.00

3.50
3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
0.50
0.00 — = ~

first second third fourth pupa
Ae. aegypti instars

No. eaten

Figure 57. Prey preference of first to fourth instar Toxorhynchites splendens for first to
fourth instars and pupae of Aedes aegypti.

Among the four larval instars and pupae offered, the fourth instar Aedes larva has
the highest activity and often “grazes” on the body of the Toxorhynchites larva, thereby
increasing interaction compared to the more lethargic pupa. The preference over the
younger prey instars was theorized to be based on the optimal foraging strategy which
explains that attacking a larger prey will require a lower attack rate. The decrease in time
needed to assault the prey outweighs the added energy needed for a longer handling time.
In a way, the Toxorhynchites larva may have perceived that the ease of attacking the
larger Aedes larva, such as the fourth instar (Figure 58), and the time needed to devour it
was still advantageous over the time and energy it could have spent stalking smaller prey

even though they were easier to consume (Lounibos 1979).


Figure 58. Fourth instar (a) Aedes aegypti and (b)
fourth instar Toxorhynchites splendens.

Preference for prey species. First, second, and fourth instar Tx. splendens larva,
consumed, in general, more of the two Aedes larvae compared to Cx. quinquefasciatus
Table 24). However, the third instar preferred it otherwise. These differences could have
accounted for the indifference found on the preference of Tx. splendens over a specific

species of prey (Kruskal-Wallis, Sig.=0.98).


Table 24. Prey preference of Toxorhychites splendens by instar.

Toxorhynchites splendens LARVAL STAGE

First instar Second instar Third instar Fourth instar
Pre: = % = y = % Ef %
y xX (7 xX % x oo x o
Ae. aegypti
2.6441.27 52.86 3.12162 62.4 1.714158 34.3 3.1441.92 62.9
Ae. albopictus 2,551.11 50.95 3.1441.51 62.9 2.124147 42.4  2.78+1.69 55.7
Cx.

quinquefasciatus | .5540.94 30.95 2.45+1.45 49.0 2.45+1.53 49.0 2.95+1.89 59.0

When grouped by instar, the consumption for each species revealed to be
significant for all, Ae. aegypti (Kruskal-Wallis, Sig =<0.0001), Ae. albopictus
(Sig.=0.025), and Cx. quinquefasciatus (Sig.=0.002). Fourth and second instars consume

more prey, regardless of the species, than the first and third instars.

In comparison to the previous “no-choice” test on Figure 47 at a density of 5
preys per day for Ae. aegypti, the mean has been sloping downwards until it slightly
increased in the fourth instar. Here, the trend for Ae. aegypti was different. Slightly
similar to that of Ae. albopictus (Figure 50), the voracity of Tx. splendens increased as it
reached the second instar, then dropped during the third instar and slightly increased

again as it reached the last instar.

Compared to the two aedine species, the bars for Culex varied in such a way that

it somehow followed the expected trend for voracity where the mean amount of prey


consumed increases as the larva ages (Figure 59). In a study by Urmila et al. (2000)
showed that Toxorhynchites sp. was able to consume 570 Cx. quinquefasciatus during its
lifetime, a number which is greater than most studies using Aedes species (Steffan and
Evenhuis, 1981; Toma and Miyagi 1992). Comparing the three prey species introduced,
Cx. quinquefasciatus was observed to have the highest activity in the containers. Greater

chances of contact due to its high activity could be a factor in the third instar’s

preference.
@ Ae. aegypti Ae. albopictus @ Culex
3.50
3.00
2.50
<
2 2.00
e
§ 150
1.00
0.50
0.00
First Second Third Fourth

Tx. splendens larval instar

Figure 59. Species prey preference of Toxorhynchites splendens by instars.

SUMMARY, CONCLUSION, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

The biology and ecology of the predatory elephant mosquito, Toxorhynchites
splendens (Wiedemann) (Dipatera: Culicidae: Toxorhynchitinae), together with its
voracity for Aedes spp. was studied from August 2013 to March 2016.

Using standard keys, collected Toxorhynchites was initially identified as
Toxorhynchites splendens. The population from CFNR, UP Los Banos was predominant
over the two other populations collected in UP Visayas ang Bulabog Puti-an National
Park in Iloilo, and was therefore, used in this study.

Using sequences of the cytochrome oxidase I (COI) gene, the populations were
confirmed as Tx. splendens with 97 to 98% homology to that found in Kerala, India.

Tx. splendens was observed to undergo a holometabolous life cycle where it
passed through an egg, four larval instars, and a pupa, before emerging as an imago. Eggs
take | to 2 days before hatching with 1.77 and 1.87 days for those which developed into
males and females. The first, second, third, and fourth instars lasted for 2.32 +0.9 and
2.35 £0.95 days, 2.90 +1.98 and 2.96 +1.25 days, 6.15 +2.94 and 6.98 +3.24 days, and
17.5 +12.6 and 19.21 +13.59 days for the males and females respectively. Male and
female pupae took 4.76 +0.72 and 4.96 +0.64 days before becoming adults. Development
was significantly shorter in males than females. Males also live shorter (12.9 +10.44)

than females (18.38 +14.76).


Females take an average of 15.3 + 3.99 days before oviposition which may last up
to 14.8 +11.23 days. Eggs were deposited in batches and reached a mean of 19.8 + 16.16
with 96.6% viability per female.

Egg deposition was done either in flight or while resting above the water surface.
The female performs 5 to 54 backward flight loops before ejecting an egg unto the water
surface. The “rugby ball’-shaped hydrophobic eggs lost its viability and failed to hatch
when taken out of the water and let dry or refrigerated for more than 24 hours.

Given different Aedes aegypti (Linnaeus) (Diptera: Culicidae) densities,
development markedly shortens as prey given increases. At prey densities of 5, 10, 20,
40, and 60, the larval period was 50.38+22.09 and 56.06+22.63 days, 27.10+2.88 and
29.07+4.36 days, 22.71+2.23 and 26.7143.29 days, 17.4345.86 and 21.33+3.17 days, and
17.840.45 and 22.0+2.36 days for the males and females, respectively. Although
development was shorter at higher prey densities, the larval mortality was higher and
adult longevity was shorter.

In the absence of prey, Toxorhynchites larvae were also reported to feed on
organic matter. The rate of development of Tx. splendens in presence of additional
detritus was observed to be almost half compared to those reared on mosquito larvae
alone.

Tx. splendens \arvae also exhibit cannibalistic behaviour in all instars even in the
presence of abundant prey. Predation increased with predator age. Aside from
cannibalism, larval Tx. splendens also practiced pre-pupal killing behaviour in the fourth

instar.


The test insect was present in the field from August 2013 to June 2014,
particularly from the onset of the rainy season. Larvae were most abundant in September
while eggs were plentiful in April. The amount of rain for a particular month has
significantly affected the number of immatures collected, while relative humidity
influenced both number of immatures and adults collected.

Eggs and immature stages of Tx. splendens were mostly collected from used car
tires all throughout the year as cut bamboo internodes, tree hoes, and other artificial
containers easily desiccate during the dry season. Adult males were also observed to be
often resting on Bischofia javanica (Phyllanthaceae), Tectonis grandifolia (Lamiaceae),
Diospyros blancoi (Ebenaceae) when surroundings are damp.

Among the organisms associated within found habitats, Tx. splendens larvae also
preyed upon Culex pipiens Skuse (Dipetra: Culicidae), Ochleratus sp. (Dipetra:
Culicidae), and similarly-sized Tipula sp. (Dipetra: Tipulidae) and Ephydrid larvae aside
from Ae. aegypti, Aedes  albopictus Skuse (Diptera: Culicidae), and Culex
quinquefasciatus Say (Diptera: Culicidae). Adults were also observed to feed upon
Pachystachis lutea (Acanthaceae), Jxora sp. (Rubiaceae), and Justicia sp. (Acanthaceae).

The total voracity of larval Tx. splendens for Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus was
found to be 80.17 and 66.66, 133.58 and 94.10, 175.55 and 144.00, 276.633 and 258.67,
and 328.75 and 316.97 when given 5, 10, 20, 40, and 60 preys per day respectively. The
increase in predation in relation to increasing density was observed for all instars.
Although, in both preys, the fourth instar consumes the most, accounting for 59.23 to

68.08% Ae. aegypti and 58.6 to 69.9% Ae. albopictus consumed during the entire larval


period. Fourth instar 7x. splendens also consumed a mean of 6.17+1.60 out of 10 pupae.
Consumption of males and females did not vary significantly in both prey species. In
proportion, the number of preys consumed over the number of preys offered declined as
density increases suggesting reach of satiation point.

From values of voracity, Roger’s random predator equation showed that the
functional response exhibited by Tx. splendens follows Type II in relation to Holling’s
Disc model using both Aedes species as prey. The response of the first and second instar
was steeper compared to the third and fourth instar Tx. splendens, suggesting satiation
was attained at lower densities.

Estimated searching efficiencies for both prey species were both high during the
first and fourth instars. Subsequently, estimated handling time gradually shortens as the
predator ages.

When offered different instars of Ae. aegypti larvae, first and second instar larvae
of 7x. splendens inclined to consume younger instars while fourth instar Tx. splendens
preferred consuming older larvae and pupae.

Alternately, when offered a mix of larvae belonging to three different species, all
instars of Tx. splendens, except for the third instar, preferred Ae. aegypti and Ae.
albopictus over Cx. quinquefasciatus.

Based on the results obtained, Tx. splendens has a great potential for biocontrol in
the Philippine setting. However, the possible presence of a subspecies should also be
explored. Mass rearing could be done using Ae. aegypti as prey as it is more preferred

and readily available. Prey given should at least be the same instar as that of the predator


and at densities ranging from 10 to 20 to lessen premature mortality and attain maximum
longevity. Simulations for preference on oviposition media should also be further

explored to support data on matching of habitat and seasonality with the target prey.

LITERATURE CITED

ANNIS B, KRISNOWARDOJO S, ATMOSOEDJONO S and SUPARDI P. 1989.
Suppression of larval Aedes aegypti populations in household water storage
containers in Jakarta, Indonesia, through releases of first-instar Toxorhynchites
splendens larvae. J. Am. Mosq. Contr. Assoc. 5: 235-238.

ANNIS B, NALIM S, WIDIARTI H and BOEWONO DT. 1990. Toxorhynchites
amboinensis \arvae released in domestic containers fail to control dengue vectors
in a rural village in Central Java. J. Am. Mosq. Contr. Assoc. 6: 75-78.

ARMSTRONG JA and BRANSBY-WILLIAMS WR. 1961. The maintenance of a
colony of Anopheles gambiae, with observations on the effects of changes in
temperature. Bull World Health Organ 24:427-435.

BAILEY DL, JONES RG and SIMMONDS PR. 1983. Effects of indigenous
Toxorhynchites rutilus rutilus on Aedes aegypti breeding in tire dumps. Mosquito
News 43: 33-37.

BAR A AND ANDREW J. 2013. Morphology and Morphometry of Aedes aegypti
Larvae. Ann. Rev. Res. Biol. 3(1): 1-21.

BARRAUD PJ. 1934. The fauna of British India. Vol. V: Culicidae. London, Taylor and
Francis, Red Lion Court, Fleet Street. 513p.

BATES M. 1970. The natural history of mosquitoes. Peter Smith, Gloucester, Mass. 378
pp.

BEGUM EM, SALEEM N, RAHMAN MM, AHMED RU, DEWAN Z, RAHMAN AM
and SALTAR A. 1988. The biology of Toxorhynchites splendens (Wiedemann)
(Diptera: Culicidae) and its potentiality as a biological control agent to other
mosquitoes. Bangladesh Med Res Counc Bull. 14(1):15-20.

BELKIN JH. 1962. Mosquitoes of the South Pacific. Vol 1. Univ. California Press.
Berkeley. 608p.

BENZON GL, APPERSON CS, and CLAY W. 1988. Factors affecting oviposition site
preference by Toxorhynchites splendens in the laboratory. 4(1): 20-22.


BERLIN OGW. 1969. Mosquito studies (Diptera, Culicidae). XIV, Redescription of
Toxorhynchites (T.) gigantulus from the Philippines. Contr. Am. Entomol.
Institute. 4:21-26.

BOHART RM. 1945. A synopsis of Philippine mosquitoes.US Naval Medical Research
Unit 2. 100p.

BRADSHAW WE and HOLZAPFEL CM. 1984. Seasonal development of tree-hole
mosquitoes (Diptera: Culicidae) and chaoborids in relation to weather and
predation. J. Med. Ent. 21: 366-378.

BRELAND OP. 1949. The biology of immature stages of the mosquito, Megarhinus
serpentoralis Dyar & Knab. Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am. 42:38-47.

BRIEGEL H. 1990. Metabolic relationship between female body size, reserves, and
fecundity of Aedes aegypti. J. Insect. Physio. 36(3):165-172.

BULL D. 1982. A growing problem: pesticides and the Third World poor. Oxfam,
Oxford, UK. 192 pp.

CHADEE DD. 1985. Toxorhynchites moctezuma, a potential biological control agent in
Trinidad and Tobago, W.I. J. Am. Mosq. Contr. Assoc. 1: 376-378.

CHAN KJ. 1968. Observations on Toxorhynchites splendens (Wiedmann) (Diptera:
Culicidae) in Singapore. Mosquito News 28: 91-95.

CHOOCHOTE W, SUCHARIT S, KHAMBOONRUANG C, SOMBOON P,
MALEEWONG W and SUWANPANIT P. 1985. Adaptation of various species
and strains of Anopheles mosquitoes to natural copulation in a 30 cm cube. J.
Parasit. Trop. Med. Ass. Thailand 8:44-7.

CHOOCHOTE W, JITPAKDI A, SUNTARAVITUN T, JUNKUM A, RONGSRIYAM
K and CHAITHONG U. 2002. A note on laboratory colonization of
Toxorhynchites splendens by using an artificial mating technique and autogenous
Aedes togoi larva as prey. J. Trop. Med. Parasitol. 25: 47-50.

CHUAH MLK and YAP HH. 1984. Studies on biological control potentials of
Toxorhynchites splendens (Diptera: Culicidae). Tropical Biomedicine 1: 145-
150.

CLARKE GM. 1993. The genetic basis of developmental stability. I. Relationships
between stability, heterozygosity and genomic adaptation. Genetica. 89:15-23.


COLLINS LE and BLACKWELL A. 2000. The biology of Toxorhynchites mosquitoes
and their potential as biocontrol agents. Biocont. News Info. 21: 105-116.

CORBET PS. 1963. Observations on Toxorhynchites brevipalpis conradti Griinb.
(Diptera: Culicidae) in Uganda. Bull. Entomol. Res. 54: 9-17.

CORBET PS. 1964. Observations on mosquitoes ovipositing in small containers in Zika
Forest, Uganda. J. Anim. Eco. 33: 141-164.0

CORBET PS and GRIFFITHS A. 1963. Observations on the aquatic stages of two
species of Toxorhynchites (Diptera: Culicidae) in Uganda. Proc. Royal Entomol.
Soc.London (A) 38: 125-135.

DARWIN C. 1909. The voyage of the beagle. New York, NY: PF. Collier.

DEEN JL, HARRIS E, WILLS B, BALMASEDA A, HAMMOND SN, ROCHA C,
DUNG NM, HUNG NT, HIEN TT and FARRAR JJ. 2006. The WHO dengue
classification and case definitions: time for a reassessment. Lancet. 8.
368(9530):170-3.

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH - NATIONAL EPIDEMIOLOGY CENTRE (DOH-
NEC). 1998. Manila. Unpublished report.

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, National Epidemiology Center, Public Health
Surveillance and Informatics Division. 2011. Disease Surveillance Report
Morbidity Week 36, September 4 - 10, 2011. Retrieved from
www.doh.gov.ph/NEC on October 2012.

DJAM JC and FOCKS DA. 1983. Susceptibility of Toxorhynchites amboinensis and
Aedes aegypti to several adulticides currently used for mosquito control. Mosq.
News. 43: 471-473.

DODGE HR. 1964. Larval chaetotaxy and notes on the biology of Toxorhynchites rutilus
septentrionalis. Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am. 57:46-53.

DYAR HG and SHANNON RC. 1925. The types of Philippine mosquitoes described by
Ludlow and other notes on the fauna. Insecutor Inscitiae Menstruus. 13(4-6):66-
89.

EDWARDS FW. 1932. Diptera. Fam. Culicidae. Fascicule 194. 258 p. In: Wystman, P.
(ed) Genera Insectorum. Brussels, Belgium; Desmet-Verteneuil, 258 pp.

EMERSON BC. 2008. Speciation on islands: What are we learning? Bio. J. Linnean Soc.
95:47-52.


ENGBER B, SONE PF and PILLAI JS. 1978. The occurrence of Toxorhynchites
amboinensis in Western Samoa. Mosquito News 38 295-296.

EVENHUIS NL and STEFFAN WA. 1986. Classification of the subgenus
Toxorhynchites. II. Revision of the Toxorhynchites acaudatus group. J. Med. Ent.
23(5): 538-74

FOCKS DA, HALL DW and SEAWRIGHT AJ. 1977. Laboratory colonization and
biological observations of Toxorhynchites rutilus rutilus. Mosquito News 37:
751-755.

FOCKS DA, SEAWRIGHT JA and HALL DW. 1978. Deterministic model for
simulating the predation of Toxorhynchites rutilus rutilus on Aedes aegypti.
Agricultural Research Service - US Department of Agriculture. ARS-S-178, 25

Pp.

FOCKS DA, SEAWRIGHT JA and HALL DW. 1979. Field survival, migration and
ovipositional characteristics of laboratory-reared Toxorhynchites rutilus rutilus
(Diptera: Culicidae). J. Med. Ent. 16: 121-127,

FOCKS DA, DAME DA, CAMERON AL and BOSTON MD. 1980. Predator-prey
interaction between insular populations of Toxorhynchites rutilus rutilus and
Aedes aegypti. Environ. Entomol. 9: 37-42.

FOCKS DA, SACKETT SR, BAILEY DL and DAME DA. 1981. Observations on
container-breeding mosquitoes in New Orleans, Louisiana, with an estimate of
the population density of Aedes aegypti (L). Am. J. Trop. Med. Hygiene 30:
1329-1335.

FOCKS DA, SACKETT SR and BAILEY DL. 1982. Field experiments onthe control of
Aedes aegypti and Culex quinquefasciatus by Toxorhynchites rutilus rutilus
(Diptera: Culicidae). J. Med. Ent.19: 336-339.

FOCKS DA, SACKET SR, DAME DA and BAILEY DL. 1983. Toxorhynchites rutilus
rutilus (Diptera: Culicidae): field studies on dispersal and oviposition in the
context of the biocontrol of urban container-breeding mosquitoes. J. Med. Ent.
20: 383-390.

FOCKS DA. 1986. Toxorhynchites .pp.42.45 in: H.C Chapman (ed.), biological control
of mosquitoes. J. Am. Mosq. Control Assoc. Bull.6

FOCKS DA, SACKETT SR, KLOTER KO, DAME DA and CARMICHAEL GT. 1986.
The integrated use of Toxorhynchites amboinensis and ground-level ULV


insecticide application to suppress Aedes aegypti (Diptera: Culicidae J. Med.
Ent., 23: 513-519.

FOX L. 1975. Cannibalism in natural populations. Ann. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 6:87-106.

FURUZIMO RT and RUDNICK A. 1978. Laboratory studies of Toxorhynchites
splendens (Diptera: Culicidae): biological observations. Annals of the Ent. Soc.
of Am. 71: 670-673.

GERBERG EJ and VISSER WM. 1978. Preliminary field trial for the biological control
of Aedes aegypti by means of Toxorhynchites brevipalpis, a predatory mosquito
larva. Mosquito News 38: 197- 200.

GILLET JD. 1951. The habits of the mosquito Aedes (Stegomyia) simpsoni Theobald in
relation to the epidemiology of yellow fever in Uganda. Ann Trop Med Parasitol.
45:06.

GODDARD J. 1993. Physician’s guide to arthropods of medical importance. Florida:
CRC Press, Boca Raton.

GOMA LKH. 1962. Laboratory observations on the influence of illumination on the
predatory habits of Toxorhynchites larvae. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasitol. 58:350-54.

GRISWOLD MW and LOUNIBOS LP. 2005. Does differential predation permit invasive
and native mosquito larvae to coexist in Florida?. Ecol. Enomol. 1; 30(1): 122—
127.

HALL TA. 1999. BioEdit: a user-friendly biological sequence alignment editor and
analysis program for Win 95/98/NT. Nucl. Acids. Symp. Ser. 41: 95-98.

HARBACH RE and KITCHING IJ. 1998. Phylogeny and classification of the Culicidae
(Diptera). Syst. Ent. 23:327-370.

HEBERT PDN, CYWINSKA A, BALL SL and DEWAARD JR. 2003. Biological
identifications through DNA barcodes. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B. 270: 313-321

HOLLING CS. 1959. Some characteristics of simple types of predation and parasitism.
Canadian Entomologist 91:385-398.

HORSFALL WR. 1972. Chapter 4. Genus Toxorhynchites Theob. In: Mosquitoes — their
bionomics and relation to disease. New York; Hafner, 309-316.

HORSTICK O, S RUNGE-RANZINGER, MB NATHAN and KROEGER A. 2010.
Dengue vector-control services: how do they work? A systematic literature


review and country case studies. Trans. Royal Soc. Trop. Med. Hygiene 104:
379-386.

HUBBARD SF, O'MALLEY SLC and RUSSO R. 1988. The functional response of
Toxorhynchites rutilus rutilus to changes in the population density of its prey
Aedes aegypti. Med. Vet. Entomol. 2(3): 279-83.

JABINES A and INVENTOR J. 2007. The Philippines; A climate hotspot. Climate
change impacts and the Philippines.
www.greenpeace.org/seasia/ph/global/seasia/report/2007/4/the-philippines-a-
climate-hotspot. May 29, 2016.

JENKINS DW and CARPENTER. 1946. Ecology of the tree hole breeding mosquitoes of
nearctic North SJ America. Ecol. Monog. 16: 31-47.

JONES CJ and SCHREIBER ET. 1998. Rearing Toxorhynchites for field releases,
Environ. Entomol. 27: 315 - 21.

JORDAN S and HUBBARD SH. 1991. Influence of humidity and temperature on the
diel periodicity of oviposition of Toxorhynchites moctezuma (Diptera: Culicidae)
in the field. J. Med. Ent. 28: 241-245.

JULIANO SA. 1991. Species introduction and replacement among mosquitoes:
interspecific resource competition or apparent competition? Ecology 79:255-68.

JULIANO SA and FM WILLIAMS.1987. A Comparison of Methods for Estimating the
Functional Response Parameters of the Random Predator Equation. J. Animal
Ecology. 56, (2): 641-653

KOOPMAN JS, PREVOTS DR, MARIN MAV, DANTES HG, AQUINO MLZ,
LONGINI IM, and AMOR JS. 1991. Determinants and predictors of dengue
infection in Mexico. Am. J. Epidem. 133: 1168-1178.

KUMAR NP, RAJAVEL AR? NATARAJAN R and JAMBULINGAM P. 2007. DNA
Barcodes can distinguish species of Indian mosquitoes. J. Med. Ent. 44(1):1-7.

LACEY LA. 1983. Larvicidal activity of Bacillus pathogens against Toxorhynchites
mosquitoes (Diptera: Culicidae). J. Med. Ent. 20: 620-624.

LACEY LA and DAME DA. 1982. The effect of Bacillus thuringiensis var. israelensis
on Toxorhynchites rutilus rutilus (Diptera: Culicidae) in the presence and
absence of prey. J. Med. Ent. 19: 593-596.


LARKIN MA, BLACKSHIELDS G, BROWN NP, CHENNA R, MCGETTIGAN PA,
MCWILLIAM H, VALENTIN F, WALLACE IM, WILM A, LOPEZ R,
THOMPSON JD, GIBSON TJ, and HIGGINS DG. 2007. ClustalW & ClustalX
Ver. 2 (2007). Bioinformatics 23: 2947-48.

LEE DJ, HICKS MM, DEBENHAM ML, GRIFFITHS M, BRYAN JH and MARKS
EN. 1988. Culicidae of the Australasian Region. Vol 10. Canberra: Australian
Government Publishing Service. 118 p.

LEVER RJAW. 1938. Mosquito notes. Agricultural Journal of the Department of
Agriculture of the Fiji Islands 9, 21.

LINLEY JR. 1987a. Aerial oviposition flight of Toxorhynchites amboinensis (Diptera:
Culicidae). J. Med. Ent. 24:637-650.

LINLEY JR. 1987b. Diel rhythm and lifetime course of oviposition in Toxorhynchites
amboinensis (Diptera: Culicidae). J. Med. Ent. 24: 99-105.

LUONIBOS LP. 1979. Temporal and spatial distribution, growth and predatory behavior
of Toxorhynchites brevipalpis on the Kenya Coast. J. Animal. Ecol. 48:213-36.

MACDONALD S. 1958. Some ecological factors influencing the distribution of Malayan
mosquitoes. Proc. Cent. Bicent. Cong. Biol, Singapore, pp. 117-122.

MAYNTZ D, RAUBENHEIMER D, SALOMON M, TOFT S and SIMPSON S. 2005.
Nutrient-specific foraging in invertebrate predators. Science. 307: 111-13.

MITCHELL A, SPERLING FAH, and HICKEY DA.2002. Higher-level phylogeny of
mosquitoes (Diptera:Culicidae): mtDNA data support a derived placement for
Toxorhynchites. Insect Syst. Evol. 33: 163-174.

MIYAGI I, TOMA T and MOGI M. 1992. Biological contro! of container breeding
mosquitoes, Aedes and Culex quinquefasciatus, in a Japanese Island by release of
Toxorhynchites splendens adults. J. Med. Vet. Ent.

MUSPRATT J. 1951. The bionomics of an African Megarhinus (Dipt., Culicidae) and its
possible use in biological control. Bull. Ent. Res. 42: 355-370.

NAKAGAWA PY. 1963. Status of Toxorhynchites in Hawaii. Proc. Hawaiian Ent.
Soc.18: 291-294.

NEWKIRK MR. 1947. Observations on Megarhinus splendens Wiedemann with
reference to its value in biological control. Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am. 40(3): 522-

27.


PADGETT PD and FOCKS DA. 1981. Prey stage preference of the predator
Toxorhynchites rutilus rutilus on Aedes aegypti. Mosquito News. 41(1):67-70.

PAINE RW. 1934. The introduction of Megarhinus mosquitoes into Fiji. Bull. Ent. Res.
25: 1-32.

PANICKER KN and GEETHA BAI M. 1983 Field release of Toxorhynchites splendens
(Diptera; Culicidae) in controlling container breeding mosquitoes in a coastal
village. Indian J. Med. Res. 77: 339-341.

PARKER DJ. 1977. The biology of treeholes of Point Pelee National Park, Ontario. II.
First record of Toxorhynchites rutilus septentrionalis in Canada. Can. Ent. 109:
93-94.

PRITCHARD D, BARRIOS-O NEILL D, BOVY H and PATERSON R. 2016. Tools for
Functional Response Analysis version 5. https://github.com/dpritchard/frair.
April 24, 2016.

PRICE PW, DENNO RF, EUBANKS MD, FINKE DL and KAPLAN I. 2011. Insect
Ecology: Behavior, Populations and Communities. UK: Cambrige University
Press. p 47.

RAWLINS SC, CLARK GG and MARTINEZ R. 1991. Effects of a single introduction
of Toxorhynchites moctezuma upon Aedes aegypti on a Caribbean Island. J. Am.
Mosq. Cont. Assoc. 7: 7-10.

RAWLINS SC and RAGOONANSINGH R. 1990. Comparative organophosphorus
insecticide susceptibility in Caribbean populations of Aedes aegypti and
Toxorhynchites moctezuma. J. Am. Mosq. Cont. Assoc. 6: 315- 317.

RIBIERO H. 1997. New species of Toxorhynchites from Macau (China). J. Am. Mosq.
Cont. Assoc. 13(3):213-17.

ROBINEAU-DESVOIDY JB. 1827. Essai sur la tribu des Culicides. Mem. Hist. Nat.
Paris 3: 390-413.

ROGERS RD. 1972. Random search and insect population models. J. Animal Ecol.
41:369-383.

RUBIO Y and AYESTA C. 1984. Laboratory observations on the biology of
Toxorhynchites theobaldi. Mosq. News. 44(1): 86-90.


RUSSO R. 1986. Comparison of predatory behavior in five species of Toxorhynchites
(Diptera: Culicidae). Ann. Ent. Soc. Am. 79 (4): 715-

SATO S. 1961. Structure and development of the compound eye of Megarhinus
towadensis Matsumura (Morphological studies on the compound eye in the
mosquito, no. VIII) Sci. Rep. Tohoku. Univ. (4" Ser. Biol.) 27:7-18.

SCHREIBER ET and JONES CJ. 1994. Evaluation of inoculative releases of
Toxorhynchites splendens (Diptera: Culicidae) in urban environments in Florida.
Environ. Ent. 23:770- 777.

SEMPALA SDK. 1983. Interactions between immature Aedes africanus (Theobald) and
larvae of two predatory species of Toxorhynchites (Diptera: Culicidae) in Zika
Forest, Uganda. Bull. Ent. Res. 73: 19-24.

SERVICE MW. 1996. Medical entomology for students. Chapman and Hall, London.
278 pp.

SCHULTZ GW. 1993. Seasonal abundance of dengue vectors in Manila, Republic of the
Philippines. SEA J. Trop. Med. Pub. Health 24: 369-375

SMITH MA, WOODLEY NE, JANZEN DH, HALLWACHS W and HEBERT PDN.
2006. DNA barcodes reveal cryptic host-specificity within the presumed
polyphagous members of a genus of parasitoid flies (Diptera: Tachinidae). Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. USA. 103: 3657-3662.

SMITTLE BJ and FOCKS DA. 1986. Laboratory and field studies with 32P labelled
Toxorhynchites rutilus rutilus J. Am. Mosq. Cont. Assoc. 2: 474-477.

STEFFAN WA. 1968. Mosquitoes of the Papuan subregion (Diptera, Culicidae).
Toxorhynchites amboinensis (Doleschall). J. Med. Entomol. 5:310-13.

STEFFAN WA. 1970. Evidence of competitive displacement of Toxorhynchites
brevipalpis Theobald by 7. amboinensis (Doleschall) in Hawaii. Mosquito Syst.
Newsletter 2: 68.

STEFFAN WA. 1975. Systematics and biological control potential of Toxorhynchites
(Diptera: Culicidae). Mosquito Syst. 7: 59-67.

STEFFAN WA. 1980. The type-specimens of Toxorhynchites (Diptera: Culicidae) at the
National Museum of Natural History. Mosquito Syst. 12: 379-385.


STEFFAN WA and EVENHUIS NL. 1980. Description of the pupa of Toxorhynchites

(Lynchiella) rutilus septentrionalis (Diptera: Culicidae). Mosquito Syst. 12: 175-
177.

STEFFAN WA and EVENHUIS NL. 1981. Biology of Toxorhynchites. Ann. Rev. Ent.
26: 159-181.

STEFFAN WA, KODANI A, and EVENHUIS NL. 1982. Male and female genitalia of
Toxorhynchites amboinensis (Diptera: Culicidae). Mosq. Syst. 14:14-33.
STEFFAN WA and EVENHUIS NL. 1985. Classification of the subgenus
Toxorhynchites (Diptera: Culicidae) I. Australasian, eastern Palearctic, and

Oriental species-groups. J. Med Ent. 22: 421-446.

STEFFAN WA, STOAKS RD and EVENHUIS NL. 1980. Biological observations of
Toxorhynchites amboinensis (Diptera: Culicidae) in the laboratory. J. Med Ent.
17: 515-518.

STONE A. 1970. A synoptic catalog of the mosquitoes of the world, Supplement IV
(Diptera, CULICIDAE). Proc. Ent. Soc. Washington, 72: 137-171.

STONE A, KNIGHT KL and STARCKE H. 1959. A synoptic catalog of the mosquitoes
of the world. Supplement IV (Diptera, Culicidae). Ent. Soc. Am. Thomas Say
Foundation Publications No. 6, pp. 1-358.

TAYLOR DS. 1989. Preliminary field observations on the killing behavior of
Toxorhynchites amboinensis larvae. J. Am. Mosq. Cont. Assoc. 5: 444-445.

THEOBALD FV. 1901. A monograph of the Culicidae or mosquitoes. Vol 1. London;
British Museum (Natural History), 424 pp.

TIMMERMAN SE and BRIEGEL H. 1998. Molting and metamorphosis in mosquito
larvae: a morphometric analysis. Mitteilungen der Schweizerischen
Entomologischen Gesellschaft. 71:373-87.

TIMMERMANN SE and BRIEGEL H. 1999. Larval growth and biosysnthesis of
reserves in mosquitoes. J. Insect. Physio. 45(5): 461-70.

TIKASINGH ES. 1992. Effects of Toxorhynchites moctezuma larval predation on Aedes
aegypti populations: experimental evaluation. Med. Vet. Ent. 6, 266-271.

TIKASINGH ES and A EUSTACE. 1992. Suppression of Aedes aegypti by predatory
Toxorhynchites moctezuma in an island habitat. Med. Vet. Ent. 6, 272-280.


TIETZE NS, SCHREIBER ET, HESTER PG, HALLMON CF, OLSON MA and
SHAFFER KR. 1993. Susceptibility of first instar Toxorhynchites splendens to
malathion, naled and resmethrin. J. Am. Mosq. Cont. Assoc. 9, 97-99.

TOMA T and MIYAGI I. 1992. Laboratory evaluation of Toxorhynchites splendens
(Diptera: Culicidae) for predation of Aedes albopictus mosquito larvae. Med Vet
Entomol. 6(3):281-9.

TOOHEY MK, GOETTEL MS, TAKAGI M, RAM RC, PRAKASH G and PILLAI JS.
(1985) Field studies on the introduction of the mosquito predator Toxorhynchites
amboinensis (Diptera: Culicidae) into Fiji. J. Med Ent. 2: 102-110.

TRIMBLE RM and SMITH SM. 1978. Geographic variation in development time and
predation in treehole mosquito, Toxorhychites rutilus septentrionalis. Can. J.
Zool. 56:1256-65.

TRIMBLE RM. 1979. Laboratory observations on oviposition by the predaceous tree-
hole mosquito, Toxorhychites rutilus septentrionalis. Can. J. Zool. 57:1104-8.

TRIMBLE RM and LUND CT. 1983. Intra- and interpopulation variation in the thermal
characteristics of preadult development of two latitudinally diverse populations
of Toxorhynchites rutilus septentrionalis (Diptera: Culicidae). Can. Ent. 115:
659-662.

TRPIS M. 1972a. Development and predatory behavior of Toxorhynchites brevipalpis
(Diptera: Culicidae) in relation to temperature. Environ. Entomol. |: 537-46.

TRPIS M. 1972b. Effect of temperature on development and predatory behavior of
Toxorhynchites brevipalpis. Abstr. 14" Int. Congr. Entomol, Canberra. 14:268

TRPIS M. 1973. Interaction between the predator Toxorhynchites brevipalpis and its prey
Aedes aegypti. Bull. World Health Org. 49: 359-365.

TRPIS M. 1979. Development of the predatory larvae of Toxorhynchites brevipalpis on
non-prey diet. J. Med. Entomol. 16:26-28.

TRPIS M and GERBERG. undated. Laboratory colonization of Toxorhynchites
brevipalpis. Brief Communications, 637-8.

URMILA J, GANESH KN and VIJAYAN VA. 2000. Feeding capacity of
Toxorhynchites sp. Larvae under laboratory conditions. Insect Environment. 6 (3):
116-117.


VARNADO WC, GODDARD J and HARRISON B. 2012. Identification Guide to Adult
Mosquitoes in Mississippi. Mississippi State University.

VONGTANGSWAD §, TIRABUTENA C and THONGKUM B. 1983. The biological
control of Aedes aegypti on Sa-Med Island, Rayong Province by means of
Toxorhynchites splendens, a predatory mosquito larva. J. Med. Assoc. Thailand
66 suppl. 1, 8-12.

WHELAN CJ and SCHMIDT KA. 2007. Food acquicision, processing, and digestion. In:
STEPHENS DW, BROWN JS, YDEN RC. Foraging Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press. Pp141-72.

WHO (World Health Organization). 1972. Vector control in international health. WHO,
Geneva, Switzerland. 144 pp.

WHO. 2007. Scientific Working Group Report on Dengue: Meeting Report, 1-5 October
2006. Geneva: World Health Organization.
http://www.who.int/tdr/publications/publications/ swg dengue 2.htm [accessed
23 April 2012].

WHO - OMS. 1995. Guidelines for Dengue Surveillance and Mosquito Control. 112 p.

WHO.2004. Global Strategic Framework for Integrated Vector Management. Geneva:
World Health Organization. http://whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/2004/WHO CDS CPE
PVC 2004 10.pdf [accessed 23 April 2012].

WHO. 1982. Manual on environmental management for mosquito control, with special
emphasis on malaria vectors. WHO, Geneva, Switzerland. Offset Publication 66,
283 pp.

WHO.1983. Integrated vector control. WHO, Geneva, Switzerland. Technical Report
Series 688, 72 pp.

WHO. 1984. Chemical methods for the control of arthropod vectors and pests of public
health importance. WHO, Geneva, Switzerland. 108 pp.

ZHANG Z, SCHWARTZ S, WAGNER L, and MILLER N. 2000. A greedy algorithm
for aligning DNA sequences. J. Comp. Biol. 7:203-14.