
Family History of Cancer:

Filipino First-Degree Relatives’ Perspectives on Disease and Inherited Gene Risks

A Master’s Thesis Submitted to the
Faculty of the Graduate Program in Genetic Counseling
College of Medicine

University of the Philippines Manila

In Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements
For the Degree of

Master of Science in Genetic Counseling

By

Abegail Jayne Amoranto

June 2017

Permission is given for the following people to have access to this thesis:

Available to the general public Yes
Available only after consultation with author/thesis adviser No
Available only to those bound by confidentiality agreement No

Student’s signature: Shemale

Signature of thesis adviser: Whitey Means

INO A
STI-17-0787

UPM-NGOHS Form # 04
Certificate of Acceptance

NATIONAL GRADUATE OFFICE FOR THE HEALTH SCIENCES

University of the Philippines Manila

3/F UP Manila Main (Old NEDA) Building

Padre Faura corner Maria Orosa Streets, Ermita, Manila 1000 Philippines

Tel nos: 526-5870, 523-1495; Telefax: 523-1498; E-mail: ngohs@post.upm.edu.ph

CERTIFICATE OF ACCEPTANCE OF THESIS/DISSERTATION

The thesis/dissertation attached hereto, entitled Family History of Cancer: Filipino First-

Degree Relatives’ Perspectives on Disease and Inherited Gene Risks

prepared and submitted by Abegail Jayne P. Amoranto , in partial fulfillment of the
name of student

requirements for the degree of MS GENETIC COUNSELING is accepted.
program/track/major

egies
lercy@aurino, MS, CGC
Thesis/Dissertation Adviser

Accepted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of

Master of Science in Genetic Counseling

Lt V4, a4. >)
MD ARNULD VFiALLAKL, Jin ber Bat

Sp JAGNESO. MEAD ee in
Professes & Dean ~Director

Collegeof__- National Graduate Office for the Health Sciences

University Pree) ines Manila University of the Philippines Manila

Date f {AG S/F} Date

ii

UPM-NGOHS Form # 03
Completion/Approval Sheet

NATIONAL GRADUATE OFFICE FOR THE HEALTH SCIENCES
University of the Philippines Manila
3/F UP Manila Main (Old NEDA) Building
Padre Faura corner Maria Orosa Streets, Ermita, Manila 1000 Philippines
Tel nos: 526-5870, 523-1495; Telefax: 523-1498; E-mail: ngohs@post.upm.edu.ph

APPROVAL SHEET

We, the members of the oral examination panel for Abegail Jayne P. Amoranto

name of student

unanimously approve the thesis/dissertation entitled Family History of Cancer:

Filipino First-Degree Relatives’ Perspectives on Disease and Inherited Gene Risks.

The thesis/dissertation attached hereto which was defended on May 10, 2017, 10:30AM-12:30PM
date and time

at UPM CHANCELLOR’S OFFICE BOARDROOM, College of __ MEDICINE _, University of the

venue

degree-granting unit

Philippines Manila for the degree of MS GENETIC COUNSELING is hereby accepted.
program degree/track/major

PANEL MEMBERS
Mercy Laurino, MS, CGC
Chair/Adviser
Carmencita Padilla, MD, MAHPS
Reader/Critic
Heinrik Martin Jude Strebel, MD
Member
__Ma-Am Joy Tumulak, MD, MS
Member
Nymia Simbulan, PhD
Member

SIGNATURE

We therefore recommend that Abegail Jayne P. Amoranto be awarded the degree of

name of student

MS GENETIC COUNSELING from the College of _MEDICINE _.

program degree/track/major

Very truly yours,

ouninl
fere: ino, MS, CGC

Panel Chairman/Adviser

Endorsed: JULIET 0. SIO, “AR, M.D., M.Sc.

Profestof and Chair
--------------. Department of Pediatrics .______
Dept. Chair/ Chair Graduate Program Committee

Date Klay or

ili

degree-granting unit

eZ vate

= -Professer & Dean:

Dean
College of ___
Date _


TABLE OF CONTENTS

List of Tables
List Of Figures... cssesessseesesesescsescscscseseecscscsesescscscsesessseesssssscsessaessseeseseseseseenseseseaeaeeeneneeee x
List of Appendices ..........cecscseecsesesesesessseseeseeesscsesesessesesessssesssessseseseeseecesseseaseneeesaeseneaeeeee xi
Acknowledgement ............:sccsesssssssssscssceescscssscsesesesesesssssesescsssesesesesseseesesesesssseeeseeaeaeaes xii
Pb en cereene seen sme ncensernerneetsenesmansareeecenenersnernrenemsersterenetnnrenbtsiessthds PUsAE Ban sHeN aoe mene xiii
Chapter I: Introduction..........c.cscesesesseesessseeeeseseseecseeescseseseseecseseececseeeseecucseseseasaseassescssecseaeas 1
Background of the Study... ceeseeeceseseseseseseseseseseeeeeseessesnsesssssessseseseeesseee 1
Statement of the Problem 0.0.0.0... esceesesseeeeesseseeeseessesseetsnssesessssceeensnseeseeteneee 3
Objectives of the Study 0... cece eceseseeeeeseeeeceesecsseesescseeeessseesssecseeeseseeeeee 3
Significance of the Study oo... cece eseeseeesscsessseeccececseesssssesusseeeeneasseneeseesee 4
Scope and Delimitations of the Study... eeseeseseseeeseseeeceeeeteeeeeteeeeaeaee 5
Chapter IT: Theoretical Framework .............:ssscssessesssssseeseessesseesesesesseesessecresssesescseceaeeseenee 6
Review of Related Literature ..............cesssessessssssessessssssceseesessscenseceseaensensenecens 6
~ Conceptual Framework ..0......... cc sececessececsesesesseseeecsecesecesecatsessssesesseseseseeeenenenees 17
ee 22
Operational Definition of Terms.................sscssssssessssessseeseesseeceeaeeeeseseeseesessees 24
Chapter TIT: Methodology ..........:.s:sssssssssssssessessssssssssessssesseeseseeseesesessesacsesssseeseesesesscssesasees 26
Study Design ..........s:secsessssssssssssessesessssusseeneescsesseseesessesecaeescsessessesecsesassesneenees 26
Participants and Study Setting ..............ccscssssessssssessssssssesestsecscsesesacseseseecaeeee 26
Sampling Strategy
Recruitment Process.........ssscssssssesssssssessessssecsesessessesessescsesscseesessesscsssseseeensaeess 31
Data Collection Tools and Procedure ............sessssssssssesscssssessscssscssesscssssseceseess 35

Data Analysis

Ethical Considerations ...........::ssesssssessssessssessesessessessesnsecsesscseesenessesseseeeneenenees 43
Chapter IV: Results.........c.cccssessssscecssssseseesesessesessesesessesesesssesssseeessecsessessasseeneneneseseenensasetets 48
Demographic Data ...........csccsssesssssscssssseeseeesescsessseseseseseeeeseeeeeseseseseeeneenes 48
Findings from the Interviews & Pedigree Analysis ...........ccccccceesesseeeeeeeee 53
Chapter V: Discussion ...........cccccsscsesesesesesssesnssesesesseesseseseesseseseacsceessssseseseneeeeaseeseaseeseees 170

Filipino First-Degree Relatives’ Perspectives on Family History, Disease
and Inherited Gene RiskS ...........:::sesessssssesecesssseseseesesessseeeeseneseseeeneseeneenenses 171
Variations in the Meanings of Family History of Disease among Filipino

First-Degree Relatives of Colorectal Cancer Patients...........0...c0cseseeeees 191

References
APPeNdices............sscssecsssssecsessneesessnesnesssessesseeesesssessssescsscssessecssssessessecoecaseesesecsacseseaceneeseess 219
Curriculum Vitae of Principal Investigator.............cccescsesssssssssscsescscssssssteccesessseseseacscnees 256

Table

2.1

2.2

3.1

3.2

3.3

3.4

4.1

4.2

43

44

4.5

4.6

47

4.8

LIST OF TABLES

Risk stratification based on family history of chronic disease................-+-+ 7
Colorectal cancer family history risk stratification............:.csseseeeseeteneeteees 8
Comparison groups based on age of cancer diagnosis and relation of

participant to patient, and corresponding sample SiZES.........-..::s:esseseeeeesereee 29
Operational definition of terms used in the coding ProceSS...........:.e:ceeee 39
Sample data saturation grid... 40
Data analysis ProceSs,.........::scsscssessssesessssesessesssensescsesessesensessscsssssscsseteneeesesesees 41
Demographic characteristics of participamts.............sscccsssesseseseseseeeeseneeneneees 49
Comparative table of demographic characteristics of participant groups

(siblings vs OffSPring)..............s:ssesssssssssseesesesesesesesestsessssssssceescsescscsssssesssonseeess 50
Characteristics of probands...............scesscsssseseseseeeeesececeeececsescnescecececseecseeeeeeeee 52
Emerged constructs, categories and sub-categories supporting the theme
“Salience of Family History of Disease”. 0.00... esesesesssseseceeseseeseseeeeeeeseeee 55
Key concepts describing “positive family history of cancer” from the
perspectives of participating Filipino first-degree relatives. 56
Sample meaning units, condensed meaning units and codes on personal
definition of family history, based on participant interviews.................00000. 58
Basis for inclusion or exclusion of individuals in the family history............. 59
Relatives to be included in participating FDRs’ family history of disease,

based on degree of consanguimity............ececssssesessssssesseseccsesssssscsessestssssesesseees 60

vi

4.9

4.11

4.12

4.13

4.14

4.15

4.16

4.17

4.18

4.19

4.20

4.21

4.22

4.23

4.24

Sample meaning units, condensed meaning units, and codes on bases for
identifying individuals to be included in the family history of disease.......... 61
Constructs under Theme 1 — Salience of Family History of Disease,

stratified by age QrOUP. occ ssesesesecsesesesesceesessssesesesesesseseaessseenenenenenenenee 69
Constructs under Theme 1 — Salience of Family History of Disease,

stratified by sex of participants... esses secseseeseeecseeeeeeesesseeseseeeeeeeneeeees 71
Constructs under Theme 1 — Salience of Family History of Disease,

stratified based on educational attainment of participants.............. eee 73

Emerged constructs and subcategories on family and community beliefs on

CANCEL... .esescsesessssesssesescssesescssscescsescesessseessssasescssseessecssssssesssecssseasesesseseseeeeesseees 77

Family and community beliefs on cancer and colorectal cancet.............:.0++ 78

Emerged constructs sub-categories on perceived causes of CRC............-:-000 83

Perceived lifestyle or behavioural causes of colorectal canceF..............:.00000 85

Perceived genetic and physiologic causes of colorectal cancef...........:.::000 89

Emerged construct and subcategories on disease inheritance perspectives... 95

Definitions of the term “namana” in relation to disease inheritance............... 96

Perspectives on how diseases are inherited. 98

Constructs describing when cancer is perceived to be “running in the

Feattnil yigtesresscssesecstestessesstersseasseszersacessvassseecrecescestecnsaveeverrersertsesrereerereteeseeteettteees 103

Perception of cancer as a disease “running in their family”

Constructs under Theme 2 — Personalizing Process, stratified by age........... 106

Constructs under Theme 2 — Personalizing Process, stratified by sex............ 109

vii

4.25

4.27

4.28

4.29

4.30

4.31

4.32

4.33

4.34

4.35

Constructs under Theme 2 — Personalizing Process, stratified based on
educational attainment of participants...............ccccessesesecceeeeseenenesteeeneneeeneneneees 113
Emerged constructs, categories and sub-categories supporting the theme

“Risk Regulation” .............cccccssssesscsesssesessesesessesessseenenesseneeeotsesneneneenenensaeaeerees 117

Participant ranking of relatives based on risk of developing cancer, from

those with the highest “increased” risk to lOWeSt..........cesssesessssesereseteseeeseenenees 119
Perceived degree of risk of developing colorectal Cancet...........::seseeseeeee 120
Factors perceived to increase and decrease personal risk for CRC............+ 121
Emerged constructs and sub-categories on Risk Regulation...............:s0+ 122
Constructs under Theme 3 — Perceived Personal Risk, stratified by age........ 124
Constructs under Theme 3 — Perceived Personal Risk, stratified by sex........ 126

Constructs under Theme 3 — Perceived Personal Risk, stratified based on
educational attainment of participants... sesesesessscesseseeseeesesseeeeneeeseetenees 127

Emerged constructs, categories and sub-categories supporting the theme

“Risk Management?”...........:csscsecsecsssssssesssssesesssesesssesesesessessessscsssessesseseseeeeeeeee 129
Constructs under Theme 4 — Risk Management, stratified by age................. 131
Constructs under Theme 4 — Risk Management, stratified by sex.................. 132

Constructs under Theme 4 — Risk Management, stratified by educational

attainment of participamts...............cccsccesessesesesesssssssesesscseeasseensseseceeseeesenesesasees 133

Emerged actual risk vs perceived risk.
Comparison of constructs between siblings and offspring, stratified by age.. 138

Comparison of constructs between siblings and offspring, stratified by sex.. 141

viii

4.41

4.42

4.43

4.44

4.45

4.46

4.47

Comparison of constructs between siblings and offspring, stratified by
educational attainment of participants..............:ssssssssseseseeeessereeeeeeeneneeneneees 144
Actual vs perceived risk, siblings vs Offspring..............ssccsesseseeeeesseeneeeeees 151
Comparison of constructs between early-onset and typical-onset FDR

groups, Stratified Dy agen... esssessstesseeesseesessesssessseesssecstensssasseeseeseesesenes 153
Comparison of constructs between early-onset and typical-onset FDR

groups, Stratified Dy SOX... eeeeseeeseseseseseseseecsesssesesesseeeseseseseseseeeseseeesseees 156
Comparison of constructs between early-onset and typical-onset FDR

groups, stratified by educational attainment................eeceseseseeseeeeeeseeceseeeeeeees 159

Actual vs perceived risk, early-onset FDR group vs typical-onset FDR

Actual vs perceived risk, siblings/offspring of probands with early-onset vs

siblings/offspring of probands with typical-onset Cance.............:csscesseeeeeeees 168

LIST OF FIGURES

Figure
2.1 Conceptual framework of the study- Model of Familial Risk Perception.................- 18
3.1 Recruitment process........ccccsecssssesesssesssesesssesscesesssssessseseceseceseseseseseseaeseeceesceeeeeeeacacseeees 32

3.2 Main characteristics of thematic analysis & qualitative content analysis in the
continuum of qualitative methodology ...........cccccssssssssssesssssesssesscesssesesecesceeseeeseeseeeaeees 37

6.1 Revised conceptual model based on emerged categories & sub-categories............. 201

LIST OF APPENDICES

Appendix

1. Tools for data Collection............:csessssscessesesestsseseseseseeesseseseessesneeeessseseesetensnceeenensatars 219
1.1 Self-administered questionnaire (English)..............::sscsccseseseseceessssseneeeeeeeeeeeees 219
1.2 Self-administered questionnaire (Tagalog)... 220
1.3 Semi-structured interview guide (English).............::cssssssseseesssessneseseeeeseneeteees 222
1.4 Semi-structured interview guide (Tagalog)............cccsssccscscssesecsseseseeeneesenenenees 224

1.5 Pedigree / family health history...

2. Scripts for Recruitment... ccssesesesesssceceseesesesseseesseessssessssesacesesenensnsacenpeeneneesenensees 227
2.1 Script for recruitment of referees (English)...............cscessssssessseeeseseseseeeseseseees 227
2.2 Script for recruitment of referees (Tagalog)....

3. Informed consent fOrMS............c cece eesecesteseseseeseeesseseeessseeesessesesessseseseseseesesseseeesees 231
3.1 Informed consent form (English)................ssssssssssecssessssscesscsssesseseseseseseseeeeeees 231
3.2 Informed consent form (Tagalog)...

A. Coding DOOK...........csessssssesssescseessececeesseeesssccecsesscecssceceaceceesecseeasacsseaesaesceseseeeeeesees 237

5. Sample transcripts, meaning units and COdES...............cscssssesecsseeseesseseseececeeeeeeseeeeee 243

6. Permits to conduct research.. 254
6.1 UP Manila Research Ethics Board approval form...............s.sscecesssseseceeesesseseeees 254
6.2 PGH Expanded Hospital Research Office — permit to conduct research.......... 255

xi

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

I would like to extend thanks to those who have made this work possible. I am
indebted to my thesis adviser, Ms. Mercy Laurino, and to the members of my thesis
committee, Dr. Carmencita Padilla, Dr. Heinrik Martin Jude Strebel, Dr. Nymia
Simbulan, Dr. Ma-Am Joy Tumulak, and Dr. Cora Afionuevo, for their guidance, support

and patience.

To the participants, physicians and nurses of the UP-PGH Cancer Institute, thank
you for your time and help. I am also grateful to the Department of Science and
Technology (DOST), Accelerated Science and Technology Human Resource
Development Program, and the Science and Education Institute for funding this research.

Without their contributions, this research would not proceed.

I would also like to thank my family for their unfaltering encouragement and
support; my sincerest thanks to my friends, in and out of the University, who have
motivated and supported me, especially during sleepless nights and cramming days

before deadlines.

And most of all, I thank our Lord, for making everything possible.

xii

ABSTRACT

Family history plays an important role in cancer risk assessment and management as it
reflects the contribution of inherited genes, shared lifestyle and environmental factors in
the development of disease in the family. An individual’s understanding of family history
influences perceptions of cancer risks and control, which consequently affect adoption of
health behaviours and screening practices. However, discrepancies may exist between the
ways lay people and health professionals perceive family history, hindering effective use
of family history in cancer risk communication and promotion of health behaviours. This
study aimed to address this gap and explore lay constructs of family history of cancer in
relation to perceptions of disease causation and inheritance of genes, perceived risk, and
risk management among Filipino first-degree relatives (FDRs) of cancer patients.
Employing a qualitative descriptive research design, the investigators also identified
variations in meanings of family history between siblings and children of affected
relatives, and between Filipinos with first-degree relatives diagnosed with early onset

cancer from those with relatives who developed cancer at typical ages.

A purposive sample of seventeen (17) individuals, who are siblings or offspring of
patients diagnosed with colorectal cancer at the University of the Philippines-Philippine
General Hospital were interviewed. Qualitative content analysis (QCA) and continuous
comparative analysis (CCA) were employed to identify and compare themes and patterns

in the interviews.

xiii

The findings of the study confirm the constructs of the Model of Familial Risk
Perception. Perceived familial and personal risks are significantly influenced by the
individual’s understanding of their family history of disease, disease inheritance, and
perceived control. One new finding is the presence of two opposite definitions of “family
history” among Filipino first-degree relatives, which affect how they recognize and
classify their familial risk of developing the disease. These variations in meanings and
understanding of family history have been found to influence participants’ understanding

of their familial risks and personal sense of vulnerability.

The study highlights potential differences between the way Filipino FDRs and clinicians
determine and understand familial risk of cancer, and points out the need for exploration

of these discrepancies for a more effective risk communication.

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
Background of the Study

The Philippines reflects the global trend of rising incidence and deaths from
cancer. For more than a decade, the disease retains its position as the third leading cause
of mortality and a top cause of morbidity in the country (Department of Health, 2012).
Acknowledging the increasing burden of this disease, programs are promulgated to
address common preventable cancers, which include the top five types of malignancy in
the country — lungs, breast, cervix-uteri, liver and colorectal malignancies. Among these
five cancer types, incidences of breast and colorectal cancer — cancer types known to
have a hereditary nature — are noted to follow a steady rise while the other three are on a

decline (Ngelangel & Wang, 2002; Sabili, 2012).

Cancer is a multi-factorial disease resulting from the interplay of genetics and
environment; and family history is considered a strong independent predictor of an
individual's lifetime risk of developing the disease (NCI, 2012). Various studies on
cancer highlight the relevance of family history or pedigree analysis in identifying at risk
individuals and families, and providing them appropriate cancer counseling and screening
recommendations. With the expanding role of family history in cancer risk assessment
and management, the need for effective risk communication that can spur health-
promoting behaviours heightens. However, evidence suggests a divergence on the
understanding of lay people of what exactly constitutes having a family history of cancer

from that of the health professionals (Helman, 2002; Hunt et al, 2001).

Clinicians often use biomedical models in assessing and managing disease risks
while lay people are likely to base their perception of vulnerability on their illness
experience, personal and cultural understanding of inheritance, and other factors. This
gap can lead to discrepancies in risk perception and can subsequently result in

misunderstandings between the clinician and the client.

A positive family history can be either a prompt or a blockade to behaviour
change (Silberberg et al, 1998); and numerous studies on disease risk perception and its
impact on health behaviour support this statement. In a study on perceptions of colorectal
cancer among Filipino-Americans, having a close relative with cancer is associated with
heightened perceived risk of developing the disease (Afable-Munsuz et al, 2011). This
result is also reflected in similar studies on other ethnicities, which also noted that those
who consider themselves at a higher risk due to family history are more likely to comply
with screening practices and lifestyle changes. However, even with the recognition of the
influence of personal constructs of risk on coping and risk management, few researches
dealt with exploring how people reached decisions about their familial risk and how they
made sense of this risk. Even fewer studies delve on this topic in relation to cancer and in

the context of Asian culture, let alone in the Filipino setting.

Evidence suggests that risk communication and promotion of health behaviours
are more effective when the clinician has a clearer understanding of the client’s cultural
norms and personal notions that explain their health beliefs, attitudes, and practice
(Stewart, 2001; Backett & Davison, 1995). Furthermore, studies show that personal and
social context of family history can influence a person’s disease perception, and sense of

vulnerability and control (Walter & Emery, 2005).
2

Living in a nation where a number of constructs on health and illness exists,
Filipino health professionals — including genetic counselors — face a great challenge of
incorporating these varying personal notions of disease and risk to communicate well
with the Filipino client. As such, the investigators of this study decided to explore and
describe Filipino constructs of their family history of cancer in relation to notions of
inheritance of genes and causal beliefs, perceived risk and risk management, with the
hope that the findings of the study will help improve clinician-patient communication,

and identify and address gaps in knowledge.
Statement of the Problem

This study generally aims to explore and describe how Filipinos, aged 18 to 59
years old with at least one first-degree relative affected with cancer, understand and come

to terms with their risk of developing cancer due to family history.
Objectives of the Study

This study generally seeks to explore and describe the perceptions of Filipinos
aged 18 to 59 years old with at least one first-degree relative (FDR) diagnosed with
cancer regarding their risk of developing cancer due to family history. Specifically, the

study aims to meet the following specific objectives:

1. To explore on lay notions of family history of cancer in relation to
perceptions of disease causation and inheritance (i.e., inherited gene risks),

perceived risk, and risk management

2. To identify and compare variations in meanings of family history between:
a) Filipinos with first-degree relatives diagnosed with cancer at less than 50
years old (early onset) and those with FDRs diagnosed with cancer at 50
years and above (typical onset)

b) Siblings and children of Filipinos diagnosed with colorectal cancer
Significance of the Study

This is one of the pioneering studies that explored lay Filipinos’ notions of their
family history of cancer and discover how these people give meaning to their familial risk
of chronic disease. The research also has the potential to highlight possible differences in
the way Filipino patients and clinicians interpret familial risk of cancer. By exploring the
views of Filipinos regarding their cancer risk due to family history, health professionals,
such as genetic counselors, will be able to gain a better understanding of a Filipino
patient’s risk perception, and develop appropriate risk communication techniques that
promote informed choices and risk management through improved health-seeking
behaviours and utilization of appropriate screening tests. Furthermore, the findings of this
study can aid in the refinement or development of a model of familial risk perception that

incorporates Filipino culture and specific beliefs.

With the increasing number of cancer cases in the country, the study may also
serve as a resource for the development of a family history risk assessment tool
specifically made for Filipinos, which can help advance the potential of family history or
pedigree as a public health and genomic tool for cancer prevention and health promotion

in the Philippines.

Scope and Delimitations of the Study

This study sought to understand Filipino perceptions of their risk of developing
cancer due to their family history of the said disease by exploring how the participants
understand and make sense of their familial risk. The scope of this research included
identification of variations in perceptions among participants, a heterogeneous sample of
individuals. Employing a qualitative descriptive research design, this study only
described the lay notions of Filipinos aged 18 and above regarding the subject matter. It

was not the scope of this study to test hypotheses or to make generalizations.

For the purpose of avoiding potential confounders in the analysis of gathered data,
the study only recruited participants who are first-degree relatives of patients diagnosed
with primary colorectal cancer (CRC). Given this scenario, the study findings may not
fully reflect the perceptions of those with first-degree relatives who presented with a

different kind of malignancy.

CHAPTER II
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

Review of Related Literature

The Role of Family History in Cancer Management

Family history or family health history is clinically defined as a record of genetic
relationships within a family together with the health information of individual family
members (National Institutes of Health, 2012). When in diagram format, the family
history is referred to as pedigree or family tree. According to the National Human
Genome Research Institute, a complete family history is a three-generation pedigree,
which includes health-related data of an individual’s grandparents, parents, aunts and
uncles, siblings, cousins, children, and nieces and nephews. This three-generation
pedigree serves as a diagnostic or risk assessment tool for rare single-gene or

chromosomal disorders, and even for multi-factorial diseases such as cancer.

Various studies recognize family history as an independent risk factor for many
chronic diseases, including cancer or malignant neoplasm (Yoon et al, 2002). The United
States Department of Health and Human Services (2004) described family history as “a
window into a person’s genome” that clues in clinicians to medical conditions running in
the family. Since relatives have many factors in common, including their genes,
environment and lifestyle, the presence of patterns of disease in the pedigree can help
healthcare professionals determine personal or familial risk of developing a particular

condition.

For colorectal cancer, the patient’s family history plays an important role in
disease prevention through identification of susceptible individuals. In the absence of
genetic testing, such as in the situation of developing countries like the Philippines,
family history can be used as a tool to stratify risk for cancer and thereby identify
individuals or families who are at a higher-than-average chance of developing the disease
(Yoon, 2002). Scheuner et al (1997) proposed a way to stratify risk based on family
history as demonstrated in Table 2.1. The criteria identified by Scheuner are applicable to

common chronic diseases known to have a genetic component, including cancer.

Table 2.1 Risk stratification based on family history of chronic disease, adapted from
Scheuner et al, 1997

Risk Category Family History Description

HIGH RISK e Premature disease in first degree relative

¢ Two affected 1* degree relatives

¢ One 1* degree relative with late or unknown disease onset and
an affected 2"! degree relative with premature disease from the
same lineage

¢ Two 2™ degree maternal or paternal relatives with at least one
having premature onset of disease

e Three or more affected paternal or maternal relatives

e Presence of a “moderate risk” family history on both sides of
the pedigree

MODERATE RISK. « One 1* degree relative with late or unknown onset of disease
« Two 2" degree relative from the same lineage with late or
unknown disease onset
AVERAGE RISK ¢ No affected relatives
« Only one affected 2"4 degree relative


Scheuner’s risk stratification for common chronic diseases is one of the bases of
guidelines in categorizing cancer risks of patients based on factors such as the number of
affected relatives, the age of cancer onset and the consultand’s degree of relationship with
the affected member. These guidelines for risk stratification are further improved to
consider the different types of cancer. Table 2.2 provides a summary of risk stratification
using family history that is specific for colorectal cancer.

Table 2.2 Colorectal cancer family history risk stratification, adapted from CDC-Public
Health Genomics (2014) and NCCN (2013)

HIGH RISK

At least one 1* degree relative with a large number of adenomas throughout the colon
(suspected FAP)

Two or more 1* or 2" degree relatives on the same side of the family diagnosed with
colon cancer, with at least one of these:
¢ Multiple colon cancers in one person
¢ Colon cancer before age 50
e With at least one relative with cancer of endometrium, ovary, stomach, small bowel,
renal pelvis, ureter, biliary tract or brain (suspected HNPCC)

Three or more 1* degree, or combination of 1‘ and 2" degree relatives on the same side
of the family diagnosed with bowel cancer (suspected HNPCC)

MODERATE RISK

One 1* degree relative with colon cancer diagnosed before age 50 (but without the high
risk features listed above)

Two 1* degree or one first- and one second-degree relative(s) on the same side of the
family with colon cancer diagnosed at any age

AVERAGE RISK

No personal history of bowel cancer, advanced adenoma or chronic ulcerative colitis or
no close relative with colon cancer

With one 1" or 2" degree relative with colon cancer diagnosed at age 50 or older


Various aspects of family history are factored in defining an individual’s cancer
risk level, as demonstrated in Table 2.2. One such factor is the degree of biologic
relationship between the individual and the affected relative. The closer the biologic
relationship of affected relatives to an individual, the higher the risk of hereditary cancer
syndrome, and consequently, the higher the chance of developing the disease (Church &
Casey, 2004). First-degree relatives with colorectal cancers are considered more
significant than second-degree or more distant relatives when assessing individual risks.
Having just one first-degree relative diagnosed with colorectal cancer puts a person’s risk
from the average lifetime risk of five percent (5%) to a moderate lifetime risk of ten to
fifteen percent (10-15%) or higher (NCI, 2013). This cancer risk further amplifies as the

number of affected close relatives and affected generations increases.

Another aspect considered in risk stratification based on family history is the age
of cancer onset or cancer diagnosis. Colorectal cancer (CRC) incidence increases with
age, with most cancers, identified as sporadic, commonly occurring at age 50 and above
(NCI, 2013). Hence, the presence of early-onset colorectal cancer in the family (i.e.,
cancer development at less than 50 years old) raises the probability that the patient may
have an inherited or familial cancer type instead of a sporadic one. Because of the higher
likelihood of inherited gene mutations, which increases the chance of developing early
onset cancer, first-degree relatives of those diagnosed with CRC before age 50 are
advised to undergo colorectal cancer screening at 40 years of age or younger (i.e., ten
years before the earliest age of onset in the family). Patients with early onset cancer are
also referred to genetic counseling services for risk assessment, genetics education and

psychosocial counseling.

Studies on Lay Perception of Family History and Disease Risks
International Studies

With the renewed interest in the use of family history as a genetic test and an
independent predictor of individual disease susceptibility for conditions such as cancer
(McGrath & Edwards, 2009), studies on how lay people come to terms with their family

history and perceived vulnerability emerge and become a focus of interest.

In the United Kingdom, Walter and colleagues (2004) did a meta-ethnographic
review of qualitative studies on lay understanding of familiar chronic diseases,
specifically cancer, diabetes and heart disease. These three common chronic diseases are
known to have a genetic basis that makes family history of disease a relevant risk factor.
From the review, the authors conclude that perceived relevance of family history and
one’s personal mental models of disease causation, inheritance and fatalism influence an
individual’s perception of risk or vulnerability. This concept of inheritance, a subset of

perceived disease causation, is a pervading theme in family history studies.

A qualitative study done in Cambridge by Walter et al (2005) exemplifies the
concept of inheritance by noting that a great majority of their participants described
common chronic diseases such as cancer as “coming down the line”, recognizing that the
disease seems to be hereditary in the family. However, acknowledging that a disease runs
in the family does not necessarily equate to a higher perceived personal risk and adoption
of appropriate screening practices. In a study of middle and working class families, Hunt
et al (2001) document ambivalence and doubts about inheritance of disease (i.e., heart

disease), The authors found that although individuals recognize heart disease as running

10

in the family, their perceived personal risks vary and tend to depend on factors such as
their alleged resemblance (e.g., similarities in physical traits, personality, and disposition)
with the affected relative. Some participants reported no perceived increase in risk if they
identified differences with the proband. This belief that one is more at risk if there are
similarities or “likeness” with the side of the family or individual with the disease have
also been documented in a number of articles and studies (Watson et al 2002; Rubinstein,

2011).

In 2005, the Michigan Department of Community Health included family health
history questions regarding colorectal cancer in the Michigan Behavioral Risk Factor
Surveillance System (BRFSS). The intentions of the said additions are to estimate the
prevalence of Michigan adults with at least one first-degree relative with colorectal
cancer (CRC) and assess and compare perception of personal CRC risk and willingness
to make preventative behavioral changes for those with and without a family history of
colorectal cancer. Among the 5,826 survey respondents, an estimated 7.3%
(approximately 425) of Michigan adults are found to have at least one affected first-
degree relative. Thirty-seven percent (37%) of respondents with a family history of CRC
reported a higher than average perceived personal cancer risk while the remaining sixty-
three percent (63%) perceived no increase in their risk of developing CRC even with a
positive history of disease in the family. The reasons behind this ambivalence in risk

perception for those with family history of cancer were not explored in the study.

People’s understanding of their family history of disease affects the way they
perceive their risk of developing a particular condition. This perception of risk is a central
element that compels individuals to adopt preventive health behaviours (Yoon et al,

2002; Sivell, et al, 2008). However, the process by which people make sense of their

disease risk is a complex course influenced by a variety of factors.

McGrath and Edwards (2009) noted that one challenge that hinders effective use
of family history is concerning the way clinicians and lay people define family. Health
professionals use the biologic meaning of family whereas lay people often include those
linked to them emotionally and socially. In some cultures, family is closely associated
with social relationships and not just about gene transfer from one generation to the other
(Finkler, 2005). Among Filipinos, the notion of extended kinship ties in which distant
relatives or adopted individuals become considered members of the family is also
prevalent. This non-congruence on the meaning of family between the clinician and the
client can result to miscommunication as the definitions of family by the clinician and the
layperson produce two different records of kinship — a genetic pedigree from the former
and a family genealogy from the latter (McGrath & Edwards, 2009). Hunt et al (2001)
recommend health professionals to recognize the existence of these differences and be

aware of the personal and cultural notions of family.

The inclusion of non-biologic relatives in reporting family health history is not the
only issue that affects effectiveness of family history as a risk assessment tool. In a study
done by the U.S. Center for Disease Control and Prevention (2004), they noted that
female members of the family are more likely to report the health status of their maternal

relatives as opposed to their paternal counterparts. Furthermore, Green and colleagues
12

(2006) accounted the tendency of patients to consider older generations more than
younger generation relatives when reporting the history of diseases in a family. In the
same study, participants indicate difficulty thinking of their parents’ siblings (i-e., aunt or

uncle) as part of family history due to indirect relatedness.
Local Studies

International studies delving on perceptions of family history of disease involve
investigations of the individual’s concept of disease inheritance. This notion of
inheritance may be equated to the Filipino concept of mana. According to Abad et al
(2004), mana or namamana, in the context of disease acquisition, refers to the passing of
disease traits from one generation to the next. However, this “passing of disease traits”
may not follow the medical model of gene transfer or gene inheritance. For some
Filipinos, physical resemblance or even similarity in personality with the affected relative
could mean a higher chance of developing the same health conditions of the said family
member. Though the concept of namamana is one of the most common Filipino cultural
beliefs on disease causation, this notion in relation to cancer acquisition and personal risk

development is not well documented.

In the Philippines, most cancer studies involving family history and cancer risks
tend to be quantitative in nature and are more focus on identifying risk factors present in
the population that increase the individual’s susceptibility to cancer. Limited research
delves deeper into the understanding of Filipinos about a particular independent risk
factor such as family history of disease and perception of cancer risk; and most of the

latter studies are investigations done with Filipino Americans or migrant Filipinos as

13

participants. In a study by Afable-Munsuz et al (2011) on immigrant and US-born
Filipina women’s orientation toward cancer prevention, in-depth interviews of 50-65 year
old self-identified Filipinas revealed that Filipino women’s notions of health maintenance
are influenced by a set of beliefs about colon cancer that contributed to their
understandings of risks, causes and prevention of the disease. In the discussion of
perceived causes of cancer, family history emerged as one of the three major themes on
causal beliefs. For majority of participants, the lack of family history of cancer puts them
at low risk of developing the disease. One immigrant who has not undergone CRC
screening stated that cancer was not in her worries, as it was not in her family history.
The latter statement illustrates the relationship between causal belief, perceived risk and

screening practices.

Although most of the respondents in the previous study considered themselves at
low risk due to lack of family history, a few felt they were at high risk of developing the
disease because someone in the immediate family (i.e., father, mother, or grandparents)
has been affected by cancer. For these respondents, the presence of family history of
cancer is a major determinant of the cancer development. However, whether this
perceived risk due to family history promotes screening for the said individuals was not

indicated in the study.

14

Family History as a Public Health Tool for Cancer Prevention

The role of family history in risk assessment is expanding to the public health
arena. Family history is a key element in assessing individual and familial risk for
common chronic diseases. This record of kinship clues in health professionals about
medical conditions and risk factors, including genes, environment and lifestyle, running
in the family (Walter & Emery, 2005). Although considered a non-modifiable risk factor,
family history analysis can aid in identifying susceptible members of the family (Yoon et
al, 2009) and can serve as a tool for promoting risk awareness and consequently, health-
seeking behaviours (Yoon et al 2002; Wang et al, 2009), However, collection and
assessment of family history has rarely been utilized in the practice of preventive
medicine (Valdez et al, 2010; Yoon et al, 2009). Even in the context of cancer prevention
and disease management, pedigree analysis is mostly applied in rare cases of cancer
where genetic influence is apparent. In the case of developing countries like the
Philippines, the potential of family history as an instrument for cancer prevention and

early detection is yet to be explored.

Yoon et al (2002), in their evaluation of family history as a prospective public
health tool, noted that there is a need for a new approach to control the incidence of
common chronic diseases. The current public health system focuses on strategies aimed
at the population at large but people may more likely comply with the lifestyle and
screening recommendations if they are convinced in a more personal level, such as taking
into account their family history of disease and then providing a non-generic prevention

program (Yoon et al, 2002).

15

A number of countries have also recognized the significance of family history in
disease prevention. In the United States, the Office of Public Health Genomics has
established the Family History Public Health Initiative last 2002 to increase public
awareness of family history as an important risk factor for cancer, heart disease, and
diabetes, and promote its use in programs aimed at reducing the burden of these diseases
(CDC, 2014). In 2006, the Australian Better Health Initiative started a family history
awareness program that will aid in the identification of individuals who are at increased
risk of developing common chronic diseases in Western Australia. Other developed
countries have also developed related programs with the aim of managing chronic disease

incidence.

Conceptual Framework

Various studies document the influence of family history in risk perception and
behaviour modification (Rubinstein et al, 2011; Walter et al, 2004). People’s
interpretation of their family history of disease impinges on their perception of
vulnerability, which consequently determines adoption of preventive behaviours (Yoon et
al, 2002; Sivell et al, 2008). However, evidence suggests a discrepancy between lay
understanding of family history of disease and the medical perspective, which can lead to
misunderstandings between the client and the clinician (Helman, 2002; Hunt et al, 2001;
Walter et al, 2004). This issue results to a challenge for health professionals to recognize
and explore their clients’ notions of their family medical history, which can be the basis

of a patient-centered approach for communicating risks.

AFFECTED RELATIVE |

i * Acknowledgement of familial risk
= Personal constructs of what
"inane er eet a SALIENCE +—————__ constitutes a family history of cancer

= Personal experience of a relative’s
illness

v
PERSONALIZING PROCESS ee
v * Personal models of health and illness,
PERCEIVED PERSONAL RISK disease causation, and inheritance

« Filipino traditional beliefs about
cancer (E.g. bad luck, fatalism, spirits,
imbalance, etc)

* Risk regulation

(Personal Sense of Vulnerability)

v

RISK MANAGEMENT
(Coping and Control)

« Perceptions of control

= Health-seeking behaviors
(e.g. lifestyle, screening)

= Continued anxiety (worry)

Figure 2.1 Conceptual framework of the study- Model of Familial Risk Perception
(adapted from Walter et al, 2004)

Walter and colleagues (2004), in their meta-ethnographic study on lay perceptions
of family history of common chronic diseases, formulate a conceptual framework that
portrays “how the family history grows in meaning through many routes” until personal
sense of vulnerability or perceived personal risk is developed and managed. The said
framework is adapted in this study, as shown in Figure 2.1, in order to explore the way

Filipinos make sense of their family history of cancer.

18

The framework of this research is adapted from the Model of Familial Risk
Perception proposed by Walter and colleagues (2004), which illustrates the dynamic
process of how lay people interpret their family history of chronic disease and develop
personal risk perceptions. In this study, the said model is revised to focus on cancer as the
disease of choice and to fit the Filipino context. Some of the terms are also adjusted to
conform to those in the study objectives. For instance, the term “personal sense of

vulnerability” in the original model is changed into “perceived personal risk”.

The model takes into account the five interconnected themes that emerged in the
meta-analysis of related qualitative investigations. These five themes — diseases running
in the family, experiencing a relative’s illness, personal mental models, personalizing
vulnerability, and control of familial risk — are reconstructed and incorporated into the
following four main elements that influence an individual’s perception of cancer risk and

coping behaviours:

A. — Salience (of the family history of cancer)

In this study, salience refers to the relevance of having an affected family
member as perceived by the first-degree relative. According to Walter et al
(2004), salience is determined by the acknowledgment of the individual that a
familial risk for the disease exists. The said element is influenced by the
participant’s personal constructs of what constitutes a family history of cancer.
These personal constructs may be developed from a number of factors that make
an individual believe that cancer runs in the family, such as the number of
affected relatives, age of cancer diagnosis, or even emotional closeness with the

affected family member.

B. Personalizing Process

During the personalizing process, individuals with a family history of
disease continuously evaluate factors that make them more or less at risk of
developing cancer (Walter et al, 2004). The individual’s personal models of
health and illness, disease causation and inheritance play an important role in the
interpretation of the salient features of the family history (NCI, 2012; Walter &
Emery, 2005). The way people regulate their risk (risk regulation), which can
involve counting and discounting familial events, comparing similarities and
differences with affected relative(s) and finding patterns within family history,

affect their perception of personal risk to develop cancer.

C. Perceived Personal Risk (Personal Sense of Vulnerability)

Personal sense of vulnerability refers to the individual’s perception of his or
her risk of developing cancer. This perception of personal risk is affected by
changes in salience (e.g., addition of a new relative with cancer) and in personal
mental models (e.g., beliefs on inheritance). An individual’s personal sense of
vulnerability is an important concept to explore as it has the potential to instigate
health-seeking behaviours and compliance with screening recommendations

(Rubinstein et al, 2011; Sivell et al, 2008; Yoon et al, 2002).

D. Risk Management (Coping and Control)

Individuals with a family history of disease such as cancer may hold
different beliefs about the means to control their risk. A person who
acknowledged his or her susceptibility to cancer may adopt health-seeking

behaviours, utilize screening services or gain a stronger intention to undergo

20

future screening (Rubinstein, 2011). Acceptance of familial and personal risks
may ease up the individual’s anxiety or do the opposite (Walter & Emery, 2005).
Perception of control is an important aspect that influences not just the coping
behaviour of the individual but also affects the continuing interpretation of
salience of cancer family history. This study investigated this concept by
exploring how first-degree relatives of cancer patients manage or plan to manage

their risks.

The process of developing one’s personal sense of vulnerability does not follow a
linear pattern, as demonstrated by the conceptual framework (see Figure 2.1). Individuals
arrive at their perception of personal risk through continuous evaluation of new events
and experiences (Rubinstein et al, 2011; Walter et al, 2004). The way people make sense
of their familial risk for cancer is influenced by various factors such as cultural and
personal notions of disease and inheritance; and by exploring these beliefs and their
understanding of their family history of cancer, a culturally competent tool or strategy to

communicate familial and personal risks can be developed.

21

Synthesis

Most studies relating to family history and cancer risk perception of first-degree
relatives generally focus on identifying the relationship between family history, perceived
risk and adoption of screening practices; and results of these researches have supported
the idea of perceived susceptibility due to family history as a compelling factor that
promotes lifestyle and behaviour modification, including screening compliance. In this
study, these concepts were explored in the context of Filipino culture. However, in
addition to that, the study also elucidated how first-degree relatives, specifically siblings
and children of Filipino cancer patients, understand and give meaning to the presence of
cancer history in the family. The latter entailed exploration of Filipino notions of

inheritance, risk bargaining or management, and coping strategies.

First-degree relatives of patients (i.e., parents, siblings, children) with cancer are
often chosen as participants in studies on cancer risks due to family history. This is
because FDRs have the highest risk of developing cancer when one in the family is
affected by the disease. However, there is lack of research comparing perceptions
regarding family history of siblings and children of affected relatives. Considering that
the groups come from two generations in the family (i.e., for siblings, the same
generation as the affected relative while children are in the younger cohort), it may be
interesting to identify similarities and differences in the way they give meaning to their
family history of cancer. Perceptions on risk due to family history of those with early
onset and typical onset cancer family history were also be investigated. Having a history
of early onset cancer (cancer diagnosis at age less than 50 years old) in the family is
associated with increased risk for familial and inherited type of colorectal cancer.

22

McGrath and Edwards (2009) noted that more research is not needed to document
that culture influences illness beliefs and practices but there is a need for more data on
how to incorporate these beliefs into a system of collecting family history. In the
Philippine setting where nil to limited data regarding the subject matter exists, this
research could aid in providing a structure that can be the basis of plans to create a

culture-specific family history assessment tool for Filipinos.

23

Operational Definition of Terms

Family history of cancer refers to having at least one first-degree relative
diagnosed with colorectal cancer. In this study, the investigators explored the personal

constructs of the participants on when they think cancer runs in the family.

Filipino traditional beliefs about cancer, in this study, refers to folk beliefs about
the causes of cancer, including rituals or practices to prevent or cure cancer. These may
be notions that the participant is aware of but may or may not believe in (hence, not
falling under the category of personal model of disease causation). In the interview guide,
this concept was elucidated by asking the participants about the beliefs in their family

and/or community about cancer, cancer causation and management.

First-degree relative, also called primary relative or FDR, refers to the parents,
siblings and children of an individual. In this study, the term first-degree relative referred

to siblings and children of patients diagnosed with colorectal cancer.

Personal model of disease causation pertains to the perception of participants on
the cause(s) of cancer. The personal model of disease causation may mirror the medical

perspective or involve one’s cultural notions about cancer and its cause.

Personal model of inheritance can be considered as a subset of personal models
of disease causation. In this study, it refers to how the participants define and understand

the term “inheritance” or “namamana” (in vernacular).

24

Perceived personal risk, also called personal sense of vulnerability, refers to the
individual’s perception of personal risk — that is, his or her thoughts on the likelihood of

developing cancer given a history of the disease in at least one family member.

Risk regulation refers to how the individual minimize (or maximize) his or her

perceived personal risk by counting or discounting events (e.g., bargaining).

Risk management or Coping & Control refers to how the individual manage his or
her personal risk for cancer. This may include changes in lifestyle, adoption of screening

recommendations, or compliance with preventive strategies.

25

CHAPTER II

METHODOLOGY

Study Design

The study employed a qualitative descriptive research design that allows for
straight descriptions of the phenomena of interest, and allows observation and description
of a behaviour, event or concept without influencing it. Since the study aimed to explore
the understanding of Filipinos of their family history of cancer, the qualitative
methodology allowed for in-depth understanding of the meaning people have constructed
concerning the certain phenomena, such as the presence of familial history of cancer,
through naturalistic inquiry such as semi-structured interviews (University of Utah,
College of Health, 2009). Qualitative studies can also provide valuable insights into the
local perspectives of the population studied as it produces culturally specific and
contextually rich data through different forms of inquiry. This aspect of qualitative
method fit and complemented the aims of this research, especially since we sought to

understand the Filipino constructs of their family history of cancer.

Participants and Study Setting

A purposive sample of seventeen (17) Filipino individuals aged 18 to 59 years old
with at least one first-degree relative diagnosed with cancer (i.e., colorectal cancer)
participated in this study. There were no refusals and withdrawals of participants during

the recruitment and data collection.

26

Given that the specific objectives of the study called for comparison between first-
degree relatives of patients diagnosed of early onset cancer (<50 years old) and those who
developed cancer at typical ages (50 and above), and between sibling and child, the

sample size allowed for at least six (6) participants per sub-group:

= 8 siblings of cancer probands
= 9 offspring of cancer probands
= 8 FDRs of probands with early-onset cancer

= 9 FDRs of probands with typical-onset cancer

This followed Creswell’s (1998) suggestion of a qualitative sample size of 5 to 25
and Morse’ (1994) proposition of at least six participants (adapted from Mason, 2010).
An initial analysis for data saturation was done, and data saturation was achieved at the
twelfth participant based on this preliminary analysis. Additional participants were
recruited to ensure that data saturation is achieved, resulting to a total of seventeen (17)

participants.

This research study recruited first-degree relatives of patients with colorectal
cancer (CRC) from the University of the Philippines-Philippine General Hospital (UP-
PGH). The participants recruited were those siblings or children of CRC patients who
were undergoing or had undergone chemotherapy at the institution’s Cancer Institute,

within six-months from the time of recruitment.

UP-PGH, a tertiary state-owned institution, was identified as the ideal setting for
recruitment as it caters to a number of Filipinos from different areas of the country. As
such, it has the potential to provide study participants that reflect a range of sex, age,

27

social class, educational level, degree of familial cancer risk (based on number of
affected relatives), and varying family size. As a tertiary hospital and with the
establishment of the Cancer Institute, UP-PGH receives thousands of consults for various
kinds of cancer each year. For colorectal cancer (CRC), approximately 180 individuals
(with a sex ratio of almost 1:1) from a number of newly diagnosed cases undergo surgical
management for CRC at the UP-PGH annually (Kaw, et al, 2002). Seventeen percent
(17%) or at least thirty of those who have colorectal cancer surgery per year are found to

have developed cancer at less than 40 years of age.

Sampling Strategy

Stratified purposive sampling strategy was employed in this study as it allows
exploration of groups of interest identified based on related literature. According to
Teddlie and Yu (2007), stratified purposive sampling, also called quota sampling, permits
the investigator to first divide a group of interest into strata or smaller groups and then
select a small number of cases or units to study intensively within each subgroup. The
aim of this sampling method was to discover and describe variations and similarities
between the identified subgroups or strata. This purpose of stratified purposive sampling
fit the study’s second specific objective, which called for the comparison between the
perceptions of siblings and children of patients, and FDRs of those diagnosed to have

early onset cancer and of those who developed cancer at age 50 and above.

28

As mentioned above, at least six (6) participants for each of the four comparison
groups (1 — siblings group, 2 — offspring group, 3 — FDRs of probands with early-onset
cancer, 4 — FDRs of probands with typical-onset cancer) were recruited. At least three (3)
participants who were either a sibling/offspring of a proband with early-onset cancer or
sibling/offspring of a proband with typical-onset cancer were also recruited as interest

subgroups.

Table 3.1 illustrates the identified groups and subgroups of interest in the study.

Table 3.1 Comparison groups based on age of cancer diagnosis and relation of participant
to patient, and corresponding sample sizes

Patient’s Age Of Cancer Diagnosis
PARENT ' FDR of proband with cancer | FDR of proband with cancer
CHARACTERISTIC: i . TOTAL
es ‘ diagnosed at <5S0 years old diagnosed at >50 years old aa
Relation to Patient AD.
(=6) (n=6)
Siblings of patients Siblings with patients
Siblings of proband (n=6) | diagnosed with CRC at age | diagnosed with CRC at age 50 6
Jess than 50 (n=3) and above (n=3)
Children of patients Children of patients

Children of proband (n=6) | diagnosed with CRC at age
less than 50 (n=3)

diagnosed with CRC at age 50 6
and above (n=3)

TOTAL = 12 6 | 6

One of the dimensions used to stratify the patient group was their age of cancer
diagnosis (as shown in Table 3.1). The sample of cancer patients with colorectal cancer
(CRC) identified from the list of patients scheduled for follow-up (i.e., chemotherapy) or
from the registry was first divided into two strata — those diagnosed with cancer under
age 50, and those diagnosed with the disease at 50 years and above. The age of cancer
diagnosis of affected members in the family was identified as a key dimension for
stratification as it is an important aspect of family history intake that affects risk

calculation and subsequent recommendations. For colorectal cancers, individuals with

29


first-degree relatives diagnosed with the disease under age 50 are considered to be at an
increased risk of developing cancer compared to their counterparts (NCCN, 2014; NCI,
2013). In clinical settings such as in the Philippine General Hospital, patients identified to
have colorectal cancer at a younger age (i.e., <50 years of age) and their families are
referred to genetic counseling services. By stratifying the sample based on the affected
relative’s age of diagnosis, the investigators were able to explore variations and

similarities between these two groups’ perceptions of their family history of cancer.

Aside from comparing based on age of cancer diagnosis, the investigators also
sought to explore differences in perceptions of family history between siblings and
children of affected relatives. Both siblings and children are considered first-degree
relatives and having a close biologic relationship to patients diagnosed with colorectal
cancer gained them a two- to three-fold increase risk for developing CRC. Comparison of
these two groups of first-degree relatives allowed identification of similarities and

differences in understanding of family history between two family generations.

Review of literature identified sex as a key element that influences understanding
of family history and development of perceived risk. Individuals with a family history of
cancer may have a tendency to identify with affected relatives of the same sex. Walter
and Emery (2005), in their study on chronic diseases and lay constructions of family
history, identified “likeness” with the affected relative — the presence of similarities in
physical characteristics (e.g., sex), personality, mannerisms or feelings with family
members — as one of the factors people believe can increase their chance of developing

the same condition.

30

Sex of the first-degree relative was also considered in the identification of interest
groups. Hence, the investigators ensured that both male and females participants were

included in the study.
Recruitment Process

In order to gain interview participants who provided the data to achieve the
research objectives, this study followed a two-step recruitment process, wherein the first
step involved selection of patients whose first-degree relatives were to be recruited as
research participants, and the second step demonstrated the recruitment (including
informed consent process) of these first-degree relatives. Figure 3.1 demonstrates how

recruitment of interview participants were done.

31

List of CRC Determine patients whose FDRs will be recruited as study
patients participants based on the following criteria: Patient must:
undergoing * Be diagnosed with colorectal cancer
chemotherapy at ——> * Have had CRC-related surgery within the last six months
UP-PGH Cancer = Have a positive histopathology result
Institute * Have FDR(s) residing in Metro Manila at the time of interview

If no FOR (sibling/child) has If an FDR (sibling/child) has
accompanied the patient accompanied the patient

Recruit FDRs referred by the Recruit the FDR (sibling and/or child) of the identified patient as
identified patients (or accompanying potential participant. Note the following inclusion criteria: FDR must:
telatives, if patient is unable to refer). = Be a Filipino citizen, aged 18 to 59 years old
Using a script (see Appendix II.A "= Be of first-degree blood relation to the patient
&B), patient or the accompanying = Reside or be available within the vicinity of Metro Manila at the
relative will be asked to refer FDRs time of interview
who meet the inclusion criteria. = Have no severe mental condition/life-threatening disease

= Be able to read and speak Tagalog or English

| }

Provide contact
Informed consent process for the FDRs —Refusals_, information in case
of change in decision
Agreed to participate
(signed th ICF)

Interview at least 6 participants per stratum (see Table 3)
3 siblings of patients diagnosed with early onset CRC (dx at <50)
3 children of patients diagnosed with early onset CRC (dx at <50)
3 siblings of patients diagnosed with typical onset CRC (dx at 250)
3 children of patients diagnosed with typical onset CRC (dx at 250)
*Recruitment will continue until data saturation is achieved.

Figure 3.1 Recruitment process of interview participants

From the list of CRC patients undergoing chemotherapy at UP-PGH Cancer
Institute, the investigator determined the patients, whose FDRs (i.e., sibling and/or child)

were to be recruited, based on the following patient eligibility criteria.

32


The patient must:
= Be diagnosed with colorectal cancer (CRC)
= Have had CRC-related surgery within the last six months
= Have a positive histopathology result confirming CRC diagnosis
= Have a first-degree relative (i.e., sibling and/or child) residing in Metro

Manila at the time of interview

The first-degree relatives of the identified CRC patients were recruited during the
follow-up visit of the patient (e.g., chemotherapy session of the CRC patient). When no
FDR (i.e., sibling or child) had accompanied the patient at the time of consultation, the
patient or the accompanying family member (a relative but not a sibling or child of the
patient) was approached. Patients were approached only if approval from the physician

in-charge of the patient at the time of recruitment is received.

Using a script, the investigator described the study and requested patients to refer
their eligible first-degree relatives (i.e., siblings and/or child). Those who assented were
asked to provide referral information about their first-degree relatives, which includes the
name and telephone or contact information of the FDRs. In the case where the patient
could not provide referral information, the person(s) who accompanied the patient during

the clinic visit were asked to refer first-degree relatives of the patient.

Prior to referral, patients and/or the person accompanying them were informed of
the eligibility criteria for first-degree relatives. Inclusion criteria were constructed to
identify a study sample that is accessible and has the characteristics that meet the

expectations of this research.

33

The first-degree relatives that were recruited as a potential study participant met

the following inclusion criteria:

" A Filipino citizen, aged 18 to 59 years old

« A first-degree blood relation to the patient

* Resided or available within the vicinity of Metro Manila at the time of
interview

= Have no severe mental condition or life-threatening disease

" Able to read and speak Tagalog or English

The investigator approached the potential participants, explained about the study
and invited them for an orientation. Only FDRs who met the inclusion criteria and signed
the informed consent form (ICF) were included in the study. Participants, who had signed
or not signed the ICF, were informed that they have the right to withdraw from the study
at any given time, for any reason, or no reason at all, with or without notification to the
investigator. In these cases, data collected from the said participants would be included in
the data analysis, unless the participant requested to have their data destroyed or excluded
from it. Another individual would be recruited as replacement if data saturation was still
not achieved at the time of withdrawal. However, no withdrawals happened during the

study period.

34

Data Collection Tools and Procedure

Primary source data were collected directly from the participants of the study
through face-to-face interviews and pedigree or family history intake. All data collection
materials were reviewed and pilot tested to identify and address potential errors and
biases. The interview happened at a place inside UP-PGH mutually agreed by the
interviewer and participants, ensuring that an atmosphere of privacy and confidentiality

was attained.

Semi-Structured Interview Guide

A semi-structured interview guide was developed with basis from two related
studies (Walter & Emery, 2007 and Hunt et al, 2001; See Appendix). To suit the study
objectives, the prompt questions in the interview guide explored the following aspects:
(1) the participant’s personal constructs of their family history of cancer, which also
includes their understanding of the cause of disease, (2) their perceived familial and

personal risk, and (3) their means of managing these perceived risks.

To allow further exploration and encourage sharing of thoughts, the interview
guide adopted a funnel-approach of questioning and then converted to Filipino (Tagalog).
This was pre-tested by students prior to data collection and piloted by at least three (3) of
the study participants to check if the tool was easy to understand and if it collected the
data needs of the study. Interviews were done by the same investigator, recorded using a
digital recorder with participants’ consent and transcribed verbatim by a research

assistant.

35

The interviews were done inside one of the consultation rooms at the UP-PGH
Cancer Institute. Privacy and confidentiality were ensured during the interviews. Notable

excerpts were translated to English for content analysis and result discussion.

Before face-to-face interviews, participants were asked to answer a self-
administered questionnaire that describes their demographic profile. Data on participant’s
age, sex, civil status, religion, educational background, ethnic group and work or source

of livelihood were derived from this tool.
Pedigree or Family Health History

A three-generation paper pedigree (starting from the proband and consultand) was
collected from the participant after the interview to ascertain relationships, ages of cancer
diagnosis and cancer-related deaths in the family. The pedigree provided a “pictorial
representation of diseases within a family”, allowed assessment of hereditary contribution
to disease, and permitted stratification of cancer risk (Wattendorf & Hadley, 2005). Data
on the participant’s maternal and paternal ancestry/ethnic origin, family size, number of
affected relatives, cancer risk category, and the presence or absence of consanguineous
relationship within the family were derived from this instrument. In this study, the

pedigree was used to analyse the actual risk of the participants.

36

Data Analysis
Background

Qualitative content analysis (QCA) was used to meet the objectives of this study.
This approach allows for exploration of understanding or perspectives on a particular
phenomenon, and provides an opportunity for quantification of data. This quantifying
aspect of qualitative content analysis makes it different from thematic analysis, which is
another usual method used in qualitative data analysis. Figure 3.2 demonstrates the

similarities and differences between these two qualitative data analysis methods.

Analyzing narrative Analyzing nursing
materials of life sensitive
stories La phenomena,
concentrations exploratory workon
the unknown
—~—___
phenomenon
Realist/essentialist ‘Communication
and constructionist, theory, factist
factist perspective Prmcerract perspective
background
[_tematcamis ke Pee Content analysis
Descriptionand Description and
interpretation, both more interpretation,
inductive and both inductive and
deductive, deductive, danger
emphasizingcontext, of missing context,
integration of bed pedrarmes possibility of finding
manifest and latent a theme based on
contents, drawing the frequency of its
thematicmap, non- occurrence, division
linear analysis ‘of manifest and
Process, no peer latent contents, non-
checking linear analysis
process
Qualifying Qualitative design Quantifying

eS

Figure 3.2 Main characteristics of thematic analysis & qualitative content analysis in the
continuum of qualitative methodology (adopted from Vaismoradi, et al., 2013)

37

Unit of Analysis, Processing & Coding Method

The unit of analysis for this study was the text (words) transcribed from the
interviews. The analysis generally followed an inductive approach. However, both
theory-driven codes (i.e., codes based on the conceptual framework used in this study)
and data-driven codes (i.e., codes derived from analysis of interviews) were used in the

data coding process and interpretation.

The interviews were transcribed verbatim by an encoder. The transcriptions were
then reviewed and rechecked by the first author. Each interview was read several times.
Open coding was initially done, and data saturation was analysed based on this initial
assessment. Refinement and organization of codes was the next step taken. Data were
then systematically analysed for codes, meaning units and condensed meaning units. The
codes and meaning units were classified into sub-categories, categories, and themes. The
themes used in this study are based on the theoretical framework adapted from Watson et
al (see Conceptual Framework). The table below shows the operational definition of

terms used in the coding process.

38

Table 3.2 Operational definition of terms used in the coding process

Code the label attached to a phrase or group of words

phrases or groups of words from the transcriptions that reflect a
meaning or code; in this study, the meaning unit is the group of

Meaning Unit words, in Filipino and verbatim format, from the interview
transcripts
Condensed shortened meaning of the text / transcription used; in this study,
Bae the condensed meaning unit is a shortened English translation of
Meaning Unit

the meaning behind the interview text (in Filipino)

Sub-categories groups of codes with content that shared a commonality

grouping imposed on the coding segments or sub-categories to

oes reduce the number of data pieces for analysis

higher level of categorisation to identify a major element of the
Themes content analysis; in this study, themes are based on the major
elements on the study’s theoretical or conceptual framework

An external reviewer was asked to review the coding process done. The
processing, analysis and interpretation were also reviewed by the thesis panel (composed

of five experts from fields related to this research).

Assessing Data Saturation

According to O'Reily & Parker (2012) and Walker (2012), data saturation is
reached when enough information has been collected to replicate the study. Guest et al
(2006), on the other hand, noted that saturation is achieved when “additional information
has been attained, and further coding is no longer feasible”. Fusch and Ness (2015) noted
that “when the amount of variation in the data is levelling off, and new no new
perspectives on the research question”, the study may be considered approaching
saturation. To assess this, Brod et al. (2009) recommend constructing a ‘saturation grid’
listing the major topics or research questions against interviews or other sources, and

ensuring all bases have been covered. The latter was adopted and employed in this study.

39

Table 3.3 shows a sample of the saturation grid used in this study. Initial data

saturation was recorded at participant 12.

Table 3.3 Sample data saturation grid

3 P4 PS P6 P7 PB PO P10 Pil P12 P13 P14 PiS

'p3|p4[p5|p6]P7|P8|P9 [P10

General data saturation at participant no.: ay

Q1: Understanding of Fhx
Involves the concept of inheritance, lahi, ancestry, lineage, th
Refers to relatives having the same disease as proband
History of diseases in the family / diseases mostly presenting]
in the family| _

|Q2: Beliefs of family & community on cancer
First thing that comes to mind: "Cancer is deadly"|. |
Cancer is synonymous to death}

Cancer is a result of vices|

Cancer is a disease of the affluent|

CRC is caused by intake of specific foods

CRC is due to old age; sex bias|

Cancer is inherited)

CRC resulted from a previously neglected condition}
CRCis nota familiar disease}

|Q3: Personal beliefs on the cause of cancer
CRC is caused by intake of specific foods/poor eating habits},
Cancer is inherited)

Everyone has cancer (cells), cancer develops when cancer

The Data Analysis Process

Gathering and analysing data can be conducted concurrently or sequentially
(Chamberlain et al, 2004). In this study, the concurrent approach was used during the first
seven (7) participants. Open coding and initial interpretation of data from the first seven
(7) participants was done in parallel to check for data saturation and to evaluate the
interview process to allow for refinement. For the subsequent ten (10) participants, data

was first gathered and encoded before coding and analysis were done.

Table 3.4 shows the steps taken to analyse the data.

40

Table 3.4 Data analysis process

PHASE

ACTIVITIES

Preparation
Phase

= Participant interviews were transcribed verbatim.

= Demographic data of participants were encoded in Microsoft Excel.
= Pedigrees were drawn using an online pedigree maker — Progeny
Genetics (link: https://pedigree.progenygenetics.com/).

= The first author reviewed and rechecked the transcribed interviews by
listening to the recorded interviews and comparing them to the
transcribed texts.

= The transcripts were read several times (to obtain a sense of whole).

= Anonymity was ensured: All soft copies / encoded data (including
interviews) do not have patient and participant names. Participant
codes were used as label.

Organizing
Phase

= Open coding was done. The following were considered during the
coding:
- Using a preliminary model (Conceptual Framework) > initial
list of coding categories from the model > inductive analysis of
new categories/themes > modified model (applicable for S.
Obj. 1)
- No theories > inductive analysis > constant comparative
method (applicable for S. Obj. 2)
- Unit of analysis (texts) can be assigned to more than one
category simultaneously
= Pedigree analysis was done.
= Sample meaning units and condensed meaning units were derived
from the transcripts.

= Codes were then collected under potential sub-categories, categories,
and themes.

= A data grid (in Microsoft Excel) was used during the coding process.

= Emerged coding clusters were compared.

= Emerged coding clusters were compared in relation to the entire data
set.

= Comparison between groups (based on the study objectives) was done
using a comparative grid.

Reporting
Phase

= The data analysis processed was documented (as reflected in this
Chapter).

" The results were reported through data grids, comparative grids,
narrative format and conceptual framework.

= Terminologies used were defined (unit of analysis, meaning unit,
condensed meaning unit, code, category, or theme).

* A final product of the analysis done was derived: emerged
categories/themes, revised conceptual framework, discussions, and
recommendations for genetic counselors (Chapter IV).

41


Constant comparative analysis (CCA) was employed to compare themes and
patterns in each interview from those of other interviews. Constant comparison assures
that all data are systematically compared to all other data in the data set. This assures that
all information produced would be analyzed rather than potentially disregarded on

thematic grounds (The Qualitative Report, 2013).

The standard process of how one should “go about constant comparison” is yet to
be determined (Boieije, 2002). As such, the investigators decided on employing Boeije’s
(2002) approach to using CCA as a method, which suggests comparing contents within a
single interview, between interviews within the same group, and of interviews from

different groups.

Data were presented in narrative form and through tabular format with table rows
named based on major themes and subthemes (categories). The latter strategy allowed

ease in making comparisons and similarities across individual accounts.

42

Ethical Considerations

Procedure for Participant Recruitment and Informed Consent

The proposed research underwent ethical review by the Ethics Review Board of
the University of the Philippines-Philippine General Hospital (UP-PGH) for approval
before its implementation. All participants were oriented that they are participating in a
research and that this study is being conducted by a student as a course requirement for a

master’s degree.

Recruitment of Interview Participants (First-Degree Relatives)

All participants of the study (first-degree relatives or FDRs of cancer patients)
received an informed consent form (ICF). Participants were oriented about the study and
informed of their rights before signing the informed consent form. Prospective
participants were also informed of why they were approached and how their information
was obtained. All questions were entertained and answered accordingly. Voluntary
participation without undue force or coercion were emphasized and participants were
notified of their right to withdraw from the study at any given time and to withhold
information they deemed private without any form of penalty or loss of benefits from this
study. A thorough discussion of their rights as human participants was included in the
informed consent. The consent was written in Filipino (Tagalog) to ensure the
understanding of the research study they are going to partake in. Participants were given

a copy of the accomplished informed consent form for their reference.

43

Recruitment of Referees (CRC Patients/Relative Accompanying the Patient)

The possibility of unintended disclosure of patient information such as his/her
cancer diagnosis, which family members may or may not be aware of, is recognized as a
potential ethical concern. To address this, the recruitment strategy was constructed so that
only FDRs who are accompanying the patient at his/her follow up consultation and those
FDRs referred by the patient themselves (or by the relative accompanying the patient)
were recruited in the study. The assumption was that FDRs, who have accompanied the
patients, and FDRs referred by the patient were already aware of the patient’s cancer
diagnosis, hence preventing unintended disclosure and protecting the privacy of the

patient.

Participant safety is a significant tenet also observed in this research. In the
protocol, it was stated that patients were only to be approached if an approval was
received from the physician-in-charge, since the latter would be able to assess if the

patient is physically, mentally and emotionally able to talk with the investigator.

Aside from that, for CRC patients or relatives who were asked to refer FDRs, a
script (one written in Tagalog and another in English) informing them of the study, what
they are requested to do, and their rights — including voluntary participation and right to
refuse without any repercussions — is constructed. A copy of the information in the script
was provided to the potential referees when requested. Questions were entertained and

answered accordingly.

44

Protection of Privacy and Confidentiality of Information

The data collected from this study were used for research purposes only. All
personal information collected were considered privileged information and were dealt
with in such a manner as not to compromise the personal dignity of the participant or to
infringe upon their right to privacy. Anonymity of the respondents was strictly ensured
and a participant number (i.e., code number) was assigned to each participant to designate
his/her study records. No identifying information about the participants was revealed in

any forms of communication.

To protect patient and participant identity and confidentiality, the recruitment list,
recorded interviews, and transcripts were accessible only to the principal investigators
and research assistant. Files, including personal information and recorded interviews
were secured in a password-protected database that only the investigators can access. All
audio files are to be kept up to one year after the study has been completed, and are to be
permanently deleted after. Transcripts of the interviews were reviewed for removal of
any remaining personal information before it is stored as an oral history of the project
accessible only to the primary investigator. Requests for utility of the stored transcripts
(raw data) for other future studies are subject to consultation with the ethics review board

and with consent from the primary investigator.

The results of the study may be published in different journals, articles or books
to be used for further research in the future, but any identifying or personal information

are to be removed or changed before files are shared in any way.

45

Benefits & Remuneration

There were no direct benefits for the first-degree relatives participating in the
study. However, the results of the study could aid in the formulation of a culture-sensitive
tool for family history risk assessment and a framework for genetic counseling for

Filipinos, which participants and their families can benefit from in the future.

Participants of the study were provided with an option to receive cancer genetic
counseling, including cancer risk assessment based on the pedigree, after the interview. A
referral to a professional psychologist was also provided upon request of the participant,
which includes a clinic schedule for oncologic consultations and a referral letter to the
appropriate healthcare service requeste. A remuneration of five hundred pesos (P500.00)

per participant was given to compensate for transportation and other related fees.

Risks

There are no risks or harm expected in participating in this study. However,
exploration of the participants’ understanding of their family history of cancer and the
documentation of their pedigrees may result to increased awareness of their personal risks
of developing cancer, and consequently an inquiry on preventive strategies and
management care for the said disease. Hence, it is the ethical responsibility of the
investigator to anticipate these needs and provide the participants with the relevant
information. To address this, participants were provided with clinic schedules and referral

slips to appropriate healthcare services.

46

On the chance of finding a participant with a family history demonstrating high
probability of familial or hereditary cancer, the case (or pedigree) would be first reviewed

by an expert before providing appropriate referral and options to the participant.

Conflict of Interest

The investigator declared no conflict of interest.

47

CHAPTER IV

RESULTS

Demographic Data

Participant Characteristics

A total of seventeen (17) participants were interviewed. There were no refusals
and withdrawals of participants during the recruitment and data collection. Table 4.1

shows the demographic characteristics of the participants.

Out of the 17, eight (8) or 47% are siblings of a patient affected with cancer (i.e.,
proband) while the remaining nine (9) or 53% of the participants are offspring or children
of the proband. The participants’ age ranges from nineteen (19) to fifty-four (54) years
old, with the mean age at 36.8 (SD: 12.99). Most of them are females (11 out of 17,

64.7%) who are either single (8/17, 47.1%) or married (6/17, 35.3%).

Sixteen (16) of the participants have finished high school except one. Out of these
16, six (6) are college undergraduates (35.3%), four (4) are college graduates (23.5%),
three (3) are vocational graduates (17.6%), and the other three (3) have achieved high

school diploma (17.5%) as their highest educational attainment.

Almost all participants (94.1%) are from a major ethnic group, i.e., Tagalog
(52.9%), Visayan (29.4%), and Bicolano (11.8%). Only one participant is from a
minority ethnic group — the Ibanag. Nine (9) or 52.9% of the participants have an

occupation while the remaining eight (8) or 47.1% are unemployed.

48

Table 4.1 Demographic characteristics of participants

CHARACTERISTIC f % |
Relationship with Proband [
Sibling 8 47.1
Offspring 9 52.9

Age (Mean: 36.80, SD: 12.99 )
18-24 (Later Adolescence)

5
25-34 (Early Adulthood) 3 17.6
35-44 (Middle Adulthood) 2 11.8
45-54 (Middle Adulthood) 7 41.2
Sex
Male 6 35.3
Female 11 64.7
Civil Status
Single 8 47.1
Married 6 35.3
Widowed 1 5.9
Separated 2 11.8
Religion
Roman Catholic 15 88.2
Christian 1 5.9
Jehovah's Witnesses 1 _| 5.9
Highest Educational Attainment
College Graduate 4 23.5
College Undergraduate 6 35.3
Vocational Graduate 3 17.6
High School Graduate 3 17.6
Elementary Graduate 1 5.9
Ethnic Group
Tagalog 9 52.9
Visayan 5 29.4
Bicolano 2 11.8
Tbanag 1 5.9
Occupation
Employed 7 41.2
Self-employed / Proprietor 2 11.8
None 8 L 47.1

f =frequency or number of participants; % = percentage

The next table shows a comparison of the demographic characteristics of the two

participant groups: siblings and offspring of CRC patients.

49

Table 4.2 Comparative table of demographic characteristics of participant groups
(siblings vs offspring)

Relationship with Proband Siblings (8) Offspring (9) ~]
Characteristics % f %
Age* (Mean: 36.80, SD: 12.99 ) x = 44.0, 11.9 xX = 30.3, 10.7
18-24 (Later Adolescence) 1 12.5 4 44.4
25-34 (Early Adulthood) 1 12.5 2 22.2
35-44 (Middle Adulthood) 0 0.0 2 22.2
45-54 (Middle Adulthood) 6 75.0 1 11.1
Sex
Male 2 25.0 4 44.4
Female 6 75.0 5 55.6
Civil Status
Single 2 25.0 6 66.7
Married 4 50.0 2 22.2
Widowed 1 12.5 0 0.0
Separated 1 12.5 1 11.1
Religion
Roman Catholic 8 100.0 7 718
Christian 0 0.0 11.1
Jehovah's Witnesses 0 0.0 1 11.1
Highest Educational Attainment
College Graduate 1 12.5 3 33.3
College Undergraduate 3 37.5 3 33.3
Vocational Graduate 2 25.0 1 11.1
High School Graduate 1 12.5 2 22.2
Elementary Graduate 1 12.5 0 0.0
Ethnic Group
Tagalog 5 62.5 4 44.4
Visayan 2 25.0 3 33.3
Bicolano 0 0.0 2 22.2
Tbanag 1 12.5 0 0.0
Occupation
Employed 3 37.5 4 44.4
Self-employed / Proprietor 1 12.5 1 11.1
None 4 50.0 4 44.4
* The age groups were based on the categorization by (Newman & Newman, 2012)

f = frequency or number of participants; % = percentage

50

The second specific objective calls for a comparison of the perspectives of the
two study groups. The number of recruited participants for the two groups is
approximately equal. Table 4.2 reflects the differences in demographic characteristics of

these two groups.

Participating siblings have a mean age of 44.0 (under the age category “Middle
Adulthood) while offspring/children of cancer probands have a mean age of 30.3 (under
the age category “Early Adulthood”). The standard deviation values between the age
means are similar at 11.9 and 10.7 Both groups are generally consisted of females (75.0%
of siblings and 55.6% of offspring), who are College Undergraduates (37.5% and 33.3%)
and Roman Catholics (100% and 77.8%), from the Tagalog ethnic group (62.5% and

44.4%), and without an occupation at the time of interview (50.0% and 44.4%).
Proband Characteristics

Table 4.3 shows the characteristics of the probands or affected relatives of the

participants.

51

Table 4.3 Characteristics of probands

Relationship with Proband Siblings (8) Offspring (9)
PROBAND 5 5 5
CHARACTERISTIC 7 | a | te f | %
Cancer Stage
Stage II 2 11.8 0 0.0 3 33.3
Stage III 9 52.9 5 62.5 3 33.3
Stage IV | 6 35.3 3 37.5 3 33.3
Age at Cancer Diagnosis x = 54.2, 14.1 Xs = 47.5, 11.2 | Xo = 60.1, 14.3
Early-Onset (<50 y.o.) Xe = 41.8, 4.2 Xes = 39.8, 3.8 | Xzo = 45.0, 2.6
30-39 1 5.9 1 12.5 0 0.0
40-49 7 41.2 4 50.0 3 33.3
Typical-Onset (> 50 y.o.) Xr = 65.2,9.5 | Xps= 60.3, 3.5 ult
50-59 3 17.6 1 12.5 2 22.2
60-69 3 17.6 2 25.0 1 11.1
70-79 3 17.6 0 0.0 3 33.3
Sex
Male 9 52.9 2) 62.5 4 44.4
Female 8 47.1 3 37.5 5 55.6

f - frequency or number of participants Xx — sample mean / average age of probands; X_ — refers to average age of

probands with early-onset cancer; Xgs — average age of probands of recruited siblings with early-onset cancer; Xgo —

average age of probands of recruited offspring with early-onset cancer; X; — average age of probands with typical-

onset cancer; Xts — average age of probands of recruited siblings with typical-onset cancer; Xo — average age of
robands of recruited offspring with typical-onset cancer

The study was able to recruit participants with probands at various cancer stages,
with almost equal number of early or typical-onset colorectal cancers, and almost
equivalent number of male and female affected relatives. Probands of recruited
participants are diagnosed with Stage II to Stage IV colorectal cancer. Most of them
(52.9%) have Stage III CRC. The mean age of cancer diagnosis is 54.2 years old with a
standard deviation of 14.1. Eight (47.1%) of the recruited participants have probands with
early-onset cancer diagnosed at a mean age of 41.8 (SD: 4.2), while the remaining nine
(52.9%) have probands with typical-onset cancer diagnosed at a mean age of 65.2 (SD:
9.5). The number of male and female probands is almost equivalent at nine (9) males
(52.9%) and eight (8) females (47.1%).

52

Findings from the Interviews & Pedigree Analysis
Emerging Themes and Constructs

The interview questionnaire explores the participants’ (1) personal understanding
of their family history of cancer, (2) views on cancer and its causation, (3) perspectives
on inherited gene risks and perceived cancer risk, and (4) means of managing risks / risk
management mechanisms. These constructs are reflected in the adapted Model of
Familial Risk Perception by Walter et al 2004. In this study, Walter’s model, specifically
its main elements (i.e., Salience, Personalizing Process, Personal Sense of Vulnerability,
and Risk Management), is used in the data analysis as main themes. These theory-based
themes are also used in the presentation of emerging constructs or concepts from the

interview.

53

Theme 1: Salience of Family History of Cancer

In this study, Salience of Family History of Cancer refers to the participants’
perceived relevance of having an affected family member. This is determined by the
acknowledgment of the individual that a familial risk for the disease exists (Walter et al,
2004), and further influenced by the participant’s personal constructs of what constitutes

a family history of cancer.

Table 4.4 shows the constructs (codes), sub-categories and categories emerging
from the participant interviews. The table also reflects the coding process and the basic

content analysis done.

Three (3) categories supporting the theme, Salience of Family History of Cancer,

emerged from the interviews:

1. Personal definition of having a family history of disease: the participants’
understanding of the term “family history”, specifically on who are considered to
have a positive family history of disease

2. Family Composition: participant views on who should be included and excluded
in the family history

3. Acknowledgement of Familial Risk: participants’ opinion on whether they have

or do not have a family history of cancer and how this affects their cancer risk

54

*(¢ saquinu juedionsed 10) ¢q fq poreadde souaryes 10J syonysu0d da1Bap-jsIJ/Sapoo [fe Jey} SUBS | UUIMJOD UI (Cg) SUL :2}0N

You Daye 1,050 [al ye Ue BUACY] cys JeDUE) SaNyeal Daye XU]
| 7K | ___ Yu SPaye le) papeye Ue DUAEY] enYsod e SB0G “YSU JO UONdarieg) su jeyey
EES XUy OU] Z18IUBD JO XUy e BAeY NOA OQ :xiy} 40 quaw
K Ky YM] $,8U0 Jo Guipueysiepun jeuosiag| abpajmowpy
OX Xiy U papnjoul oq Jou Senyear Bley UOIsnaXS i
w SaAye@) DUAT AUC} SMQEIS UAT UO paseg F
Pueqold se Ae jo ops ewes CT ee | 3
PUEqOI Se aseasip ewes aly YIM] aseasp ay} Jo aruasaid UO paseg >
SaAyeal payeDosse-Aasop Tqiejule; jo saiap uo pases] = Ayala]
‘Gn pue eAjeal eaiDap-4yNo4 uluolsnjul] =
‘Aneel eelDap-pAUL Joy sseg] 2
BARRA] BaIDap-pudreS (diysuoiejas poojq)} :uogsodwo}| g
Ajeje1 dasdep-Jsil4]| AYUINDUeSUCD JO aaiap UO paseg Alwe4}]
aSeasp B43 UUM BAQeIa) BuO GuAeH| xu 40) yOnoua Si yy T DUIAeH a
TOqSSIUE UE WOY SOLO) aseOTT 8
S@AQees aGQNW JO Yeap jo asne) %
‘BSEASIP DUP € JO VORUAH sub jo] F
sO ‘AUR; 8} 30 aps eU0 SPayy aseasip yo loys] Asoysiy Alwey! =
QUT Paweyur S| eseasiq) Awey aAysod sayesuOWAP| 2 Suey, |
x2 UW ad T Ul papaye SeAqeal a[dynH| suaquiaw Ajuey adiynw) jo voyuyap|
be ak ee he x ; ow | Papaye SUOeIeUaD aldynW| Oupaye aseasip 2ydeds e Sure} Jeuosiad
Lid: Std (ONINWakI LYOHS) 3009 AYO9ALWO-8NS XYO93LVO 3WIHL
v NOON - 22U81Pag UO paseg UONe NERS xSTY
W jaUNSUDS - aa/8 ipaq UO Paseq VONENENS ASH
A yom | ow fay af fin} [in arf ary ar [in [utes ou
sjo}sfoj ojojojsifolojs|s|s|sifo} o | s |pueqoduimuoneey
4 jeje | ve] se | se | ez] 6 | se e|etjorjo-je|ez| wz (pueansuod - puegoid) e2uaseyi0 28y
09 puegoig jo a8y
ts pURIINSUOD Jo a3y
Ww PURGOIg JO xeS
El PURIINSUO) JO XeS
piLd' 9d gd: td) £d 2d Td) sAg uoneinjes ejeq [ereue9

aSeasiq Jo Alojstpy ATHWe.J Jo souatypes,, ousy) ay) Sutoddns sat0Beje0-qns pue sali0Ba}e0 ‘sjonsuos paBlouly p'p a1qeL

55

A. Personal Definition of “Having a Family History of Disease”

Content analysis of the interview shows that participating siblings and children of
cancer-affected individuals have two definitions of what it means to have a family history
of disease. Having a family history may mean (1) having at least one relative affected
with the disease in question, or (2) having multiple relatives affected with the disease in

question.

Most of the participants (15 out of 17) equate a positive family history of disease
with the disease seeming to run in the family. Having one affected relative is often
considered as not having a family history of cancer. For the participants, a positive family
history of cancer or a disease happens when more than one family member are/were

affected by the disease and has met at least one of the following conditions in Table 4.5.

Table 4.5 Key concepts describing “positive family history of cancer” from the
perspectives of participating Filipino first-degree relatives

Multiple generations are affected

Multiple relatives are affected in one generation 10
The disease seems to be inherited or passed down in the family 10
The disease came from an ancestor (often a fourth-degree or a more 5

distant relative)

The disease mainly affects or presents in one side of the family (i.e., 4
maternal or paternal)

The disease is the main cause of death of multiple family members 1

n= number of responses for the specific construct

56

As shown in Table 4.5, majority of the participants (10 of 17, ~60%) define a
“positive family history of disease” as having an inherited disease that affects multiple

generations and/or multiple relatives in one generation.

The concepts of disease/gene inheritance, demonstrated by the use of the words
“namamana”, “lahi”, and “salinlahi” (i.e., transfer of racial genes), as well as ancestry,
through mentions of the words “kanununuan” and “ninuno”, have appeared during the

discussions on family history of disease.

Aside from the concepts of inheritance and ancestry, the participants also
mentioned existing chronic diseases, such as diabetes and hypertension, which they
believe to run in the family. The participants tend to bring up the diseases they believe to
have a “family history” of to explain their understanding of family history of disease.
These are reflected in Table 4.6, which also shows sample transcripts from the interviews

on how they define family history of disease.

57

Table 4.6 Sample meaning units, condensed meaning units and codes (or first-order
constructs) on personal definition of family history, based on participant interviews

TRANSCRIPT

MEANING UNFIT

[Pag sinabing family history

CONDENSED
MEANING UNIT

involves the

CODE

And in every succeeding generation of the
family, the disease evolves.

[Pag sinabing family history of disease,] f di kinal transfer of disease MG
may kinalaman sa salinlahi. Salinlahi, of disease,] may kinalaman | | ween
[ibig sabihin] yung mga lahi-lahi ng sakit sa salinlahi | generations
fa My ng mga anak o kapatid. [P1, [Ito] yung mga Jahi-iahi ng disease affects

sakit na namamana ng mga multiple family MR
Family history has to do with “‘salinlahi” anak 0 kapatid. a members 4
(i.e., transfer of racial genes). It refers to
diseases running in the family that are .-namamana ng mga anak o dlaome a Inherited Inh
inherited by children or siblings. kapatid

...Sa papa ko, yung side nila | disease affects
Yung sa papa ko, yung side nila may may diabetes. Dunsamama_ | members of one
diabetes. Dun sa mama ko naman, mataas_| ko naman, mataas ang blood | side of the family os
ang blood pressure. Yun ang kanilang pressure. Yun ang kanilang | (paternal /
family history [of disease]. [P3, 47/F] family history. maternal)

sa papa ko, side nila | US° oe cuone

My father’s family has diabetes. At my tna ators ba sa mama disease considered
mom's side, they have hypertension. Those ko » man a ang blood to run in the family Chr
are their family history [of diseases]. oe ? 8 to define family

P : history
Kapag merong family history, parang eee family owe disease affects
nakakahawa yung sakit kasi maraming in i kit kasi maramine multiple family MR
naapektuhan, parang nasa lahi. [P13, 24/F) rraapektuhan 8 members
When there’s a positive family history, it’s
like having a “catching” disease that . A Papen eo
affects a number of relatives... it’s like the -~-parang nasa labi. disease is inherited Inh
disease is inherited or it runs in the family.
Ang family history of cancer ay first
galing sa ninuno, like nanay ng nanay ng
nanay. Tapos every generation, nag- ; Fi

A aa cancer in the family

He yung sakit sa families. [P16, Ang family history of cancer | is passed down by

ay first galing sa ninuno, an early ancestor, ‘Anc
One’s family history of cancer comes from cain! ng nanay ng 8. bee on f
ancestors, like your great grandmother. ye i a °

58

Pag sinabing may family history, parang
sa pamilya ko may family history kami ng
diabetes. Yun kasi yung halos kinamatay
ng mga tiyuhin, tiyahin, lolo at lola ko;
halos lahat yun ang naging cause of death.
Namatay dahil sa komplikasyon ng sakit.
[P16, 41/M]

When you ask about family history, I think
of our family history of diabetes. The
disease has been the cause of death of my
uncles, aunts, and grandparents.

Pay sinabing may family
history, parang sa pamilya ko

use of a chronic
disease
considered to run

Pag sinabing may family history, ito yung
parang "meron na bang nagkasakit sa inyo
[pamilya] ng ganung karamdaman?" [P2,
27/F]

) ¢ Chr
may family history kami ng in the family to
diabetes. define family
history
me hal a disease

Yun kasi yung halos considered to be
kinamatay ng mga tiyuhin, in the "family
tiyahin, lolo at lola ko; halos history" is often cor
lahat yun ang naging cause of | 4. cause of death
death. of relatives

. kit having a family
.-meron na bang nagkasakit sa member affected
inyo {pamilya] ng ganung ws

karamdaman?

with the disease

When you say family history, it’s like in question
answering the question “Do you have a
relative affected by the said disease?”

B. Family Composition: Basis for Inclusion in the Family History

Based on the interviews, inclusion of relatives in the family history is based on

four (4) concepts shown in Table 4.7.

Table 4.7 Basis for inclusion or exclusion of individuals in the family history

Degree of consanguinity or blood relationship

Presence of the disease in question 10
Degree of familiarity or social closeness 3
| Living or vital status of the relative 2

59


1. Degree of consanguinity or blood relationship

The participants consider blood relationship as a determinant of who will be
included in their family history. Table 4.8 reflects the individuals identified by
participants as those who should be included in their family history during pedigree

intake.

Table 4.8 Relatives to be included in participating FDRs’ family history of disease, based
on degree of consanguinity

First-degree relatives or FDRs (parents, siblings, offspring) 17

Second-degree relatives or SDRs (grandparent, grandchild, uncles/aunts, half- 11
siblings, nephews/nieces)

Third-degree relatives or TDRs (first cousins, great grandparents, great 8
grandchildren)
Fourth-degree or more distant relatives (great, great grandparents) 3

The participants’ understanding of consanguinity also influences their
perspectives on who among their family members are not to be included when asked

about their family history of disease.

All participants mentioned that they include health conditions of first-degree
relatives (parents, sibling and offspring) during intake of family history. Inclusion of
second-degree relatives, specifically grandparents and uncles/aunts, also emerged among

majority of the participants.

60

The rationale behind inclusion of FDRs and SDRs in the family history mainly

revolves on the understanding that health conditions of these relatives are likely related or

similar due to their close blood relations. Hence, diseases can be passed to or inherited by

these relatives, either through gene inheritance or through similar behaviours and/or

environmental exposure.

Table 4.9 shows some of the transcripts reflecting the perspectives of the

participants regarding who should be included or not included in the family during intake

of pedigree or family history based on degree of consanguinity.

Table 4.9 Sample meaning units, condensed meaning units, and codes on bases for

identifying individuals to be included in the family history of disease

TRANSCRIPT

MEANING UNIT

CONDENSED
MEANING UNIT

CODE

kasama ang buong

family includes

grandmother who has the same condition (i.e.,
cancer) and other relatives who were affected
with the disease. [P2, 27/F])

kamag-anak na meron
ding ganung sakit.

disease as proband

“(Sa kwento ng aking family history] kasama mag-anak... magulang FDR
ang buong mag-anak... ang aking mga magulang | at kapatid EES
at kapatid, tapos mga tiyo at tiya, at mga 7 apse
5 ” kasama ang... mgatiyo | family includes
pinsan.” [P1, 48/M] at tiya... SDRs SDR
([My family history] includes my immediate
family, specifically my parents and siblings, and | kasama ang... mga family includes TDR
also uncles/aunts and cousins. [P1, 48/M]) pinsan. TDRs
Kasama ang mga magulang at mga anak, si lola a
na may ganun din na kondisyon (i.e., cancer) at | Kasama ang mga family includes FDR
iba pang kamag-anak na meron ding ganung magulang at mga anak | FDRs
sakit. [P2, 27/F]
si lola na may ganun
({It] includes my parents and offspring, my din na kondisyon (i.e., | includes relatives
cancer) at iba pang with the same SDP-R

61


TRANSCRIPT.

MEANING UNIT

CONDENSED

MEANING UNIT

CODE

“Yung kasama sa family history, syempre yung | Yung kasama sa family
mga kalapit na kapamilya... Yung mga "first history, syempre yung
relatives" - kapatid, anak at magulang. Yung mga kalapit na family includes
mga pinsan-pinsan sinasama... kung meron sa kapamilya... Yung mga FDRs FDR
kanila ng may ganung sakit. Yung "first “first relatives" -
relatives" talaga ang importante.” (P4, 48/F] kapatid, anak at
magulang.
(Included in my family history are, of course,
my close relatives. This includes my siblings,
children and parents. Cousins who were Yung mga pinsan- family includes TDR
affecied are also included but the most pinsan sinasama... cousins
important relatives to include are actually my
first-degree relatives. [P4, 48/F]
Yung mga anak ng pinsan namin di ko na
sinasama kasi iba na yun, may ibang lahi na sila.
Yung percent ng lahi namin mababa na, kasi children of
may nadagdag na na ibang lahi - yung lahi nung cousins (TDRs)
napangasawa nila. [P4, 48/F] Yung mga anak ng should not be
pinsan namin di ko na included in the
The children of my cousins are not included sinasama kasi iba na fhx bi f XC
. Pape , . ecause of an
anymore in my family history because they yun, may ibang lahi na additional lineage
already have a different lineage or ancestry. sila. of their other
The percentage of shared lineage or common
ancestry that we have is small, since their parent
parent from another lineage has added their
own bloodline to these children. [P4, 48/F]
Lahat kasama [sa family history], kasi nga
family history di ba? So, parang galing sa
kanunununuan. Sa kabuuan ng family talaga.
Family history, kasama mula sa lolo hanggang Lahat kasama [sa everyone, from
apo ng magkabilang side. [P3, 47/F] family history], kasi ancestors to recent
nga family history di generation, is XDR
Everyone in the family is included since it is a ba? So, parang galing included in the
“family history”, right? So, this starts from sa kanunununuan. family history
one’s ancestors. Includes the whole family, from
grandparents to grandchildren of both maternal
and paternal sides. [P3, 47/F]
2. Presence of the disease in question

Some participants mention including those who are / were affected by the disease

during intake of their family history. Most of them talked about history of cancers in the

family, not just focused on colorectal cancer. In the interviews, the following constructs

emerged:

62

Majority of recruited FDRs (9 out of 17) include relatives with the same disease

as proband in their family history. Example excerpts include:

P2: “[Kasama sa family history] yung mga magulang at mga anak, si lola na may
ganun ding kondisyon [colorectal cancer], at mga kamag-anak na meron din
ganung sakit.”(/Included in the family history] are the parents and children, my
grandmother who had the same condition [i.e., colorectal cancer], and my
relatives who developed the same disease.)

P4: “Yung kasama sa family history, syempre yung mga kalapit na kapamilya... at
yung mga pinsan-pinsan. Pero iniisip ko din kung meron sa kanila [mga pinsan]
nagkaroon ng ganung sakit — kanser, pero wala naman kaya di ko na sila sinama.”
(Included in the family history are, of course, my close relatives... and my cousins.
But I also consider if someone among my cousins developed the said disease —
cancer, but no one did, so I did not include them anymore.)

Some of the participants (4 out of 17) mention including only relatives with the
same disease and from the same side of the family as the proband in their family

history of disease.

P9: “[Kasama sa family] si tatay, nanay, mga anak, kapatid ni papa kasi si papa
ang may sakit. [Kasama din ang] tatay at nanay ni papa.Pero di na kasama yung
mga kapatid ng lolo at lola ko sa father’s side. Basta malapit [na kamag-anak] ni
papa tapos may ganun ding sakit, sinasama sa kwento.” ([Included in the family]
are the father, mother, children, and my father’s siblings because he's the one
who got sick. [Also included are] my grandparents from my paternal side, but my
grandparents’ siblings are not included anymore. As long as the person is a
close-relative of my father, and he/she has the same disease, I will include it when
sharing my family history.)

63

3. Degree of familiarity or social closeness

Perceived familiarity or social closeness with a relative is also a basis for
inclusion in the family history. Some of the participants mention not including some of
their relatives (often second-degree relatives and up) due to unfamiliarity with their
health conditions. One participant mentioned including only those relatives living with

them or those nearby. The excerpts below support this finding.

P5: “Yung kasama [sa family history] ay yung mga kapamilya, ibig sabihin [ng
kapamilya] parang kasambahay na din — yung mga kasama mo sa bahay o yung
malapit lang.” (Those included [in my family history] are the family members,
referring to housemates — those you are living with or those living near you).

P12: “Yung mga pinsan siguro, di na kasama [sa family history], kasi balita na
lang ang dumarating. Di naman namin alam kung ano na lagay nila.” (Maybe
cousins need not to be included [in the family history] since we only get to receive
news or rumours. We do not know their [health] conditions.)

P16: “Sa family kasi namin, marami akong hindi na-meet na relatives, kaya di ko
alam yung mga sakit nila, kaya di ko sila masasabi. Usually, kapag di ko na ganun
kakilala, halimbawa, yung kapatid ng lola ko na nagkadiabetes din ata, di ko
sinasama sa kwento ng family history ng sakit. Kapag di na ganoong ka-close [di
ko na sinasama], kasi di ko din alam, baka may ibang sakit o komplikasyon sila.”
(In my family, there are quite a lot of relatives I haven’t met, so I do not know
what illnesses or diseases they have/had. Hence, I cannot include them [in the
family history]. Usually, when I do not know them very well, for instance, my
grandmother's sister who may have had diabetes, I do not include them anymore
in our family history of disease. When I’m not that close with a particular relative,
Ido not include them anymore. Because, I’m not sure of their condition, maybe
they have another disease or complication.)

64

4. Current living or vital status

The relative’s living status is also an aspect taken into consideration in
determining who to include when sharing their history of diseases. In some cases, first-
degree relatives focus only on sharing the health conditions of living relatives and may
not include family members, who have already died, in their family history. The
following are excerpts from interviews of participants who mentioned this construct:

P5: “Kasama sa family history, siguro kaming magkakapatid na lang, kasi wala na

kaming magulang.” (Only I and my siblings are included in the family history,
since we do not have parents anymore.)

P15: “Kasama sa family history yung mga kapatid namin at si nanay. Di na
kasama yung mga anak at mga tito at tita. Si tatay di na kasama,kasi wala na po
sya.” (Included in the family history are our siblings and mother. Our children
and our aunts and uncles are not included anymore. My father is not included
since he already passed away.)

65

Cc. Acknowledgement of Familial Risk

In this study, participants’ acknowledgement of familial risk is measured based on

their views or answers on the following questions:

1. Do you think you have a family history of cancer?

The answer to this question is greatly influenced by the participants’
understanding of what a positive family history means (see A. Personal Definition of

Family History).

As mentioned, majority (15 out of 17) of the participants define having a family
history as having multiple family members affected with the disease, with the disease
sometimes considered as running in the family. Out of this fifteen, eleven (11)
respondents consider themselves as not having a family history of cancer, since only one
or a few relatives developed cancer. The other three (3) participants with a similar
definition of family history considered themselves as having a positive family history of

cancer due to the following reasons:

= P6: Two relatives are affected with colon cancer, and others have developed
tumours and other cancer types. This meets the participant’s definition of
family history.

= P8: Father’s grandmother and mother (i.e., participant’s great grandmother
and grandmother) developed colon diseases. The participant’s great
grandmother has also reportedly developed haemorrhoids and may have been

diagnosed with colon cancer as well (however, this remains uncertain).

66

" P14: The participant’s mother developed colorectal cancer while she had a
benign breast mass removed previously, and has developed another breast
mass (of unknown malignancy). Since parent and child developed tumours,

the participant thinks that they may have a family history of cancer.

The remaining participant (from the fifteen with similar definitions of family

history) has no idea on whether they have a family history of cancer or not.

Two participants defined family history as having at least one relative affected
with the disease. Both participants with this definition considered themselves as having a
family history of cancer. However, it should be noted that out of these two, one (P12)
only has a father affected with colon cancer and the other (P2) has both father and

grandmother affected with cancer.

2. Do you think having a relative with cancer affect the cancer risks of other family

members?

The participants of the study are divided in half on whether having a family
member with cancer affects the cancer risks of other relatives. Eight (8 out of 17)
participants believe that having a relative with cancer affects cancer risks of the family,

while nine (9 out of 17) participants do not think so.

Considering their perceptions on presence of family history of cancer, of the five
(5) participants who perceived themselves as having a family history of cancer, only two
(2) responded that having an affected relative increases the cancer risks of other family

members.

67

Emerged constructs on Theme | (Salience) based on demographic characteristics of
participants

Demographic characteristics of participants, specifically age, sex and educational
attainment, were also considered in the analysis of constructs emerging from the

interviews.

Perceptions stratified by age. Approximately half of the participants recruited in
the study (8 of 17) fall under the Later Adolescence (18-24 years old) and Early
Adulthood (25-34 years old) categories, while the other half (9 of 17) are under the
Middle Adulthood (35-54 years old) age category. Table 4.10 reflects perceptions under

Theme 1, stratified based on age group.

Participants under the 18-34 age group defined “positive family history of
disease” as either having at least one affected relative (+FH Definition 1) or having
multiple relatives affected (+FH Definition 2). On the other hand, those who are 35 to 54
years of age tend to use the latter definition (+FH Definition 2) to describe the concept of
a positive family history. The Middle Adulthood group (35-54 years old) is also more
likely to describe having a family history of disease with statements pointing to having
multiple relatives affected in one generation, the disease coming from an ancestor or the

disease being the main cause of death of members of the family.

68

Table 4.10 Constructs under Theme | — Salience of Family History of Disease, stratified
by age group

LA & EA
Constructs on Family History of Disease (18:
+FH Definition 1: A positive family history means “having at least 2 0
one relative affected with the disease in question”.
+FH Definition 2: A positive family history means “having
multiple relatives affected with the disease in question, with the 6 9
disease seeming to run in the family”, as described by the
constructs below:
Multiple generations are affected. 3 7
Multiple relatives are affected in one generation. 5 5
The disease seems to be inherited or passed
F 5 5 5
down in the family.
The disease came from an ancestor (often a 1 4
fourth-degree or a more distant relative).
The disease mainly affects or presents in one 2 2
side of the family (i.e., maternal or paternal).
The disease is the main cause of death of
5 0 1
multiple family members.
Family history should include both FDRs and SDRs. 6 5
Family history should also include TDRs and/or more distant 4 4
Telatives (aside from FDRs & SDRs).
Family history includes closely-associated relatives (based on
Jaan 1 2
degree of familiarity).
Family history should include those with the same disease as the 5 4
proband.
Family history should include those with the same disease and 2 2
from the same lineage as the proband.
Family history should only include living relatives. 0 2
J have a family history of cancer. 3 2
I have no family history of cancer. 5 6
Having an affected relative increases cancer risks of other family 3 5
members.
Having an affected relative has no effect or does not increase 5 4
cancer risks of other family members. |
n= number of respondents with the specific characteristic
LA = later adolescence (18-24y.0.), EA = Early Adulthood (25-34y.0.), MA = middle adulthood (35-54y.0.)

69

When it comes to who should be included in their intake of family history, both
age groups identified degrees of consanguinity and familiarity/social closeness, and
presence of the disease in question as their bases for inclusion and exclusion. However,
only the Middle Adulthood age group raised the idea of only including living relatives in

their family history.

There were no significant differences in both age groups perceptions on their
family history of cancer and the effects of having an affected relative to other family
members’ cancer risks. Of the three (3) participants under the 18-34 age group who
perceived themselves as having a family history of cancer, two (2) responded that having
an affected relative does not affect or increase the cancer risks of other family members.
On the other hand, for the two (2) Middle Adulthood participants who perceived presence
of a family history of cancer, one stated that having a relative with cancer increases

cancer risk of other family members, while the remaining participant answered otherwise.

Perceptions stratified by sex. The two definitions of “positive family history”
discussed previously emerged on both male and female groups of participants. However,
it was observed that male participants were more likely to describe positive family
history of disease with statements pointing to the disease being inherited or passed down
in the family, and the disease mainly presenting in one lineage (maternal or paternal),
compared to their female counterparts. Furthermore, inclusion of both FDRs and SDRs in
their family history was stated by all male participants, while less than half (6 of 11) of
female participants responded similarly. Inclusion of relatives based on how familiar they
are with their health conditions also appeared more in responses of male participants than

the female recruits (as shown in Table 4.11).

70

Table 4.11 Constructs under Theme 1 — Salience of Family History of Disease, stratified
by sex of participants

" ra Male
Constructs on Family History of Disease
i)
+FH Definition 1: A positive family history means “having at least 1017) 1(9)
one relative affected with the disease in question”.
+FH Definition 2: A positive family history means “having
multiple relatives affected with the disease in question, with the 5 (83) 10 (91)
disease seeming to run in the family”, as described by the
constructs below:
Multiple generations are affected. 4 (67) 6 (55)
Multiple relatives are affected in one generation. 3 (50) 7 (64)
The disease seems to be inherited or passed 5 (83) 5 (45)
down in the family.
The disease came from an ancestor (often a
fourth-degree or a more distant relative). AGED) 3Q7
The disease mainly affects or presents in one
side of the family (i.e., maternal or paternal). 2@3) 2:18)
The disease is the main cause of death of
multiple family members. 90) 10)
Family history should include both FDRs and SDRs. 6 (100) 5 (45)
Family history should also include TDRs and/or more distant 3 (50) 5 (45)
relatives (aside from FDRs / SDRs).
Family history includes closely-associated relatives (based on 2 (33) 109)
degree of familiarity).
Family history should include those with the same disease as the 2.(33) 7 (64)
proband.
Family history should include those with the same disease and 107) 327)
from the same lineage as the proband.
Family history should only include living relatives. 0(@) 2 (18)
T have a family history of cancer. 2 (33) 3 (27)
I have no family history of cancer. 4 (67) 7 (64) |
Having an affected relative increases cancer risks of other family 3 (50) 5 (45)
members.
Having an affected relative has no effect or does not increase 3 (50) 6 (55
cancer risks of other family members. )
nyy= number of male respondents; np = number of female respondents
{= number of responses, % = percentage

71

Female participants are more likely to include only relatives with the same disease
as the proband, and those who are still alive in their family history, as compared to male

participants.

As for their perceived effect of family history to cancer risk, the two (2) male
participants, who perceived themselves as having a family history of cancer, both believe
that having an affected relative with CRC does not increase the risks of other family
members to develop cancer. As for their female counterparts, two (2) out of the three (3)
female participants who identified themselves as having a family history of cancer,
believe that having an affected relative does affect or increases the risks of other family

members to develop the said disease.

Perceptions stratified by educational attainment. The participants of the study
can be grouped into two, based on educational attainment. The first group includes those
who have finished high school and/or received a vocational degree, while the second
group is consisted of participants who have received tertiary education (i.e.,, college
undergraduate or college graduate). For this part of the analysis, the single elementary
graduate participant was excluded in the comparison. Table 4.12 shows the constructs on

family history of disease as categorized based on their educational attainment.

72

Table 4.12 Constructs under Theme 1 — Salience of Family History of Disease, stratified
based on educational attainment of participants.

Constructs on Family History of Disease
S(%) f(%)
+FH Definition 1: A positive family history means “having at least 1(17) 110)
one relative affected with the disease in question”.
+FH Definition 2: A positive family history means “having
multiple relatives affected with the disease in question, with the 5 (83) 9 (90)
disease seeming to run in the family”, as described by the
constructs below:
Multiple generations are affected. 2 (33) 7(70)
Multiple relatives are affected in one generation. 4 (67) 5 (50)
The disease seems to be inherited or passed
down in the family. 467) 5.60)
The disease came from an ancestor (often a
fourth-degree or a more distant relative). 2 63) 3 G0)
The disease mainly affects or presents in one
side of the family (i.e., maternal or paternal). 900) 4 (40)
The disease is the main cause of death of
multiple family members. 0) 110)
Family history should include both FDRs and SDRs. 4 (67) 7 (70)
Family history should also include TDRs and/or more distant
relatives (aside from FDRs / SDRs). 3 (50) 4 (40)
Family history includes closely-associated relatives (based on
degree of familiarity). 2.63) 1 (10)
Family history should include those with the same disease as the
proband. 3 (50) 6 (60)
Family history should include those with the same disease and 1 300
from the same lineage as the proband. w (0)
Family history should only include living relatives. 1(17) 0 (0)
Ihave a family history of cancer. 3 (50) 2 (20)
T have no family history of cancer. 3 (50) 7(70)
Having an affected relative increases cancer risks of other family
members. 2.63) 6 (60)
Having an affected relative has no effect or does not increase
cancer risks of other family members. 467) 4 (40)
ny = number of respondents who are high school or vocational graduates; nc = number of respondents who are

college undergraduates or college graduates.
J = number of responses; % = percentage

2B

Both groups mentioned the two definition of a positive family history, which
emerged from the interviews. However, when it comes to the additional constructs used
to describe a positive family history of disease, participants who are college
undergraduates/graduates are more likely to use constructs such as having multiple
generations affected, the disease mainly affecting a specific lineage of the family, and the
disease as the main cause of death of family members to describe positive family history.
On the other hand, the idea of including only closely-associated relatives and living
relatives in the family history is more apparent among the high school and vocational

graduates.

Though a larger portion of college undergraduates/graduates have identified
themselves as having no family history of cancer (70% compared to 50% of the high
school/vocational graduates group), more participants from this group have also stated
that having an affected relative increases the risks of other family members to develop

cancer (60% compared to 33% of the high school/vocational graduates group).

74

Theme 2: Personalizing Process

During the personalizing process, individuals with a family history of disease
continuously evaluate factors that make them more or less at risk of developing cancer
(Walter et al, 2004). The individual’s personal models of health and illness, disease
causation and inheritance play an important role in the interpretation of the salient

features of the family history (NCI, 2012; Walter & Emery, 2005).

Tables 4.13 to 4.15 show the constructs (codes), sub-categories and categories on
this second theme, which emerged from the participant interviews. The table also reflects

the coding process and the basic content analysis done.

Three (3) categories supporting the theme, Personalizing Process, emerged from

the interviews:

1. Beliefs about cancer (includes personal and community beliefs about cancer and
also participants’ awareness of colorectal cancer)
2. Personal perception of disease causation or perceived causes of colorectal cancer

3. Perception of disease inheritance

75

A. Beliefs about Cancer

The conducted interviews explore the perspectives of first-degree relatives of
cancer-affected patients regarding cancer and colorectal cancer (see Table 4.13 for the
emerged constructs). Analysis of the interviews resulted to four (4) subcategories

discussed below:

1. Words associated with cancer diagnosis (words that come to mind when the

Participants first heard of their FDR’s cancer diagnosis)

Cancer is often associated with the words and word-substitutes for
“nakamamatay” (deadly or fatal), “malalang sakit” (advanced or serious disease),

“nakakakaba” (anxiety-inducing), and/or nakakatakot” (frightening or fearsome).

When asked on their thoughts about cancer, majority (11 out of 17) of the
participants describe cancer as a deadly or fatal disease. This is a pervading word

associated with cancer regardless of cancer stage.

76

“(6 saquimu yuedionsed 10) 6g Aq paseadde ssas01g SuIzijeuosiog BUOY) OY) 10J sJonQsUODS sa1Zep-jsIJ/Sepod |]e Je} SUBD | UUNJOD UT (6d) OU :230N.

‘BSeasIp Jee] ©) JY)| SSOUBIEME JY) -JOIUED [eDaIOO>
Ssea5p BUY OU YO] yoge sjaiaq Awuey / AYUNWWOD
qWawWebeuew peAeap 3/p 51 Du!

®) YYM IOSSE SPOO} 3/P 51 DYD!
‘Sygey Ouges 1000 0} anp SIU

g)o)

sit] z | SToysaaue Woy payeyul 9 18IUeD s/asne>
6s [Tt Hag ‘be iO 0} aNp 5 7aDUe) panadiag :u2Ue) [281002
[es] a im | SA SAA JO yNsas eS YO] yoge syayaq Awe; / AyUNWWOD)

oo | 0 | | Uaw spaye AueW IO) =
SIT] Zz TaWom Spaye AUIEW Ju) s
yaa a ‘BISe\Se}OW “INIA! VED 18IUe) S
Sit] z ‘Wanye 843 JO aseasip & S| DyD| =
yaa Bind OU Sey 18DUED| 7
Set] D 0 im ind Paina aq UD JaDUe)| 482UED |BPAJ0}0> Q
sez] + 70 “Weep 0} pasop, 10 ,DUIAp,S| UOSIed] ynoge syajaq Aue} / AYUNWWOD Fy
See | + ae BupnpurAexuy] 2
ZT | € APY ‘Bseasip SNoUes | padUeAPY s
SIT] 2 [ a a oa Sig ‘aseasip DUUaIYDUy 7 PWOSIeBJ| ,JeDUeD, PsOM BY} JeaY4 NOA Uaym| (Gd) 422UeD) 8
Z| IT Pa Bseasp eyed PAPE] Pull 0} BWOD ey} $/pOM YsII4] ynOge sJajag

V uO go uO a uO

viviwty | viv} y | wl] wlatw[ at wl wl vw | y [Non - au8ipag uo paseq uonesynens ysty
HWA |W [ieunauss -2ai3ipag uo paseq uonesynens xsi

AU] At | fe} mp my any an At | i [augers ou9

s[ofojs|s|s| slo] o | s |pueqois wm uoneiey

zz| et | ot jot-| z-| 6z | 12 | 6 |(puewnsuoy - pueqoig) a2uaiayig 28y

re

: 03 so] ce] v9 [zl te] 92 | ae | cs [pueaoia yo a8y
£s tz] oz | vs | zs] ay] ey | ez | gy [puernsuo jo s8y
Ww a{Wwlala[wlwl w |W [pueqoigioxs
3 wilw]3]3a]3] 3] 3 [W [pueunsuos jo xes
itd Td 2Aq uonemmes ee¢. Jemuey

Jg0ued UO sjot[aq AyTUNUIUOD pure ATURE} UO SoLIoSaye9-qns puke sjonysuoo pesiowy ["p aqeL

77

2. Family and community beliefs on cancer and colorectal cancer

The participants also relay that their family or community have the following

beliefs about cancer and/or colorectal cancer:

Table 4.14 Family and community beliefs on cancer and colorectal cancer

Probands*
Cancer Stages

First-order Constructs

A person diagnosed with cancer is “dying” or “closed to death”. 4 I-IV
| Cancer can be cured. 4 ll-IV
| Cancer is incurable. 3 I-IV
Colorectal cancer can affect other body parts and recur. 3 IV
Colorectal cancer is a disease of the affluent. 2 NA
Colorectal cancer mainly affects women. 2 NA

n= refers to number of responses for the specific construct, NA = not applicable

A person diagnosed with cancer is “dying” or “closed to death”. Having a
cancer diagnosis is like being given a date for death (“may taning na ang buhay”), as

reflected in the excerpts below:

P4: “Pag kanser, unang naiisip ay mamamatay na. Sa amin [community], pag
sinabi na sakit ay kanser, para daw mamatay na daw. Sabi nila, “Naku! Malapit na
yan [mamatay].” (When its cancer, the first thing that comes to mind is that the
person is closed to death. In our community, when the diagnosis is cancer, they
say the person is dying. They say, “Oh! That person is closed [to death].)

P12: “[Yung paniniwala, pag kanser] nakamamatay. Tapos parang may period of
time o may taning na. Anytime, pwede mawala.” ([The belief is, if its cancer, ] it
is deadly. The person seems to be given a term or date of death. Anytime, the
person can die.)

P15: “[Sa kanser,] parang ang ginagawa ay parang dinugdugtungan na lang natin
ang buhay nila.”(/When it’s cancer, ] what happens during management is like we
are just trying to extend their life spans.)

78

Cancer cannot be cured. This is in a way related to the previous belief that a
person with cancer is dying or closed to death. Most of the participants who mentioned
this have a relative diagnosed with Stage IV colorectal cancer, though relatives of

probands with Stage III cancer have also shared this idea.

Cancer can be cured. This is mentioned by participants with relatives who have

Stage II to IV cancers.

Colorectal cancer is a disease of the affluent. Two of the participants mentioned
that their families/communities perceive colon cancer as a disease of the affluent. They
have associated colon cancer with media personalities, who were considered prosperous,
such as Former President Corazon Aquino. This is shown in the excerpt below:

P4: “Sabi nila, “Naku! Sakit ng mayaman yan!” Parang sa mga artista, di ba

meron colon cancer si Cory?” (They say, “Oh! That’s a disease of the rich!” Like

those of artists. Didn’t Cory also develop colon cancer?)

Colorectal cancer can affect other body parts (i.e., metastasize) and recur.
This belief was expressed by participants with probands affected by Stage IV cancer.
Stage IV cancer is associated with metastatic lesions, often presenting in the liver, but can
also manifest in other body parts.

P3: “Parang di pa namin mawari ang kanser. Ang pagkakaalam ko parang malapit

na mamatay, ganun. Yung parang kalat na kalat na sa buong katawan, yang kanser

nga na tinatawag. Parang ganun, kalat na, parang wala nang pag-asa [gumaling].”

(Cancer is something we still haven't fully comprehended. From what I know,

having cancer is like being closed to death. It means the disease is already
widespread, and there’s no chance for cure.)

79

P10: “Ang kanser kapag nagkaroon ka sa isang parte ng katawan, pwedeng
lumipat sa iba. Parang kapag natanggal na yung bukol, pwede pa rin magkaroon
sa iba. Pwede mag-recur. Pwede later on, lumabas sa ibang parte ng katawan.” (In
cancer, if you develop it in one part of the body, it can transfer to another part.
It’s like, even if the tumour has been removed, another tumour may develop. It
can recur. Later on, cancer can present in other parts of the body.)

Colorectal cancer mainly affects women. Two participants mentioned hearing
from their familics and/or communities that colorectal cancer mainly presents among
women. One rationale is that childbirth causes straining of the rectal muscles, which
might have triggered tumour development. The participant also mentioned hearing that
delayed or lack of post-partum abdominal massage can also cause colon cancer to

develop.

P14: “Ang narinig ko, babae daw ang mas madalas mag-colon cancer. Siguro
dahil nanganganak ang mga babae, mas nagagalaw o na-iistress yung sa puwet
kasi umiire. Narinig ko din na kapag di daw nahilot agad [ang tyan]
pagkapanganak, mas mabilis magdevelop yung bukol.”(From what I heard,
women more often developed colon cancer. Maybe it’s because they give birth,
and childbirth stresses the rectal muscles. I also heard that if abdominal massage
was not done immediately after delivery of the child, tumour develops faster.)

P16: “Ang sabi daw, kapag tumatanda ang mga babae, usually sa colon daw
talaga yung madalas na sakit na lumalapit. Sa lalaki, prostate naman. Wala naman
akong alam na dahilan kung bakit sa babae lumalabas ang colon cancer, pero sa
kanila daw talaga nag-eevolve yung sakit na yung pag tumanda sila.” (What they
say is that when a woman gets old, they usually develop colon cancer. Among
men, it’s prostate cancer. I do not know of the reason why women are more likely
to develop colon cancer than men, but colon cancer is known to really evolve
among women when they grow old.)

80

3. Family and community beliefs on the cause of colorectal cancer

During the interviews, there were mentions of perceived causes of colorectal
cancer by the participants’ families or communities. According to the participants, their
families and/or communities believe that colorectal cancer maybe due to intake of foods
they believe to be associated with colorectal cancer development. These include foods
that are burned/grilled, spicy, and not easy to digest (such as meat). One participant
mentioned hearing in the workplace that intake of too much vegetables can result to
colorectal cancer, since green and leafy vegetables are not easy to digest. Delayed
management of a previous colon condition, such as haemorrhoids or colonic polyp, and
disease inheritance from parents or ancestors are also seen by the families as possible
causes of CRC. Vices (such as alcohol drinking), old age, and poor eating habits (such as
not eating on time) are also identified by the families as causes of their relatives’

colorectal cancer.
4. Awareness or familiarity with colorectal cancer as a disease

One of the constructs emerging from the interviews is the lack of familiarity or
awareness of participants regarding colorectal cancer prior to CRC diagnosis of their
first-degree relative. Majority of the participants (10 out of 17) mentioned having heard
of colorectal cancer for the first time at the hospital or during their relatives’
consultations. One participant shared that she’s familiar with breast and cervical cancers
as their community has an awareness program about these two cancer types. However,
community programs on colon or colorectal cancer have not been mentioned or known

among the participants.

81

This lack of awareness about colorectal cancer compared to other cancer types is

demonstrated by the excerpt below:

P3: “Taga Ilo-Ilo kami talaga, nagpunta lang kami dito kasi nasabihan kami na
ipapalaser daw yung bukol. Dun sa komunidad namin, may mga breast cancer. Sa
barangay, may ginagawa din na awareness program sa breast cancer, sa cervical
cancer, meron din free clinic (kung saan) pwede ka magpapapap-smear. Pero sa
colorectal cancer, wala naman. Kaya nga di namin alam yun! Wala kaming alam.
(We actually are from Io-ilo. We just came here because my father needs to
undergo laser surgery of his tumour. In our community, we are familiar with
breast cancer. In our barangay, there are awareness programs on breast cancer,
as well as on cervical cancer. There's also a free clinic, wherein you can have
free pap smear. But when it comes to colorectal cancer, there’s nothing [there are
no awareness programs]. That’s why we know nothing about it! We do not know
the disease.)

Five (5) participants reported awareness or familiarity with colorectal cancer due
to previous family history of CRC or having an acquaintance, who have developed the

disease.

82

“(6 Joquinu juedionsed 40) 6g Aq paseadde ssooo1g SUIZI[eUOSIag OWIOY} BY} 10} sJoLNSUOD doIBop-jsIJ/SOpod [Ie Jey) SUBOUT | ULINJOD UI (6d) PUL :30N

6s | | i Sasnes jemjeweans]
E — ‘aaUeLP Aq SIO 35ne spelods
m | AYUNU yea")
“S7proyuouay BUAeH]
CT ‘BE pio 0} anp padojareq

POg a} Ul BulyyaOs jo sruasalg

Paweyul 1 YD] — sasned rHojoiskyd pue 2neuay

Yugpnyo|

SpPOVNG UO sje ] Bune payeadey

rt] a] a] oe] ae] a] a] a} ex]

‘aNDIAeWeAO, S@SNED |eDISAYd|

yt | € $5a195 [DIDO|OUDASG Sasne [eIo|OUDASG] a
T ToREGNIO 8
€ De ‘Jewayp “Uognjod 07 ainsodxy sasned jequawuouAu3)| (6¢) J22U2 g
9 Juawebevew pareep [00d] lepaiojoa} >
(4 Deu (‘SAY G josasnD|
(4 SIE Jas 1000 I pananiad) §
€ TIN /uogesnes}
T eM ‘ByeU Jaye JUaDUINSUT aseasp| >
A (aj tL J8IUED YYM IOSSE SPO0} JO BHAT jouogdened) 2
ul Had Sygey ugee 1004) Sasne jeoineyag / a\Aysay euosieg) {
vivij{w{[v{v{[v{ivi[wiwlw w | v | W | ¥ [NOON -22u8tpag uo paseq uoneaynens xs)
wi]wilkH[Ww{w wfH[ HH HW] H |W [paunauas - aaudipag uo paseg uonerynens »:
Al I 1 t{ ou ee ee AL} AL] AL | Ut [Burdeas 2¥9
s of ofolojsfofoljs|s|{s[slo] o | s [pueccdumuoneiy
v ve | se | ee | | 6 | sx [zz] etl orjor-|z-| ez] tz | 6 |{pueunsuoy-pueqorg) arusieyia o8y

9 | 2 || to 92 | Sp |) 25 |pURaoI Jo aay

ss | tr | sv | by | oe | ez | ez | ze | ot | te] oz] os | 25 | ay | cy | 22 | ap [Puensuogjo aay.
i
4

Se
Ww a [3 EI EI Ww 4 wi] Wwfaiw 3 |W] WW] W | W [puRqoig jo x8g

3] 4] 4] 4 |W [pueunsuo jo xas
Id | 91d | STd| tTd d d! Tid Old 6d '8d)\2d"'9d''Sd vd: Ed’ 7d Td SAq UoneInjeS EEG

IQOUBD [e}09I0[O9 Jo sasned paatoolad UO saLloBa}20-qns sjonjsuod pasIowY ['p 292.

83

B. Personal Perception of Disease Causation

The participants have differing views on what they believe as the cause(s) of their
FDRs’ colorectal cancer. Table 4.15 shows the emerged constructs and subcategories on

personal perception of disease causation.

The first-degree relatives of cancer patients have various beliefs on what may
have caused their relatives’ colorectal cancer. In most cases, not one particular cause is
identified, rather the participants considered colorectal cancer as a result of various
factors. Participants’ perceived causes of colorectal cancer can be grouped into seven

subcategories, namely:
1. Lifestyle or Behavioural Causes

Majority of the participants (16 out of 17) considered lifestyle or behavioural
factors as one of the reasons behind their relatives’ cancer. Out of these sixteen
participants, thirteen (13) identified behavioural factors as the likely (or number one)

cause of colorectal cancer.

Table 4.16 shows the list of perceived causes of CRC under the lifestyle or

behavioural factors.

84

Table 4.16 Perceived lifestyle or behavioural causes of colorectal cancer

First-order Constructs Specifics
Intake of foods Q Foods that are not easy to digest (burnt / grilled 12 8
associated with CRC foods, meat & meat products, vegetables)
development O Foods that irritate the colon causing haemorrhoid
development (spicy foods)
Ignoring S/Sx resulting Q Ignoring S/Sx of haemorthoid or tumour > 6 1
to delayed management delayed removal of the haemorrhoid/tumour/cyst
> worsens > CRC
Poor eating habits Q_ Missed meals, binge eating, insufficient intake of 4 1
foods
Vices Q_ Alcohol drinking, smoking 3 1
Improper hygiene / poor Q “Di malinis sa katawan” 2 1
self care
Physical inactivity Q Not exercising, sitting for long periods of time 2 0
Insufficient water intake Q Not drinking enough water to cleanse the colon 1 1

n= refers to number of responses for the specific construct; nc = number of responses identifying the construct
as the likely cause of proband’s cancer

Lifestyle or behavioural causes that emerged in the interviews, as reflected in the

table above, include the following:

a. Intake of foods associated with colorectal cancer development

Twelve (12) participants mentioned intake of foods associated with
colorectal cancer development as a possible cause of their relatives’ CRC. Eight
(8) of this twelve identified the latter as the main cause of their parents’ or

siblings’ cancer.

85

For the participants, food intake is one of the potential causes of colorectal

cancer development since the function of the colon has to do with digestion of

food. However, the foods they associate with colorectal cancer development may

or may not be included in the existing causation theories about CRC. The

following are the foods the participants associated with CRC development:

Foods which are not easy to digest, such as:
Burned or grilled foods
P1: believes that eating burned or grilled foods can “speed up the
development of CRC” in individuals with or without family history of
cancer
Meat and meat products
P17: believes that brother’s history of working abroad for five years,
where meat is a staple food, might have caused the CRC
Vegetables
P17: shared that “excessive intake of green, leafy vegetables” such as
those in “crunchy salad” may have caused colorectal cancer
“Ang colon cancer dahil sa kinakain daw. Narinig ko din na cause daw
kapag kumakain ng gulay na mahirap tunawin sa tyan. Yung green, leafy
vegetables daw, yung nasa crunchy na salad. Narinig ko yan dun sa
constituent namin na nagkacolon cancer. Ang cause daw ng colon cancer
nya, gulay daw. Sobrang kain ng gulay.” (I heard colon cancer is due to
foods we eat. I heard that eating vegetables that are difficult to digest,
such as the green, leafy vegetables in crunchy salads, can cause colon

cancer. I heard it from a constituent who have developed the disease. She
mentioned that her colon cancer is due to excessive intake of vegetables.)

86

b.

Foods that irritate the colon or cause haemorrhoid development, such as:
* Spicy foods
P7: shared that when eating spicy foods, there is a heat or burning
sensation from the spice that doesn’t go away easily and can be felt even
when moving the bowels; this prickly pain (“hapdi”) in the rectal area

may result to haemorrhoid development.

Ignoring signs and symptoms resulting to delayed management

Six (6) participants mentioned that their affected relatives have a tendency
to ignore their health conditions, which resulted to delay in management, and
consequently development of colorectal cancer. One participant (P14) identified
this as the main cause of her mother’s colorectal cancer. This perceived cause is

demonstrated by the following excerpts:

P14: “Sa tingin ko, kaya nagkaroon ng colorectal cancer si tatay ay dahil matagal
na di natanggal yung bukol, kaya naging kanser.” (I think father developed
colorectal cancer because the tumour was not removed immediately, thus it
evolved to cancer.)

P10: “Seven years ago, sabi ng kapatid ko parang may isang butlig lang na
nakapa sa may puwetan, tapos di na nya pinansin. Tapos last year, nahirapan na
syang dumumi.Akala namin almoranas lang, tapos biglang sakit na. Tapos nakita
ang bukol, tapos biglang kanser na. Sa tingin ko naging kanser, kasi napabayaan
ng matagal.” (Seven years ago, my brother had a small cyst in the rectal area,
which he had ignored. Then last year, he had difficulty moving his bowels.
Initially, we thought it’s just a haemorrhoid; however, it suddenly became a
disease. Then, the tumour was discovered, and then all of a sudden, it’s cancer.
I think it become cancer because the cyst was neglected for a long time.)

87

P7: “Sa tingin ko, yung rectal cancer, para yang simpleng almoranas na lumala.
Parang di napansin agad, so yung almoranas, nainfect na tapos lumaki, at naging
kanser.” (I think rectal cancer is like a simple haemorrhoid that worsened. The
haemorrhoid was not immediately noticed, thus it got infected, grew larger, and
became cancer.)

Poor eating habits

Poor eating habits is one of the factors perceived as an initiator of
colorectal cancer development. This factor refers to tendencies to miss meals
(“nalilipasan ng gutom”), do binge eating, and eat lesser than usual (due to lack

of appetite).

P8: “Yung sanhi ng kanser ni Mama, siguro dahil matakaw kasi talaga si Mama.
Madalas kumain ng marami sa isang kain. Lagi siyang busog kaya nahihirapan
na siyang dumumi. [Dahil dito] parang nagsusugat na talaga ang loob ng puwet
nya. Parang nagagasgas.” (I think the cause of my mother’s cancer has to do with
her being a voracious eater. She often eats a lot of foods in one sitting.She’'s
always full. That's why she has difficulty moving his bowels. [Because of this,]
her rectum gets abraded.)

P15: “Yung kapatid ko, manikyurista kasi. Syempre, pag nalilibang, halos di na
kumakain. Pag-uwi nya, iinom ng maraming tubig tapos biglang kakain ng
marami. So, parang nalipasan na ng gutom tapos biglang kain ng marami. Siguro
dahil laging nangyayari kaya nagkaroon ng kanser.” (My sister is a manicurist.
Of course, when she’s busy with work, she almost does not eat anything. Once
she gets home, she tends to drink lots of water and then suddenly eat a lot of
food. So, it’s like her hunger has already passed and then she suddenly eats a lot.
Maybe because this happens often, that’s why she developed cancer.)

. Vices
Alcohol drinking and cigarette smoking were also mentioned as factors

that increase the likelihood of colorectal cancer development.

88

e. Others (perceived causes mentioned by only one or two participants)
Some participants believe that insufficient water intake, poor hygiene, and

physical inactivity might also be the reason behind their relatives’ CRC.

2. Genetic and Physiologic Causes

Ten (10) participants mentioned factors that can be classified under genetic and

physiologic causes, as reflected in the table below.

Table 4.17 Perceived genetic and physiologic causes of colorectal cancer

First-order Constructs

Presence of “something” in the body (e.g., cancer cells, something

unknown) that when triggered causes CRC

Inheritance of cancer disease traits 0
Old age 1 0
Having weak immunity / immune system 1 0 |
Having haemorthoid/s 1 0 |

n= refers to number of responses for the specific construct; nyc = number of responses identifying the
construct as the likely cause of proband’s cancer

Four (4) participants believed that their relatives may have inherited the disease
from their parents or ancestors. Another four (4) participants shared that everyone has
something in their body, such as cancer cells, that when triggered resulted to colorectal
cancer development. The latter idea is demonstrated in the following statement:

P4: “Lahat naman tayo may di normal na cells sa katawan. Pag nagkataon na mas

dumami yun, yung ang nagko-cause ng cancer. Nadadaig kasi yung mga normal

cells natin.” (All of us have atypical or abnormal cells in our body. When these

atypical cells grew in number or multiply, it causes cancer. The normal cells get
overwhelmed.)

89

One participant (P3) likened cancer development to acquired naevus (or mole)

since both suddenly grow or appear without the person knowing, as shown in the excerpt

below:

P3: “Pwede sigurong dahilan ng cancer yung kinakain. Pero pwede din na nasa
katawan mo na mismo, di mo alam, bigla na lang tutubo. Di mo alam kung saan
galing, biglang tutubo na lang, biglang magkakaroon na lang. Parang nunal,
tutubo na lang bigla bigla nang di mo alam. Yung bukol bigla na lang din tutubo,
tapos dadami. Parang nanganganak [yung bukol], tapos pupunta yun sa iba ibang
bahagi ng katawan.” (Foods may be a cause of cancer. But maybe [cancer] is
already inside the body. Unaware, it can suddenly grow or develop. You are not
sure where it (i.e., cancer) came from, it just suddenly develops. Suddenly, you
already have cancer. It is similar to a mole. It suddenly pops out without you
knowing. The tumour is like that, it just suddenly develops, and then it multiples,
and then it goes to different parts of the body.)

Having an existing health condition, specifically haemorrhoids, is also perceived

as a potential cause of CRC.

cancer.

Old age and weak immunity also emerged as possible causes of their relatives’

One participant mentioned that those with weak immunity are likely to “catch”

cancer easily.

Environmental Causes

Exposure to dirty environment, pollution and/or chemicals was also one of the

causes mentioned by the participants. Some participants mentioned that goods nowadays

have a lot of chemicals in them, which may have caused cancer. Mosquitoes and other

insects

may also be vectors that carry cancer, according to one participant.

90

Another participant also mentioned that compared to older times, people at
present are more exposed to pollution and chemicals, which is maybe one reason why
this generation developed cancer at an earlier age. A sample excerpt of a perceived
environmental cause is shown below:

P16: “Baka nakuha din [ang colon cancer] sa kapaligiran. Kasi di natin alam

ngayon kung ang mga lamok, dengue lang ang dala. Yung mga insekto katulad ng

langaw pwede din magdala ng kanser.” (Maybe colon cancer also comes from the

environment. Nowadays, we're not certain that mosquitoes only bring dengue.
Maybe insects, such as flies, can also carry cancer.)

4. Psychological Causes

Three participants mentioned psychological stress as the reason or one of the
reasons behind their relatives’ colorectal cancer. The participants shared that their
relatives have been experiencing stress due to problems, which results to poor eating
habits and poor self care. Psychological stress can make one’s body and immunity
weaker, which maybe the cause of cancer development. One participant believes that her
brother’s cancer may have been a result of his depression (the proband was reportedly

depressed for two years prior to cancer diagnosis), as demonstrated in the excerpt below:

P4: “Iniisip ko din kung saan galing yung sigmoid cancer, kasi wala naman sa lahi
namin. Baka psychological ang dahilan. Psychological stress ba. Kasi dati nung
may trabaho yan, masayahin yan. Pero nung nawalan ng trabaho, parang na-
depressed. Nag-isip ng kung anu-ano. Hindi na sya lumalabas... nawalan ng social
life. Parang depressed nga.” (I was thinking what caused my brother's sigmoid
cancer since it’s not a disease common in our lineage. I thought, maybe it was
due to psychological reasons, like psychological stress. Because before, when he
had a job, he was very happy. But when he lost it, he got depressed. He began to
think of various things. He did not go out... losing his social life. He was
depressed.)

91

J. Physical Causes

Physical causes also emerged as a subcategory during the interviews. Some

participants believe the colorectal cancer may have developed due to:

Over-fatigue or physical stress

Repeated trauma or falling on the buttocks. One participant associated his
father’s colorectal cancer development with two histories of fall, which he
believes to have caused trauma to the rectal area.

Childbirth. One participant (P11) mentioned that childbirth may have caused
her mother’s colorectal cancer. The participant believes that women are more
likely to develop CRC compared to men since they give birth. She noted that
the number of births doesn’t matter and just one history of childbirth is
enough to cause colon cancer.

P11: “Nung una, ang alam ko sa pagkain ang dahilan [ng colon cancer].
Tapos dito [sa ospital], narinig ko na dahil daw sa panganganak. Mas prone
daw ang babae na magkaroon ng colon cancer kasi nanganganak sila. Wala
naman sa dami ng pinapanganak pero basta daw nanganak. Kasi daw ang
pag-iri yung nagcause ng colon cancer. Kaya parang ako, ito na
pinapaniwalaan ko na cause ng sakit ni nanay.” (At first, foods were what I
believe as the cause of colon cancer. But I heard here [in the hospital] that it
is due to childbirth. Women are more prone to develop colon cancer because
they give birth. It’s not about the number of times the person gives birth but
Just one occurrence is enough, because it is when the woman pushes the baby
during delivery that causes colon cancer. So for me, this is what I believe as
the cause of my mother’s disease.)

6. Sporadic Occurrence

One participant believes that her relatives’ colon cancer may have occurred by

chance. She believes that cancer just happens, regardless of lifestyle or gene inheritance.

92

7. Supernatural Cause
Supernatural causes for colorectal cancer have rarely surfaced during the
interviews. Only one participant mentioned believing that her brother’s cancer develop
because of God’s will. She shared that God may have given this disease to his brother as
a “wake-up call” to remember his faith.
P4: “Baka paraan ng Diyos yan [ang pagkakaroon nya ng kanser] para maalala
yung faith niya. Parang wake-up call. Kasi parang nakalimot siya eh. Pero talaga
naman, pag-nagkasakit ka, makakapagdasal ka talaga eh.” (Maybe my brother’s

cancer is a way of God to bring back his faith. It is like a wake-up call, because it
seems he has forgotten [his faith]. And it is really true that when you get sick, you

get to pray.)

93

C. Personal Perception of Disease Inheritance

Table 4.18 shows the constructs and sub-categories emerging from the participant

interviews about their understanding of disease inheritance.

The following are the different sub-categories derived from the interviews that

explain the perspectives of the participants about disease inheritance:

= Understanding of the term “namana” or “namamana” in the context of disease

inheritance

= Perspectives on how diseases are inherited

= Perceptions on colorectal cancer inheritance

= First-degree relatives’ (FDRs’) descriptions on when cancer is perceived to be

running in the family

= Perceived heritability of cancer in the family: “Does cancer run in your family?”

94

(6 oquinu quedioiyred 10) 6g Aq pareadde ssooo1g SuIZI[eUOSIeg SUIaY} dU) JOJ sJorLNSUOD de1Bap-jsI/Sapod [Je Jey) SuUBAU | UUINJOD Ul (6d) PUL :°30N

re] s aad Papaye Yds OM]
Tae Wade TOREISUSD INS E UIE T ISe3I IV]
os T —— +S "O'AGI-B) abe DUNOK © ye aseasIG|
62s | 6 ww. SYOS/SUCI 31 SSARE[O] PSP AY
sez] + sv ‘pis AUe WO SSAREIA! PADALY]
ese | 9 ass SPs sues WOU SAREE PAPALV|
67s | 6 DY ‘BAK TOUS 70 SSapsedey]
ste | & DS BAY SUSS SUNS] gAjwies 249 Ul UNL JeDUE>D Saop Vay}
Ooor| at TAN TSSUES AG PASSE FOATE|STJO OU Y] — :OURUaYUI JaDUE> Jo LORdaD.a4|
bee |S UG aqren|
ese] 9 N ON} «Asm Ipauay DUD s,pURqoUd aip)
ver [Ss Wak BoA] S] :sOURyUaYUI 42DUR JO UORdaDJ0q|
os | t Tw el]
sae uN oN epaUDYUI aq Z2DUR 123>210}00]
592 | et rN BOA] _UeD :430UED AseyIp 394 UO SMaIA
ese] 9 py Sseasp TOAD TOUR FO NYS Se]
es |t ROW, TaROND SeasIp TUOREDALY
sec é mS SJuoqeTauss oM/au0 dys UPD]
6s T Eas TReD ‘piles Bulsn/Bugee Aq asp j0 DuIssed|
es [tT mS. TI 5 p05 wo paseq ssp BugUeqUT|
sec | > ae Bs TA j0d Jou UOISSUSUER [qUOZOH|
os | t XIA {UIFXSS) UOSRISUED [EORIDA
wes | st TK DD<-D<d *UOSSMISUED RIAA
se] qwoD [a¥d5) SHEN SSP PAUIGUOD paquayu
ese | 9 : PIaL ‘Pool YONONA UOSSSUEI,] due SaSPaSIP MOY LO SeAq>adsJed|
Gn BG Susy Ta5Ue 10) SSuab sip BuTeH|
se] - Lar TeISSUe Woy 35p BURST
ve | Ss Pia Pool nap Hien Sseasip BUARDOY
es T Xess Kes aWes "O-d Sieg asp jo bussed
tse] 9 Er] sp Jo iy SARISOd © BUNCH (7 sueau ,euewewen,)
ve | ot eT quand y aseasip payvequ DUNE saseasip Asmipasay/paquayul
Ta | 8 SENS pasodsipa. jaa] 40 .eueweweu, jo Gulpueyssepun|
%o d 91d d bid d d d Old d d ao v u oO YO
v v w v v v ¥ w v w Vv [NOON ||P8d UO PSSEG UO}IBDYIIEIIS 45}y
Ww wTHi wl] w wfilwf{k WH | W [euneyag- eeil|peg uo pereq voneayensasiy
a LS ALY Al] wi fRuiessous
s ° ° ° o fo s O | oO | s |pueqoiduumuoneiay
“Z Le Ld ve SE se az 6 ez} 1% 6 |(Puernsuc.- pueqoig) e2uaseyI0 aay
0 oo | ec [el ec | os [ts | v5 [te 32 | sp | 2s [puencsgioaiy
€s te sv bad 24 & (54 ze iv | cz | Sp |Pusrinsuca jo aay
w El EJ EJ EJ w Ed w wi w W |pueqosgjoxes
E w 4 4 4 w E] E 4 EI W |Pueansu0> jo x8s
Zid | 9td|Std| vtd Bemeraetsrbes di td'Td ried

(6d)|
soueuayul
‘aseasip|

uo uogdaaisg|
uO

-— (64) 5529010 Bujz}Ieu0s sg

soatjoedsiad ooue}LoYUr aseasip UO Ssat1039}¥9-qns pue sjonysuOS pesIoWY gI"p 21921

95

1. Understanding of the term “namana” in terms of disease inheritance

For the recruited siblings and children of cancer patients, “namana” in relation to

disease inheritance can be defined based on the constructs in the table below.

Table 4.19 Filipino FDRs’ definitions of the term “namana” in relation to disease
inheritance

First-order Constructs

Having inherited the disease from a parent

Being predisposed or susceptible to develop the same disease as the proband

Having a “positive family history” of disease (i.e., Definition 2: “having multiple
relatives affected with cancer, with additional features demonstrating CRC as
Tunning in the family)

Having received disease traits through blood

Having inherited the disease from an ancestor

Having inherited the disease of the parent with the same sex (i.e., a daughter
inheriting her mother’s disease traits or a son inheriting her father’s disease traits)

Having the “genes for cancer”

Majority of the participants define “namana” as having inherited the disease from
a parent (14 out of 17) and/or being predisposed or likely to develop the disease (8 out of

17). These constructs are reflected in the following excerpts:

P6: “Pag namana, parang nasalin... magulang papunta sa anak.” (When you say
the disease is inherited, it’s like the disease is transferred or passed from parent
to child.)

P9: “Namamana, ibig sabihin, pwede rin po ako magkaroon ng ganun [na sakit].
Naipapasa po sakin. Pwedeng galing sa papa ko o sa mga kamag-anak ko
din...pwede din maipasa ng lolo yung sakit niya sa amin [mga apo].” (Namamana
means I can also develop the same disease. It means disease traits are passed to
me. It can be from my father or my other relatives... my grandfather can also pass
his diseases to us, his grandchildren.)

96

P1: “Nakakatakot po pag naiisip na namamana ang sakit. [Kasi pag namamana,]
ibig sabihin baka magkaroon din ako ng ganun kasi nagkaroon yung kapamilya
ko.” (It is frightening to think that a disease is inherited. Because when you say
it’s inherited, it means that I can also develop the same disease because my
relative has it.)

“Namana” is also associated with “having a family history” of the disease (6 out
of 17), with positive family history referring to the disease running in the family, instead
of its actual definition, which is having at least one family member affected with the

disease.

P2: “Namamana, ibig sabihin, parang nasa family history. Ibig sabihin,
inheritance o nasa lahi.” (Namamana means the disease seems to be in the family
history. It means inheritance or the disease being in the lineage.)

P7: “Pag namana, ibig sabihin may family history. Nanggaling sa ancient family
mo, dun sa nauna sayo. Kasi pag sa ngayon lang nagkaroon, walang family
history, di namana. So, baka sa pagkain nauha [yung sakit].” (When you say the
disease is inherited, it means having a positive family history. It means the disease
came from your ancestors, those who came before you. If the disease also
appeared now, then there’s no family history, thus it’s not inherited. So, the
disease may have been due to food.)

P11: “Sa tingin ko, namana pag nasa family history. Kung ano talaga yung sakit
sa pamilya, kunwari high blood, usually talaga meron na sa history nila. Kaya pag
ganun, nasa history na, namamana yung mga ganung sakit.” (J think the disease is
inherited if there’s a family history of disease. When a disease is really in the
family, like hypertension, usually, they really have a family history of it. And so
when it’s like that, when the disease is in their history, it means the disease is
inherited.)

97

2. Perspectives on how diseases are inherited

Based on the interviews, participants believe that diseases are inherited through

the various mechanisms, shown in the table below.

Table 4.20 Filipino first-degree relatives’ perspectives on how diseases are inherited

Diseases are passed through vertical transmission (vertical gene transfer) from parent to
child.

Diseases are passed through blood. 6

Combined disease traits from parents and grandparents are passed to the child/offspring. 4

Horizontal transmission or horizontal gene transfer (i.e., sibling to sibling) is not
possible

An inherited disease can skip one/two generations before presenting again.

Diseases of the mother are passed to their daughters while father’s passed their disease
traits to their sons.

Individuals “inherit” their relative’s disease when they use the same utensils and eat the 1
same food

Diseases become more severe and appear at an earlier age as it is passed from one
generation to another.

Diseases are inherited based on the will of a higher being (i.e., God’s will).

Diseases are passed through vertical transmission/vertical gene transfer.
Majority of the participants believe that disease traits are passed from parent to child.

Diseases manifesting in a parent can be inherited by their children, regardless of sex.

Diseases are inherited through blood. The concept of disease traits being passed
or inherited through blood is also a common construct emerging from the interviews.

“Namana” or “namamana sa dugo” is often used to describe how diseases are inherited.

98

P6: “Pag namana, ibig sabihin nasalin. Nasa dugo na. Siguro sa pamilya namin,
yung cancer nanggaling sa tatay ko o sa side ng tatay ko. Magulang papunta sa
anak.” (When you say namana, it means the disease is transferred. The disease is
already in the blood. Maybe in my family, cancer is passed by my father or
relatives from my father’s side. The disease is transferred from parent to child.)
Combined disease traits from grandparents and parents are inherited by the
offspring. Disease traits from one’s grandparents and even early ancestors can be passed
to the current generation if one or both parents have inherited them. Disease traits from

both parents are passed to their offspring. The excerpt below reflects this construct and

also the idea of inheriting disease traits through blood.

P1: “Yung sakit namamana po sa dugo. Yung dugo ko, ng asawa ko, at ng nanay
at tatay namin ay nagsasama tapos may epekto ito sa anak. Yung sakit pwedeng
makuha sa dugo.” (The disease is inherited through blood. My blood, my wife's
blood, the blood of our parents, are combined and have an effect to the child. You
can develop the disease in the blood.)

Horizontal transmission or horizontal gene transfer is deemed not possible.
Inheriting or passing disease traits from one sibling to another is unlikely. Inheriting the

disease from an aunt or uncle is also considered improbable.

Inherited diseases can skip one or two generations. Diseases, such as cancer,
can skip generations before presenting again in the succeeding generations. A most
common example provided by the participants is when one’s grandfather developed the
disease and the grandchildren also developed the same disease, even with unaffected

parents. This is demonstrated in the excerpt below:

99

P16: “Para sa akin pag namana, parang halimabawa, ang lola ko yung may sakit,
nanay ko wala, tapos napunta sa apo. Parang ganun. Kung wala sa mother,
maaaring lumabas sa apo. Basta laging lumalabas kasi namana. Pwedeng mag-
skip ng isang henerasyon tapos sa apo lumabas.” (When a disease is inherited, for
example, my grandmother developed the disease, my mother did not have it, but
then the grandchild developed the disease. It’s like that. When the disease did not
present in the mother, it can manifest in the grandchild. When you say it’s
inherited, it means the disease always appears. Though, it can skip one
generation (the parent's generation) before presenting again among
grandchildren.)

Diseases are inherited through sex-linked, vertical transmission. Some of the
participants believe that diseases that mothers developed are passed to their daughters
while diseases that fathers developed are inherited by their sons. Transmission of disease

traits is influenced by the sex of the offspring.

P4: “Kunwari yung tatay may sakit, yung anak na lalaki magkakaroon din ng
ganung sakit. Kung yung nanay naman yung may ganung sakit, possible na yung
anak na babae magkaroon din.” (For example, the father developed the disease,
the son can also develop the same disease. But if it’s the mother who developed
the said disease, it is possible that the daughter will develop the disease.)
Diseases are inherited similar to infectious and/or food-borne disease

transmission. Eating the same food, using the same utensils and/or living in the same

environment can make a person “inherit” or “catch” the disease of their affected relative.

100

Inherited diseases, such as cancer, become more severe as it is passed from
one generation to another. The concept of anticipation also emerged from the
interviews. Anticipation, in genetics, refers to the phenomenon where signs and
symptoms of a genetic condition become more severe and appear at an earlier age as it is
passed from one generation to the next (National Library of Medicine (US), 2017). One
participant mentioned that cancer may become more severe and develop earlier than the

proband’s age at cancer diagnosis in the succeeding generations.

P16: “Pag namana, yung sakit pwede mag-evolve talaga. Pwede mas bumata yung
magkakaroon nun. For example, kung si lola nagkaroon ng kanser ng 50 years
old, yung next na magkakaroon baka mas bata sa 50 magkasakit. Sa tingin ko,
habang tumatagal o dumadami yung henerasyon, mas bumabata yung
nagkakasakit.” (When a disease is inherited, it can really “evolve”. People can
develop it at an earlier age. For example, if my grandmother developed cancer at
50, the next one who developed it may have it before 50. I think, as time passes or
as generations pass, those who developed the disease become affected at younger

ages.)

Inheriting the disease based on God’s will. Diseases are inherited or passed
based on the will of a higher being. One participant mentioned that an individual inherits

/ passed the disease if God dictates it to happen.

P10: “Sa tingin ko mamamana mo yung sakit, kung yun talaga yung binigay sayo
ni God. Yung sakit sayo talaga yan.” (I think you will inherit the disease if God
will really give it you. If it’s like that, then that disease is really for you.)

During the interviews, participants are likely to use familiar chronic diseases to

explain their perspectives on disease inheritance.

101

3. Perceptions on colorectal cancer inheritance

This part of the results discusses the opinions of the participants regarding these
two questions: (a) Can colorectal cancer be inherited? (b) Is the proband’s CRC

inherited?

Based on the interviews, majority of the participants (13 out of 17) believes that
colorectal cancer can be inherited. Three (3) participants, however, believed that CRC is
not hereditary. The rationale behind this answer is because they believe that (a) everyone
already has cancer cells, and (b) colorectal cancer develops mainly because of lifestyle or
behavioural choices and not because it was inherited. One participant is uncertain on

whether colorectal cancer is hereditary.

As for their personal family history of colorectal cancer, five (5) participants,
from those who also responded that CRC can be inherited, believe that their relatives’
cancer is hereditary. Six (6) FDRs, three of whom do not consider CRC as hereditary,
responded that they think their relatives’ CRC is not inherited. The remaining five (5)

participants are uncertain whether their relatives’ cancer is hereditary or not.

4. When does cancer run in the family?

The participants believe that cancer runs in the family when a number of relatives
(minimum range based on interviews: 2 - 5 relatives) are affected with cancer, in addition

to at least one of the following conditions in Table 4.21.

102

Table 4.21 Constructs describing when cancer is perceived to be running in the family

der Constructs

Affected with cancer, regardless of cancer type

Affected with cancer, of the same cancer type

9
Affected relatives are first-degree or second-degree relatives of each other 9 |

6

6

Affected relatives should be from the same side of the family (maternal or
paternal)

A parent and a child are affected (two FDRs) 5
Affected relatives from any/both sides of the family 4
At least one individual affected in every generation for three (3) succeeding 3
generations (e.g., affected grandparent, parent and child)

Disease developed at a young age, specifically 8-19 years old 1

Majority of the participants consider cancer as running in the family when at least
two relatives, who are first-degree (parent and child) or second-degree relatives

(grandparent and grandchild), are affected with cancer, regardless of cancer type.

J. Participant views on cancer running in their family

This part discusses the opinion of participants on whether cancer runs in their

family. The table below shows the participants’ answers to this question.

Table 4.22 Perception of cancer as a disease “running in their family”

Cancer seems to run in my family. 4
Cancer does not run in my family. 11
I’m uncertain if cancer runs in my family. 2

103

Majority of the participants believe that cancer does not run in their family since
only the proband or a few relatives have developed cancer. Four (4) participants shared
that they think cancer runs in their family because (a) multiple family members
developed colorectal cancer, other cancer types, and/or tumours, or (b) their family thinks
that their relatives’ cancer is hereditary and will likely affect other family members in the

future.

104

Emerged constructs on Theme 2 (Personalizing Process) based on demographic
characteristics of participants

Demographic characteristics of participants, specifically age, sex and educational
attainment, were also considered in the analysis of constructs emerging from the

interviews.

Perceptions stratified by age. Approximately half of the participants recruited in
the study (8 of 17) fall under the Later Adolescence (18-24 years old) and Early
Adulthood (25-34 years old) categories, while the other half (9 of 17) are under the
Middle Adulthood (35-54 years old) age category. Table 4.23 reflects perceptions under

Theme 2, stratified based on age group.

The perceived causes of CRC between the 18-34 and the 35-54 age groups are
very similar with each other, except on the ideas of CRC resulting from physical factors
(such as trauma, childbirth and physical stress), which is only raised by the 18-34 (Later
Adolescence and Early Adulthood) age group, and of CRC being caused by the will of a

higher being, which only emerged among the Middle Adulthood age group.

Perceptions on disease inheritance are also similar between the two groups, except
on the construct of only inheriting the disease from a parent with the same sex, which
emerged among the Middle Adulthood group, and the statement mentioning inheriting

“genes for cancer”, which was raised by the younger age group.

105

Table 4.23 Constructs under Theme 2 — Personalizing Process, stratified by age group

Constructs

Perceived causes of relatives’ colorectal cancer:

LA& EA
(18-34).0.)

VA
(35-54y.0.)
n=9

passed from one generation to another.

Lifestyle or behavioural causes 7 9

Genetic and physiologic causes 4 6

Environmental causes (chemicals, pollution, vectors) 1 3 |

Psychological causes (depression, negative thinking) 1 2

Physical causes (trauma, physical stress, childbirth) 3 0

Supernatural cause (God’s will) 0 1

Sporadic occurrence (by chance) 1 1
Perceptions on disease inheritance: “Namana” means...

Having inherited the disease from a parent 6 8

Being predisposed or susceptible to develop the same disease as 5 3

the proband

Having a “positive family history” of disease (Definition 2) 3 3

Having received disease traits through blood 3 2 |

Having inherited the disease from an ancestor 2 2 |

Having inherited the disease of the parent with the same sex 0 1 |

Having the “genes for cancer” 1 0 |
Perceptions on how diseases are inherited: |

Diseases are passed through vertical transmission (vertical gene

* 6 9

transfer) from parent to child.

Diseases are passed through blood. 3 3

Combined disease traits from parents and grandparents are passed 1 3

to the child/offspring.

Horizontal transmission or horizontal gene transfer (i.e., sibling to 2 2

sibling) is not possible

An inherited disease can skip one/two generations before 2 2

presenting again.

Diseases of the mother are passed to their daughters while father’s 0 1

passed their disease traits to their sons.

Individuals “inherit” their relative’s disease when they use the 1 0

same utensils and eat the same food

Diseases become more severe and appear at an earlier age as it is 0 1

106

LA & EA

Constructs - ; (18-34y.0.) (35-
Diseases are inherited based on the will of a higher being (i.e., 1 0
God’s will).

Perceived heritability of colorectal cancer: |
CRC is hereditary and proband’s CRC is inherited 2 3
CRC is hereditary but proband’s CRC is not inherited 1 3

CRC is hereditary but not sure if proband’s CRC is inherited

3
CRC is not hereditary and proband’s CRC is not inherited 2 1
Uncertain if CRC is hereditary and if proband’s CRC is inherited 0

Cancer runs in the family when a number of relatives (at least 2-5)
are affected in addition to at least one of the following:

Affected with cancer, regardless of cancer type 3 6

Affected relatives are first-degree or second-degree relatives of 4 5

each other

Affected with cancer, of the same cancer type 2 2

Affected relatives should be from the same side of the family 4 2

(maternal or paternal)

A parent and a child are affected (two FDRs) 2 3

Affected relatives from any/both sides of the family 1 3

At least one individual affected in every generation for three @) 2 1

succeeding generations (e.g., affected grandparent, parent & child)

Disease developed at a young age, specifically 8-19 years old 1 0
Perceived presence of familial or hereditary risk for CRC:

I think cancer runs in my family. 2 2

I think cancer does not run in my family. 5 6

I am uncertain if cancer runs in my family. 1 1

n= number of respondents with the specific characteristic
LA = later adolescence (18-24y.0,), EA = Early Adulthood (25-34y.0.), MA = middle adulthood (35-54y.0.)

107

The ideas of inheriting combined disease traits from both parents and even
grandparents, offspring only inheriting disease traits of a parent with the same sex, and
the disease becoming more severe as it is passed in the next generations are more
apparent among the Middle Adulthood age group. While the ideas of inheriting the
disease by using the same utensils or eating the same food, as well as inheriting based on

the will of a higher being are only raised by the younger age group.

Views on the perceived heritability and presence of familial/hereditary risk for
colorectal cancer are generally similar between the two age groups. Both groups
generally believe that CRC is hereditary but are indecisive on whether their probands’
CRC was inherited. The perception of cancer as a disease not running in their families is

also the majority’s response for both age groups.

When it comes to descriptions reflecting presence of familial or hereditary cancer,
a larger portion of participants from the Middle Adulthood age group described cancer as
running in the family if multiple relatives are affected regardless of cancer type. The
younger 18-34 age group, on the other hand, tend to use the constructs of the disease
manifesting mostly in one lineage, and the disease presenting at 8-19 years old, as criteria

to identify if cancer runs in the family.

Perceptions stratified by sex. When it comes to perceived causes of their
relatives’ CRC, environmental and physical causes are raised more by male participants
than female ones (though the idea of childbirth as a cause of CRC is raised by a female
participant). Supernatural cause and sporadic occurrence of CRC only emerged among

female participants, as reflected in Table 4.24.

108

Table 4.24 Constructs under Theme 2 — Personalizing Process, stratified by sex of
participants

Constructs Mie : te
Ny =6 ny=11
S(%) F(%) |
Perceived causes of relatives’ colorectal cancer:
Lifestyle or behavioural causes 5 (83) 11 (100)
Genetic and physiologic causes 4 (67) 6 (55)
Environmental causes (chemicals, pollution, vectors) 2 (33) 2 (18)
Psychological causes (depression, negative thinking) 1(17) 2 (18)
Physical causes (trauma, physical stress, childbirth) 2 (33) 1(9)
Supernatural cause (God’s will) 0 (0) 1(9)
Sporadic occurrence (by chance) 0(0) 2 (18)
Perceptions on disease inheritance: “Namana” means...
Having inherited the disease from a parent 5 (83) 9 (82)
rie lila or susceptible to develop the same disease as 3.(50) 5 (45)
Having a “positive family history” of disease (Definition 2) 2 (33) 4 (36)
Having received disease traits through blood 1(17) 4 (36)
Having inherited the disease from an ancestor 2 (33) 2 (18)
Having inherited the disease of the parent with the same sex 0(0) 1(9)
Having the “genes for cancer” 0(0) 1(9)
Perceptions on how diseases are inherited:
ante are heme hae tiie transmission (vertical gene 6 (100) 9 (82)
Diseases are passed through blood. 2 (33) 4 (36)
Combines recent na from parents and grandparents are passed 2.(33) 2(18)
Pierearng or horizontal gene transfer (i.e., sibling to 1(17) 327)
ae can skip one/two generations before 2.33) 2(18)
Diseases of the mother are passed to their daughters while father’s 0(0) 1(9)
passed their disease traits to their sons.
Individuals “inherit” their relative’s disease when they use the 0(0) 10)

same utensils and eat the same food

109

~ Female

onstructs 7 - - 11

Diseases become more severe and appear at an earlier age as it is

. 1(17) 0 (0)
passed from one generation to another.
Diseases are inherited based on the will of a higher being (i-e., 0(0) 109)
God’s will).

Perceived heritability of colorectal cancer:

CRC is hereditary and proband’s CRC is inherited 3 (50) 2 (18)
CRC is hereditary but proband’s CRC is not inherited 1(17) 2 (18)
CRC is hereditary but not sure if proband’s CRC is inherited 1(17) 3 (27)
CRC is not hereditary and proband’s CRC is not inherited 1(17) 2 (18)
Uncertain if CRC is hereditary and if proband’s CRC is inherited 0(0) 1Q)

Cancer runs in the family when a number of relatives (at least 2-5)
are affected in addition to at least one of the following:

Affected with cancer, regardless of cancer type 5 (83) 4 (36)
Affected relatives are first-degree or second-degree relatives of 2(33) 7 (64)
each other

Affected with cancer, of the same cancer type 0(0) 4 (36)
raspteain penne ae be from the same side of the family 2(33) 4(36)
A parent and a child are affected (two FDRs) 0(0) 5 (45)
Affected relatives from any/both sides of the family 1(17) 3 (27)
At least one individual affected in every generation for three G) 2(33) 10)
succeeding generations (e.g., affected grandparent, parent & child)

Disease developed at a young age, specifically 8-19 years old 1(17) 0(0)

Perceived presence of familial or hereditary risk for CRC:

I think cancer runs in my family. 3 (50) 1(9)
I think cancer does not run in my family. 3 (50) 8 (73)
T am uncertain if cancer runs in my family. 0(0) 2 (18)

na = number of male respondents; nr = number of female respondents
J = number of responses; % = percentage

110

Receiving disease traits through blood and only inheriting diseases from a parent
of the same sex mostly emerged from female participants. Male participants, on the other
hand, are more likely to mention inheriting disease traits from an ancestor (often a great

grandparent or great great grandparent) in their definition of “namana”.

When it comes to perceptions on how diseases are inherited, only female
participants mentioned that diseases are (a) only passed from mother to daughter or father
to son, (b) inherited by using the same utensils or eating the same food, and (c) inherited
based on the will of a higher being. Male participants, on the other hand, are more likely
to use constructs, such as (a) inheriting combined disease traits from parents and
grandparents, (b) the possibility of inherited diseases to skip one or two generations
before presenting again, and (c) the concept of anticipation or the disease becoming more
severe as it is passed from one generation to another, when describing disease
inheritance. Furthermore, compared to their female counterparts, more male participants
perceive CRC as a hereditary disease and their proband’s cancer as inherited. Female
participants tend to be express more uncertainty when it comes to the question whether

their relatives’ CRC is inherited.

For descriptions on when cancer is perceived as running in the family, male
participants believe that cancer is familial if multiple relatives are affected “regardless of
cancer type”, while female participants believe that cancer runs in the family only when
the relatives are affected “with the same cancer type”. Male participants are also more
likely to mention that the disease should be present in at least one relative in three
succeeding generations, and/or the disease should present at a young age (of 8-19 years)

for cancer to be considered familial.

111

Male participants are divided into half on whether cancer seems to run in their
family or not. Female participants, on the other hand, generally believe that cancer does

not run in their families.

Perceptions stratified by educational attainment. The participants of the study
can be grouped into two, based on educational attainment. The first group includes those
who have finished high school and/or received a vocational degree, while the second
group is consisted of participants who have received tertiary education (i.e.,, college
undergraduate or college graduate). For this part of the analysis, the single elementary
graduate participant was excluded in the comparison. Table 4.25 shows the constructs

under Theme 2, categorized based on their educational attainment.

College undergraduates/graduates have more perceived causes than those with
high school or vocational degree. The former group are more likely to mention CRC as
caused by genetic/physiologic, environmental, and physical causes, as well as sporadic
occurrence, than the high school or vocational degree holders. The high school/vocational
group, on the other hand, is the only one that has mentioned God’s will as the cause of

their relatives’ colon cancer.

As for their definition of the term “namana”, participants with high school and/or
vocational degree more often mention inheriting disease traits through blood, and
inheriting only from the parent with the same sex, compared to the college
undergrad/graduates. Descriptions, such as inheriting the disease from an ancestor and
having the genes for cancer, only emerged in the interviews of participants, who have

received or is receiving college education.

112

Table 4.25 Constructs under Theme 2 — Personalizing Process, stratified based on

educational attainment of participants.

F(A) S(%)
Perceived causes of relatives’ colorectal cancer:
Lifestyle or behavioural causes 6 (100) 9 (90)
Genetic and physiologic causes 2 (33) 7 (70)
Environmental causes (chemicals, pollution, vectors) 0(0) 3 (30)
Psychological causes (depression, negative thinking) 1 (17) 2 (20)
Physical causes (trauma, physical stress, childbirth) 0(0) 3 (30)
Supernatural cause (God’s will) 1(17) 0(0)
Sporadic occurrence (by chance) 0(0) 2 (20)
Perceptions on disease inheritance: “Namana” means...
Having inherited the disease from a parent 6 (100) 7 (70)
— predisposed or susceptible to develop the same disease as 3 (50) 4 (40)
e proband
Having a “positive family history” of disease (Definition 2) 2 (33) 4 (40)
Having received disease traits through blood 3 (50) 2 (20)
Having inherited the disease from an ancestor 0(0) 4 (40)
Having inherited the disease of the parent with the same sex 1(17) 0 (0)
Having the “genes for cancer” 0(0) 1 (10)
Perceptions on how diseases are inherited:
aren are mand ipa ates transmission (vertical gene 6 (100) 8 (80)
Diseases are passed through blood. 2 (33) 4 (40)
Combined rant ne from parents and grandparents are passed 2.63) 2(20)
serpent or horizontal gene transfer (i.e., sibling to 1017) 220)
oe poeaeeitie can skip one/two generations before 00) 4 (40)
Diseases of the mother are passed to their daughters while father’s 107) 0(0)
passed their disease traits to their sons.
Individuals “inherit” their relative’s disease when they use the 107) 0(0)
same utensils and eat the same food

113

- HSNG

Constructs n= 6

Diseases become more severe and appear at an earlier age as it is

A 0 (0) 1 (10)
passed from one generation to another.
Discases are inherited based on the will of a higher being (i.e., 0(0) 1(10)
God’s will).

Perceived heritability of colorectal cancer: |
CRC is hereditary and proband’s CRC is inherited 1(17) 4 (40)
CRC is hereditary but proband’s CRC is not inherited 2 (33) 1 (10)
CRC is hereditary but not sure if proband’s CRC is inherited 2 (33) 2 (20)
CRC is not hereditary and proband’s CRC is not inherited 0 (0) 3 (30) |
Uncertain if CRC is hereditary and if proband’s CRC is inherited 117) 0(0)

Cancer runs in the family when a number of relatives (at least 2-5)

are affected in addition to at least one of the following:

Affected with cancer, regardless of cancer type 3 (50) 5 (50)
Affected relatives are first-degree or second-degree relatives of 3 (50) 5 (50)
each other

Affected with cancer, of the same cancer type 2 (33) 2 (20)

Affected relatives should be from the same side of the family

(maternal or paternal) 17 5 (50)
A parent and a child are affected (two FDRs) 3 (50) 1 (10)
Affected relatives from any/both sides of the family 1(17) 2 (20)
At least one individual affected in every generation for three G) 107 2.20)
succeeding generations (e.g., affected grandparent, parent & child)

Disease developed at a young age, specifically 8-19 years old 0(0) 1 (10)

Perceived presence of familial or hereditary risk for CRC:

I think cancer runs in my family. 1(17) 3 (30)
I think cancer does not run in my family. 5 (83) 5 (50)
I am uncertain if cancer runs in my family. 0(0) 2 (20)

y= number of respondents who are high school or vocational graduates; ic = number of respondents who are
college undergraduates or college graduates
J = number of responses; % = percentage

Only participants with tertiary education (college undergraduate /graduates)
mentioned that disease traits can skip one or two generations before presenting again, and

become more severe as the disease is passed from one generation to another.

114

A participant from the latter group also mentioned that diseases are inherited based on the
will of God. On the other hand, only participants from the high school / vocational group
mentioned inheriting disease traits only from the parent with the same sex, or through

using the same utensils or eating the same food.

The participants from the college undergrad/graduate group are more likely to
perceive CRC as hereditary and their relatives’ colon cancer as inherited. However, at the
same time, this group is also more likely to believe that CRC is not hereditary disease and
thus, their relatives’ colon cancer is not inherited. The high school and vocational group,
on the other hand, perceives CRC as hereditary but is indecisive on whether their

relatives’ colon cancer was inherited.

When it comes to describing when cancer is perceived to run in the family,
participants with college education are more likely to describe it as having multiple
affected relatives from the same lineage as the proband. High school or vocational
graduate participants, on the other hand, believe that when both parent and child are
affected by cancer, the disease can already be considered running or common in the

family.

When it comes to their perceived presence of familial or hereditary cancer,
participants with high school or vocational degrees tend to answer that they believe
cancer does not run in their family. College undergraduates and graduates, on the other
hand, are often divided and/or undecided on whether the disease does run or not run in

their family.

115

Theme 3: Perceived Personal Risk (Personal Sense of Vulnerabili

Personal sense of vulnerability refers to the individual’s perception of his or her
risk of developing cancer. This perception of personal risk is affected by changes in
salience (e.g., addition of a new relative with cancer) and in personal mental models (e.g.,
beliefs on inheritance). Tables 4.26 and 4.30 show the constructs (codes), subcategories,

and categories, which emerged from the participant interviews under this theme.

As mentioned above, one’s personal sense of vulnerability is affected by changes in
salience and the personalizing process, which have been discussed earlier. In this part, the
focus will be on the resulting subcategories pointing to the category, Risk Regulation.

Risk regulation is influenced by:

= Views on the effects of having an affected FDR to personal cancer risk
= Perceived personal risk of developing cancer
= Risk mitigating factors (includes perceived protective and enabling factors in

colorectal cancer development)

116

“(EI Jaquimu juedionsed 10) ¢{ q Aq poreadde ysry [euosieg paalaoied eWay} ay Joy sjonsuOd sasBep-jss/Sopod ][e JY Sues | UUM[OD UI (€]1d) PML :2}0N

sit[ Zz qian SUOAOIUOD jequey Buel 7
B'as | Ot AH ayasayl AyyeeH| |
os | 1 50d AaAysod BunuUL
wtp] 2 0 TAY TadUED BSNED JeU3 SPO0j DUIPIOAY, |
Sat € uuez W Pod ul yyey DUAEH
yee | s LEN ‘Spoo Ayyeay Dunes (siopey anpe}010)|
etry Z aa Pueqoid YM SasUalayp lOAeyag| slope) SuneSgw ysu paniaried
os | t DHad  [UOMpUO> Yyeay DURSXE JO adUeSeld
6s | Tt THN erasey) AyyeqUN |
os | 1 T_T] MOU HM 5/PO5 |
vag a XHM Was pawaye | Aossiy AWE UM
oat € TH aQsegi AUEEH) |
9AtT E Dan Taaue> DuldojeAep Jo AquIeWedul) |
s Hod Tea Pood penaried su |
€ 08 Pueqold YUM SedUalayip [LOIAeYag) jeuosiad paneriad 10) ajeuoney
€ %0 [WN Su ON
$s %0 ¥ su ebeIaAy
Zz y Ww YSU BeOpPOW] ASU JO BasHap 4adDUe> Hujdojaaap
H 50 UDI JO 9su jeuosiad panaried
€ quix Wey aseasp ayy Weyl ou pipy @
[+ | un TIEVADUN 5 J8DUeD) BUIdojeAeg asnesag g
0 xS/Sx TaUe JO XS/S OU BART] SU UO Paya ON :yS8u jeuOSIad = |
€ pool mT) TOAEYSG/a Asam Jala © BACUT $,8U0 03 D¥D WM aAgeIad & |
v “IN YF oge Hu 0} JUEM 3,UOPT 2 Ouaey 40 Daye panaried e
T OS-a SDUIGS GO YM eDUELD = SDUIGS Hf |
T Sul SBusdsyo < SOUIqIS Sty |
v D Our SBulgs < SOuUdsyO =9STy asnedeq 2 |
9 yoru Puegold ayy JO YOI EWI] YSU paseaiduUT :2YD YYW aAee, & ||
Ed Yurel | Aeypaiey 7 paweuyui eq Ue Jauey 2 Guiey jo Pays panardied (etd)} 2
or XH-UN ysu AU aSeaDUl JOU Sa0g] Yau [eU0sIed O} yD 7M] uoAenBay} LY
Tip] Z XU | Du DUIdo|eAap jo you AU SeseeDull| ja/ e Guey Jo Paya paniaried| yr] it

W]ev |W |v [Noon - 2au81pag uo paseq uonesynens 1518
H| WA |W |Jeuneuds - aai8ipod U0 paseg Uonergnens S18 i
AVL AY | At | an [Surdeis 38D
| o | s [puegoid ym voneieu |
6z | TZ | 6 |(PUBINSUOD - PURgoig) s2USJHIC a3y
gc || ev _]) es |pueqorg yo 23y

@p [PuerinsuoD jo ay
WWW [pueqoid jo xs

W [PUBIINSUOD 30 xeS
GuonemIES EPO es

29 Is |r Jo
IF
Ie

LId | 91d | STd| vid

Uonelnsay Ysry,, Woy} 94) BuToddns sati08a}e9-qns pue saLodayed ‘sjon.YsuOd pesIoUly 9Z'p BGR

17

1

1. Views on the effects of having an affected FDR to personal cancer risk

Majority of the participants (10 out of 17) believe that having an affected relative
does not increase their risk of developing cancer. The rationale provided for this answer
includes:

= 4/10: developing cancer is an uncertain thing; a person may or may not
develop cancer with or without family history

= 4/10: they believe there’s no effect and they do not want to think otherwise

= 3/10: they believe they did not inherit the disease

= 3/10: cancer is mainly due to lifestyle or behavioural factors / they have a

different lifestyle or behaviour compared to the proband

The remaining seven (7) believe that having an affected relative increases their
risk of developing colorectal cancer. This is because:
= 6/7: they are FDRs or have close blood ties with the proband, and/or

= 4/7: colorectal cancer can be inherited or is hereditary

During the interviews, some of the participants ranked family members from
those having the highest “increased risk” of developing cancer due to a family history of
CRC to those whose cancer risk have been affected the least. Table 4.27 reflects some of

these views.

118

Table 4.27 Participant ranking of relatives based on risk of developing cancer, from those
with the highest “increased” risk to lowest

Pl [S] Siblings (FDR) > Offspring (FDR) > Cousins (TDR) > Aunts/Uncles (SDR)

P2 [O] Siblings (FDR) = Offspring (FDR) > Cousins and other family members
(SDR/TDR; no increased risk as they are already distant relatives)

P5 [S] Offspring (FDR; higher risk because they have received the blood of their affected

| parent) > Siblings (FDR)

Po [S} Offspring (FDR) > Siblings (FDR; no increased risk for siblings)

P9 [O] Offspring (FDR) > Siblings (FDR; no increased risk for siblings)

P12 [O] Offspring (FDR; conditional: increased risk if the offspring of the proband is born

after the parent was diagnosed with cancer) > Siblings (FDR; no increased risk for
siblings)

The participants believe that first-degree relatives of the affected relative (i.e.,

siblings and offspring of the proband) have a higher “increased risk” of developing

cancer compared to their second- or third-degree relatives. Offspring of probands are also

considered to have a higher risk of developing cancer due to a family history of the

disease compared to siblings of affected individuals. An excerpt that reflects a common

reasoning behind the latter is shown below:

PS: “Kumpara saming mga kapatid, sa tingin ko mas mataas yung tyansa ng mga
anak na magkaroon ng kanser... Siyempre, dugo niya [ng kapatid na apektado]
yun nasa mga anak niya. Eh, napapasa sa dugo yung kanser. Pwedeng mamana
[ng mga anak].” (Compared to us, siblings, I think the offspring of my sister
affected with cancer have a higher chance of developing the disease... Of course,
her children are her blood. And cancer is passed through blood. So, her children
may have inherited the disease [through her blood].)

2. Perceived personal risk of developing cancer

Most of the participants (7 out of 17) consider themselves at moderate risk of

developing cancer. Five (5 out of 17) believe they have average or low risk of developing

the disease, and two (2) have identified themselves as high risk. The remaining three (3)

participants think that they have no risk or 0% risk of developing cancer.

119


Table 4.28 Perceived degree of risk of developing colorectal cancer
First-order Constructs Range: Perceived %
Risk
20% - 50%
<10% - 50%

Ihave a HIGH RISK of developing CRC.

I have a MODERATE RISK of developing CRC.

<50% - 50%
0%

I have an AVERAGE RISK of developing CRC.
I have NO RISK of developing CRC.

wWwlnl si nN

Some of the participants mentioned percent risks during the interviews, as
demonstrated in Table 4.28. The classification of these perceived percent risks into high,
moderate and average risk differs per participant. For instance, a 50% perceived risk of
developing cancer is considered high risk by P12, moderate risk by P2 and P13, and even
average or low risk by P9 and P11. One participant explained that having a 50 out of 100
chance of developing cancer is considered moderate risk since it means there is also a 50
out of 100 chance of not developing cancer (50 people may develop cancer while the

other 50 will not).

Of the two participants who mentioned a plan to do CRC screening in the future,
one has a perceived moderate risk of developing CRC, and another has a perceived

average risk of developing CRC (with a perceived percent risk of <50%).

Perceived risks are influenced by factors that are thought to increase or decrease
one’s personal cancer risk. Factors that are believed to decrease their personal risk
include those listed under “Protective Factors”, while those believed to increase their

personal risk of developing CRC is under “Risk Factors”.

120

Table 4.29 Factors perceived to increase and decrease personal risk for CRC

Protective Factors Risk Factors

o Perceived good health o Having a family history of cancer
(at least one affected relative)

Behavioural differences with proband o Having an unhealthy lifestyle

Having a healthy lifestyle o Presence of an existing health
condition, specifically tumours or
colon-related problems

Uncertainty of developing cancer

Faith that God will prevent disease
occurrence

3. Risk mitigating & risk enabling factors
During the interview, the participants were asked about factors that they think
decrease/increase an individual’s risk of developing colorectal cancer. Table 4.30 reflects
a summary of their answers to this question.
The participants identified the following as the factors that decrease cancer risk:
= Having a healthy lifestyle
= Behavioural difference with the proband
= Avoiding foods known to cause colorectal cancer
= Eating healthy foods
= Having faith in God and/or praying regularly
= Taking herbal concoctions, such as boiled water with mangostene peel

= Thinking positively

121

*(€I saquinu juedionsed 10) ¢1 gq Aq poreadde ysry [eUOsIog PeAlaoog OUWIdY} aU} 10J sJONNsUOS sa‘Bap-ISIJ/Sopod [|e JY} SUBS | UUMIOD UI (EI d) EYL :230N

5 CT] aS rejeuay J Be Bursa) SeIq XO]
€ Exrcrl Suigey Buges 00g}
£ | ww | __ Apoq / Ayunuiuiryeann)
T GD TIGRIS
z _ HN | _CaAmeU "poay) syasayT AipreayUn]|
T uw spalgo Anesy Bugs]
v =] UaUILOIAUD pani 10)
BIT] z a Puegosd im SsaUayl [eIshya] =
ett |Z eal 35d ‘BIED-JI95 100g) g
sit] z Xess pueqoid se Xas Sues ay BUIAeH| 2
ER=4 MEE 09-05 +09 095 ,09-0 yeby —_ 3b¥] (Qysu Janue> aseanul 2
tw] Zz qu PayYUTS|TBOUeD| —_7LA $1092) $1099} BUqeUR| Fa
sit] Zz qieH ‘SUOQCDUOD jeqzay Bude ||
ees | oF 1H Sasa AAeSH
6s | tT 30d eAgSOd Bupuiyl | 5
rac a 0 Ty TSUET SEND TEAR SpOoy BUPIOAY] fa
ga ¢ es Burkes] pop ur ipiey BUIAeH| Id] s
vec | S fie BA Spooy Atpjeay ugey| (suoy2ey angrayoud)| —uogeinbay}
Ziel Z er] PUeGOIT AIM SSDUBIAIP /CIOIAeYSG] — S10yrey BuReSg ¥Su panlarsaq ysra]
viviwtvyi vy [vt el] ww lowell] wl REIS ASIY
wfilwlH#[Twi[wf[lwfi[w[H[H{H[H|wi[H|Hx|wi[ Hw Ped UO Pased VO|IEDUIELS ASI
atutufumtufumfula[a|[alu[uf[mfaf{aya [oo
s to] s [Lo Lo Lolo} s Lofols[s]s]sfo]_o Js [pvequduymuo,
4 [cele [ve] se [se] cz] 6 | sz [zzler|or lor] c| ez] tz | 6 |(puesnsucp-pueqosg) aauasayia oy
° oo | ez | ze] ec | 6s | t9 | os | te | op levee] oo] ze] te] 9c] ap |] cs [pueqoiesoaty
es | te | se] ob | oz | ez | ez | ze | ot [tzfoz|es|zs|av| ze] cz | gp [puesinsucojo ay
wteefsf3[3f[w[s[wiwl/s[wi[sls[wl[w w | [pueqogoxs
2 {[wls/sa]a[anlz[sf[wle[e([e[a[sl[s[s lw

Ltd | 91d |STd} bTd d d d (OTd) 6d 'Sdizd''9d''Sd vd Ed d d =Aq uoqeames e]e0

uoneinsoy Ysty Uo saloSee0-qns pue sjonNsuos pesiowy [py A192

122

The following factors, on the other hand, are identified as factors that increase chance of

developing cancer (enabling factors):

Having inherited the disease

Unhealthy lifestyle (e.g., eating foods known to cause cancer, physical
inactivity, etc)

Being male or female: Five (5) participants mentioned during the interview
that females are likely to develop colorectal cancer than males. Two out of
this five associated CRC development with childbirth. One participant
mentioned that CRC presents more among males, since they tend to have
more unhealthy habits, especially when it comes to food choices, than
females.

Age: Two participants mentioned that they think older people, those at 60
years of age or more, are more prone to develop CRC. Two other participants
gave a younger age range, and identified those in the age group of 30-60
years as susceptible to developing CRC.

Poor eating habits

Weak immunity

Living or exposure to dirty/polluted environment

One participant believes that cancer can develop when an individual
“inhales” chemotherapy drugs given to the patients (by being near the patient
during chemotherapy).

Having the same sex as the proband

Physical likeness with the proband

123

"Poor self-care or poor hygiene
* History of childbirth

* Lifting heavy objects

Majority of the participants identified healthy lifestyle, behavioural differences
with the affected relative and avoiding foods known to cause CRC as factors that
decrease cancer risk, while having inherited the disease and an unhealthy lifestyle were

identified as factors enabling CRC development.

Emerged constructs on Theme 3 (Perceived Personal Risk or Personal Sense of
Vulnerability) based on demographic characteristics of participants

Perceptions stratified by age. Table 4.31 reflects perceptions under Theme 3,

stratified based on age group.

Table 4.31 Constructs under Theme 3 — Perceived Personal Risk, stratified by age group

VA

Constructs . (35-54).0.)
n=9

Perceived effect of +FH to personal risk

Having an affected relative increases my risk for CRC 4 3

Having an affected relative has no effect to my risk for CRC 4 6

Perceived personal risk of developing CRC

High Risk i !

(% risk: 50%) (% tisk: 20%)
Moderate Risk “ 5
(% risk: 50%) (% risk: <10-10%)
Average Risk 4 ;
8 (% risk: <50-50%) (% risk: NA)
No Risk 1 2

n= number of respondents with the specific characteristic
LA = later adolescence (18-24y.0,), EA = Early Adulthood (25-34y.0.), MA = middle adulthood (35-54y.0.)

124

When it comes to the perceived effect of having an affected relative to one’s
personal risk for colorectal cancer (CRC), the 18-34 age group is divided into it causing
an increased risk or having no effect at all. The Middle Adulthood age group (35-54 years
old), on the other hand, perceive that having an affected relative has no effect to their risk

of developing of CRC.

The Middle Adulthood group also tend to have a higher perceived risk (i.e.,
moderate risk) compared to participants under the Later Adolescence and Early
Adulthood group, who generally perceived themselves as having average risks. However,
if the provided percent risks will be considered, the Later Adolescence and Early
Adulthood group tend to think that they have a 0-50% chance of developing CRC. This is
comparably higher than the 0-20% perceived chance for CRC among participants under
the Middle Adulthood group. This shows that even with a higher perceived percent risk
of developing CRC, the younger age group tends to have a lower perceived nominal or

categorical perceived risk.

Perceptions stratified by sex. Table 4.32 shows that the male FDRs recruited in
the study tend to be divided into those who think that having an affected relative
increases their personal risk for CRC and those who think otherwise. Female participants,
on the other hand, generally believe that having an affected relative has no effect to their

tisk of developing colorectal cancer.

125

Table 4.32 Constructs under Theme 3 — Perceived Personal Risk, stratified by sex of
participants

Male

nstructs
Ny = 6
F(%) S(%)
Perceived effect of +FH to personal risk
Having an affected relative increases my risk for CRC 3 (50) 4 (36)
Having an affected relative has no effect to my risk for CRC 3 (50) 7 (64)
Perceived personal risk of developing CRC
a 1 (17) 1(9)
High Risk (% risk: 50%) (% risk: 20%)
. 2 (33) 5 (45)
Moderate Risk (% risk: 10-50%) (risk: <10-50%)
- 3 (50) 2(18)
Average Risk (% tisk: 50%) (% risk: <50%)
No Risk 0(0) 3 (27)
ny¢= number of male respondents; ne = number of female respondents

= number of responses; % = percentage

Perceptions stratified by educational attainment. As shown in Table 4.33,
participants who have received college education are divided into those who perceive an
increased risk due to having an affected relative and those who think otherwise.
Compared to the college group, the high school or vocational degree holders generally

believe that having an affected relative has no effect to their personal risk for CRC.

The participants, who are high school or vocational graduates, also tend to have a
higher perceived degree risk of developing CRC than those with college education. Only
participants who are college undergraduates / graduates have mentioned having no risk or
0% risk of developing colorectal cancer. The latter also has no one who perceived
themselves at high risk, since most of their responses fall under average and moderate

risks, and no risk.

126

Table 4.33 Constructs under Theme 3 — Perceived Personal Risk, stratified based on
educational attainment of participants

S(%) S(%)
Perceived effect of +FH to personal risk
Having an affected relative increases my risk for CRC 2 (33) 5 (50) |
Having an affected relative has no effect to my risk for CRC 4 (67) 5 (50)
Perceived personal risk of developing CRC
a 233) 0(0)
High Risk (% risk: 20-50%) (% risk: NA)
. 3 (50) 3 (30)
Moderate Risk (% risk: 50%) (% risk: 10-50%)
. 1(17) 4 (40)
Average Risk (Yo risk: NA) (%orisk: <50-50%)
No Risk 0(0) 3 (30)

y= number of respondents who are high school or vocational graduates; nc = number of respondents who are college
undergraduates or college graduates; f = number of responses; % = percentage

127

Theme 4: Risk Management

Individuals with a family history of disease such as cancer may hold different
beliefs about the means to control their risk. A person who acknowledged his or her
susceptibility to cancer may adopt health-seeking behaviours, utilize screening services
or gain a stronger intention to undergo future screening (Rubinstein, 2011). Acceptance
of familial and personal risks may ease up the individual’s anxiety or do the opposite
(Walter & Emery, 2005). Perception of control is an important aspect that influences not
just the coping behaviour of the individual but also affects the continuing interpretation
of salience of cancer family history. Table 4.34 shows the constructs (codes), sub-
categories and categories emerging from the participant interviews, which reflect the
theme “Risk Management”. The table also reflects the coding process and the basic
content analysis done.

Two (2) categories supporting the theme, Risk Management, emerged from the
interviews:

= Presence of anxiety or continued anxiety due to relatives’ cancer diagnosis and
the causes of participants’ anxiety

= Their means to cope with perceived cancer risk and continued anxiety

1. Anxiety and its causes

One of the questions in the interview asked participants whether they feel worried
over having a relative affected with cancer. The participants were divided into those who
are feeling anxious because of their family history of cancer (9 out of 17) and those who

are not feeling worried about it (7 out of 17).

128

*(€] Joqumnu yuedionsed
JO) €1q Aq poreadde yuswa8euryy Ysty SW9Y) dU) JOJ s}onsUOS saITap-jsIIJ/Spoo |]! Jey} SUBS | UUIMJOD Ul (E1d) SUL ‘AION

31 SabUELp [eJoINe Yad] aQSayrT TOE eq]

¥78 | oT =
Stl | Zz UDS BuluaaDs DYD| Gunjas| a
vee | S eld juikead 7 Upley panuguod| Ayaixue| -WPH| 8 =
Sz | + i) XG/§ sDU0 OM-palp 405 OB a} SUe|d] Panuguod / J22Ue> dojanap oy) / SwsiueLpaw a 8
Sc | + yuLaX Wajqoud atp ynoge BuDjUILA JON] SU panleouad AIM ado oy SAeN) Buido>) 8
6s | 1 Taq ‘SPASayp OMe laq Je;LIS DUIAEH| at 3
Chis ee | Wid TeIpalay S17 payuayul SM JaDUED 32
675 | 6 un TaDUED Buidojanap 50 AuIE}Je2UN} sasne>) a
ze Z NN ON Giaaue Budoenap| (ETd) Aaxue] —~ 3
67s | 6 MK S3A yhoge paiuom jaaj nokog| — panuguo>| 8
%o d 91d d tld d d d Old 6d &d d 9d d d d d d ao v uO go uO v-a uO

vf[vi[w]y[ vw {[v[ ef wtw wv | Ww | ¥ [NOON-#2au8ipeq uo paseq uoneaynesysiy

wfi[w[H[w[wfw H[H H |W] H | W |ssunayss-saidipag vo pasequoneaynensxsiy

ee ALT Al AL AL [AT | m [auiseasouo

s [o]s[o]ol]lo s Lo s Lo | 0 || s [pueqoudyayauonejay
SI [cle |vel] se | se 6 | sz & | 6z[ tz | 6 [(puesinsucg-pueqosg) e2uaseyia aay

0 os [ez | zo] ec] 65 | 19 | 5 | te || op [er ee} v9 | zo] th] 92 || ep | cs [puedosasoaay

€s te | se | ee | oz | ez | cz | ze | ot [tzJoz| os] zs] ae co] cz | ap |puernsuogjo aly
wfiafaf4 a [wf atwf[wlatw]syayw]w] w Iw [pueqgioxs
i fTwfiala i [wf a]a[wl]wiw]a]s] [a7 a | w [puesnsuogjoxes

duawadeuryl JsTY,, owloyy oy) Butoddns satoBayeo-qns pue saiioBaje0 ‘sjonsuod pasIowy |" 31921

129

The uncertainty of developing cancer (9 out of 17), the thought that cancer may
be hereditary in the family (2 out of 17), and their existing lifestyle that may promote

cancer development (1 out of 17) were the reported causes of participants’ anxiety.

2. Ways to cope with perceived risk and continued anxiety

Some of the participants cope with their perceived risk and anxiety by not
thinking about the problem or the possibility of them developing the same disease.
According to one participant, putting too much thought about cancer risks may make the
person actually develop the disease. People should think positively and avoid thinking

about negative things to not develop cancer.

Majority of the participants mentioned lifestyle or behavioural changes as one of
the things they can do or they are doing to cope with their perceived risk of developing
the disease. Continued faith and praying was also mentioned as a means to reduce their
worries and their chances of having cancer. Four participants mentioned plans to go for
check-up once they presented with signs and symptoms they’ve seen on their affected
relatives. The signs and symptoms they are referring include presence of blood in the

stool, sudden weight loss, constipation and/or having a haemorrhoid.

Only two participants out of the seventeen mentioned CRC screening as one their
plans to control their cancer risk. Both participants have heard about this from their

physicians.

130

Emerged constructs on Theme 4 (Risk Management) based on demographic
characteristics of participants

Perceptions stratified by age. Table 4.35 reflects perceptions under Theme 4,

stratified based on age group.

Participants aged 35-54 years old tend to be more anxious about the possibility of
developing cancer due to their family history than those aged 18-34 years old. The
Middle Adulthood group also tend to cope with faith and prayers for their anxiety. They
are also the ones who mentioned planning to go for check-up if they experienced signs

and symptoms seen in their relatives affected with cancer.

Table 4.35 Constructs under Theme 4 — Risk Management, stratified by age group

LA& EA VA
Constructs 0. (35-54y.0.)
Presence of anxiety due to having an affected relative with CRC 2 7
Reported no anxiety or worries on having an affected relative with CRC 5 2

Ways to cope with anxiety and perceived cancer risk:

Plans to do lifestyle or behavioural changes 8 6
Not thinking about the problem 3 1
Continued faith or prayers 1 4
Plans to go for check-up once S/Sx seen in proband manifested 0 4
Plans to do CRC screening 1 1

n= number of respondents with the specific characteristic
LA = later adolescence (18-24y.0.), EA = Early Adulthood (25-34y.0.), MA = middle adulthood (35-54y.0.)

131

Perceptions stratified by sex. Female participants are more likely to express
anxiety due to family history of cancer. There is not much difference between the coping
and health-seeking behaviours of the two groups. However, female participants are the
only ones who mentioned seeking medical help once signs and symptoms indicative of

CRC appeared.

Table 4.36 Constructs under Theme 4 — Risk Management, stratified by sex of
participants

Constructs Hi
f(%) f(%)
Presence of anxiety due to having an affected relative with CRC 1(17) 8 (73)
Reported no anxiety or worries on having an affected relative with CRC 4 (67) 3 (27)
Ways to cope with anxiety and perceived cancer risk:
Plans to do lifestyle or behavioural changes 5 (83) 9 (82)
Not thinking about the problem 1(17) 3 (27)
Continued faith or prayers 2 (33) 3 (27)
Plans to go for check-up once S/Sx seen in proband manifested 0(0) 4 (36)
Plans to do CRC screening 1(17) 1Q)

nv = number of male respondents; n; = number of female respondents
f = number of responses; % = percentage

Perceptions stratified by educational attainment. Table 4.37 shows that
participants under the high school and vocational group tend to be more anxious with
regards to their family history of CRC compared to participants with higher educational

attainment.

132

When it comes to health-seeking behaviours, more participants from the high
school/vocational group mentioned seeking medical help once signs and symptoms of
CRC seen in the proband are experienced. On the other hand, only participants who have
received college education mentioned colorectal cancer screening as one of their future

plans.

Table 4.37 Constructs under Theme 4 — Risk Management, stratified based on
educational attainment of participants.

Constructs
SC) f(%)
| Presence of anxiety due to having an affected relative with CRC 5 (83) 3 (30)
| Reported no anxiety or worries on having an affected relative with CRC 1(17) 5 (50)
Ways to cope with anxiety and perceived cancer risk:
Plans to do lifestyle or behavioural changes 5 (83) 8 (80)
Not thinking about the problem 1(17) 3 (30)
Continued faith or prayers 1(17) 3 (30)
Plans to go for check-up once S/Sx seen in proband manifested 3 (50) 1 (10)
Plans to do CRC screening 0(0) 2 (20)
ny = number of respondents who are high school or vocational graduates; nc = number of respondents who are
college undergraduates or college graduates; f = number of responses; % = percentage

133

Pedigree Analysis: Actual VS Perceived Risk

Intake of at least a three-generation pedigree from the proband for each
participant was also done. These pedigrees were analysed for the actual cancer risk of the
participants based on the criteria by Scheuner et al and the CDC/NCCN, and compared
with the participants’ perceived risk derived from the interviews. Actual and perceived
risks were identified based on the following categories: no risk, average risk, moderate

risk, and high risk.

Table 4.38 reflects the participants’ actual cancer risks based on pedigree analysis

and their perceived cancer risks.

Table 4.38 Emerged actual risk (based on pedigree) vs perceived risk (based on
interview)

Sex of
constag | MI) FPF] EF] Fe] ei] M|MiM| Fe } ef | mM] ef ef] Fe | Mm | oF
Sex of
Proband MIM MM F F M F M | M F M F F F F M
Age of
Consultand 48 | 27 | 47 | 48 | 52 | 54 | 20 | 21] 19 | 32 7 23 24 44 45 41 53
Age ot | s7 | 48 | 76 | 41 | 42 | 64 | 33 | 43 a] a a | o | so | 7 | a | 7 | 60
Proband |
Relation with
Pr d Ss o| oO Ss Ss Ss Ss Le) Lo} s Lo} Le) Le} 10) Ss Le} Ss
Cancer Risk
(Scheuner) M H M H H M H H H H M M M M H M M
Cancer Risk
(CDCINCCN) A M A M wx “ M M A ala [™ A A
Perceived
Cancer Risk | M M N A Mi M A A A N A H M H M M N
(Interview)
Perceived vs 5 a 5
meet f= fe fed-fefete fede a tft t = Tt 4
M-= Male; F = Female; S = Sibling; O = Offspring; H = High Risk; M = Moderate Risk; A = Average Risk; N = No Risk
1 Perceived vs Actual - this compares the perceived risk from the actual risk (based on pedigree analysis, considering NCCN criteria); e.g., P1's
perceived risk category is higher than P1’s actual risk

134

Based on Scheuner’s risk stratification criteria, the presence of a first-degree
relative with cancer already puts the participant in the moderate risk category, while
having a first-degree relative with early-onset cancer (i.e., cancer diagnosis before age
50) puts them at the high risk category. Nine (9) of the participants have moderate cancer
tisk while eight (8) of them fall under the high cancer risk category based on Scheuner’s

criteria.

The CDC-NCCN risk stratification provides criteria for categorization that is
more specific to familial and hereditary colorectal cancer. Out of the 17 participants,
eight (8) falls under the average risk category for having a first-degree relative diagnosed
with typical-onset cancer. Another eight (8) are considered as having moderate risk
(having an FDR diagnosed with cancer at age <50), while one (1) is classified as a

potential high risk.

As shown in the table above, majority of the participants (8 out of 17) perceived
their chance to develop cancer relatively lower than their actual colorectal cancer risk
(based on CDC-NCCN). Four (4) participants have perceived risks equal to their actual
risk category based on pedigree, while five (5) participants have perceived risks higher

than their actual risk.

135

Comparative Analysis

The second specific objective calls for comparison in the meanings of family
history between (a) siblings and children of Filipinos diagnosed with CRC, and (b)
participants with first-degree relatives with early-onset and typical-onset colorectal
cancer. There are eight (8) siblings and nine (9) offspring of cancer probands recruited in
the study. Nine (9) FDRs with probands diagnosed with early-onset cancer and eight (8)

FDRs with probands affected with typical-onset cancer also participated in the study.

EARLY-ONSET CANCER FDR GROUP TYPICAL-ONSET CANCER FDR GROUP.

Age of
Proband | 48 41 42 «(33 430 4441 42

Relation
with o s § $ O O $§$ S
Proband

s oO Ss (e} (e} fe) (e) ie} s

5 SIBLINGS, 3 OFFSPRING 3 SIBLINGS, 6 OFFSPRING

As shown above, the early-onset cancer FDR group is mostly consisted of siblings
while the typical-onset cancer FDR group mostly involves offspring. Because of this, the
emerged constructs of the sibling group and the early-onset cancer FDR group are

expected to be similar.

136

A comparative grid was done to compare constructs on family history between
these two study groups. The following emerged categories and subcategories were
compared:

= Personal definition of family history: How do understand the term “family
history”?

= Family composition: Who are included in the family history?

= Acknowledgement of familial risk: Does having a family member with cancer
affect other relatives’ cancer risk?

= Understanding of the term “namana” or “namamana”

= Perspectives on colorectal cancer inheritance

= Actual VS perceived cancer risks in relation to presence of family history of CRC

Sibling VS Offspring

Tables 4.39 to 4.41 compare the perspectives between siblings and offspring,
while considering age, sex and educational attainment of the participants. Constructs on
their personal definition of family history, family composition, acknowledgement of
familial risk, and perceptions on cancer and CRC inheritance were compared in the said

table.

137

Table 4.39 Comparison of constructs between siblings and offspring, stratified by age
group

Constructs Sibling (n= 8) - Offspring (n = 9)

LA/EA MA LA/EA MA
18-34 35-54 18-34 35-54
n=2 n=6 n=6 n=3

+FH Definition 1: A positive family history means “having at

least one relative affected with the disease in question”. 00) 0©) | 2G3) 0)

+FH Definition 2: A positive family history means “having
multiple relatives affected with the disease in question, with the | 2(100) 6(100) | 4(67) 3(100)
disease seeming to run in the family”, as described below:

Multiple generations are affected. 2 (100) 4(67) | 1(17) 3(100)
Multiple relatives are affected in one generation. 1 (50) 3(50) | 4(67) 2(67)

The disease seems to be inherited or passed down in the

family. 2(100) 467) | 2(33) 1: (33)

The disease came from an ancestor (often a fourth-degree

or a more distant relative). 1 (50) 23) 0) 2 (67)

The disease mainly affects or presents in one side of the

family (i.e., maternal or paternal). 90) 107) | 263) 163)

The disease is the main cause of death of multiple family
members.

Family history should include both FDRs and SDRs. 1 (50) 3(50) | 5(83) 2(67)

0(0) 00) | 000) 1033)

Family history should also include TDRs and/or more distant

relatives (aside from FDRs & SDRs). 1650) 360) | 3650) 133)

Family history includes closely-associated relatives (based on

degree of familiarity). 9@) 160) | 1017) -163)

Family history should include those with the same disease as

the proband. 1(50) 233) | 467) 267)

Family history should include those with the same disease and

from the same lineage as the proband. 9) 1(17) | 2@3)_ 13)

Family history should only include living relatives. 0 (0) 2 (33) 0(0) 0(0)
I have a family history of cancer. 0(0) 1(17) 7 3(50) 1 (33)
I have no family history of cancer. 2(100) 467) | 3(50) =2.(67)

Having an affected relative increases cancer risks of other

family members. 90) 4(67) | 3(50) 133)

Having an affected relative has no effect or does not increase

cancer risks of other family members. 2(100) 233) | 350) 267)

Perceptions on disease inheritance: “Namana” means...

Having inherited the disease from a parent 0(0) 5 (83) |6(100) 3(100)

Being predisposed to develop the same disease as proband | 0 (0) 3(50) | 5(83) 0(0)

138

Constructs ~ Sibling (n=8)-  Offspring-(n = 9)

Having a “positive family history” of disease (Def. 2) 1 (50) 1(17) | 2@3) 267)
Having received disease traits through blood 0(0) 2(33) | 3(50) 0(0)
| Having inherited the disease from an ancestor 1 (50) 1(17) 1(17) 1 (33)

+
Having inherited the disease of the parent with the same 0(0) 107 00) 0(0)
Having the “genes for cancer” 1 (50) 0(0) 0 (0) 0 (0)

Perceptions on how diseases are inherited:

Diseases are passed through vertical transmission (vertical

100
gene transfer) from parent to child. KE OLY PEK ENOL)

Diseases are passed through blood. 0(0) 3 (50) | 3 (50) 0 (0)

Combined disease traits from parents and grandparents

are passed to the child/offspring. 90) 263) | 107) 163)

Horizontal transmission or horizontal gene transfer (i.e.,

sibling to sibling) is not possible 000) = 23) | 263) 00)

An inherited disease can skip one/two generations before

presenting again. 000) 1(17) | 23) 133)

Diseases of the mother are passed to their daughters while
father’s passed their disease traits to their sons.

90) 107 | 0) 0@)

Individuals “inherit” their relative’s disease when they
use the same utensils and eat the same food

00) 0()'|107 00)

Diseases become more severe and appear at an earlier age

as it is passed from one generation to another. 0) 9@) 90) 163)

Diseases are inherited based on the will of a higher being. 0(0) 0(0) 107) 0(0)

Perceived heritability of colorectal cancer:

CRC is hereditary and proband’s CRC is inherited 0(0) 2 (33) | 2(3) 13)
CRC is hereditary but proband’s CRC is not inherited 0 (0) 1(17) | 1€17)_—-1@3)
CRC is hereditary but not sure if proband’s CRC is

inherited | 000) =1(17) | 3(50) = 00)
CRC is not hereditary and proband’s CRC is not inherited | 2 (100) 1(17) 0(0) 0(0)

Uncertain if CRC is hereditary and if proband’s CRC is

inherited 90) 0(0) | 00) 1(33)

Cancer runs in the family when a number of relatives (at
least 2-5) are affected in addition to at least one of the ff: |

Affected with cancer, regardless of cancer type 0 (0) 5 (83) | 3(50) 1 (33)

Affected relatives are first-degree or second-degree

relatives of each other 1(50) 3 (50) | 3(50) = 2.67)

139

Constructs < - | Sibling (n = 8) Offspring (n = 9)

LA/EA MA LA/EA MA
18-34 35-54 18-34 35-54
n=2 n=6 n=6 n=

Affected with cancer, of the same cancer type 0(0) 0(0) | 2@3) 267)

Affected relatives should be from the same side of the

family (maternal or paternal) 160) ty) 3650) 267)

A parent and a child are affected (two FDRs) 0(0) 2(33) | 2(33) 133)
Affected relatives from any/both sides of the family 1 (50) 3 (50) 0 (0) 0 (0)

At least one individual affected in every generation for
three (3) succeeding generations (e.g., affected 0(0) 1(17) | 2(33) 0(0)
grandparent, parent & child)

Disease developed at a young age, specifically 8-19 years

old 1 (50) 0 (0) 0(0) 0(0)

Perceived presence of familial or hereditary risk for CRC:

I think cancer runs in my family. 0(0) 2 (33) | 2(33) 0(0)
I think cancer does not run in my family. 2(100)  4(67) | 3(50) 2(67)
I am uncertain if cancer runs in my family. 0(0) 0 (0) 1(17) =: 1.33)

140

Table 4.40 Comparison of constructs between siblings and offspring, stratified by sex of
participants

Constructs Sibling (n=8) Offspring (n = 9)
Male Female | Male Female
n=2 n=6 n=4 n=5

+FH Definition 1: A positive family history means “having at

least one relative affected with the disease in question”. 90) 00) 1@5) 120)

+FH Definition 2: A positive family history means “having
multiple relatives affected with the disease in question, with the | 2(100) 6(100) | 3(75) 4 (80)
disease seeming to run in the family”, as described below:

Multiple generations are affected. 2(100)  4(67) | 2(50) 2(40)
Multiple relatives are affected in one generation. 1 (50) 3(50) | 2(50)  4(80)

The disease seems to be inherited or passed down in the

family. 2(100) 4(67) | 2(50) 1 (20)

The disease came from an ancestor (often a fourth-degree

or a more distant relative). 160) 2(33) | 1(25) 1 (20)

The disease mainly affects or presents in one side of the

family (i.e., maternal or paternal). 9) 1(17) | 2(50) 120)

The disease is the main cause of death of multiple family
members.

Family history should include both FDRs and SDRs. 2(100) 2(33) |4(100) 3(60)

0(0) 0(0) 0(0) 1 (20)

Family history should also include TDRs and/or more distant

relatives (aside from FDRs & SDRs). 2100) 2(33) | 125) 3 (60)

Family history includes closely-associated relatives (based on

degree of familiarity). 00) 117) | 260) 00)

Family history should include those with the same disease as

the proband. 00) 3 (50) | 2(50) 4 (80)

Family history should include those with the same disease and

from the same lineage as the proband. 9) 117) | 1@5) — 2(40)

Family history should only include living relatives. 0(0) 2 (33) 0(0) 0(0)
I have a family history of cancer. 0(0) 1(17) | 2(60) 2(40)
I have no family history of cancer. 2(100)  4(67) | 2(50) 3(60)

Having an affected relative increases cancer risks of other

family members. 160) 3(50) | 2(50)  2(40)

Having an affected relative has no effect or does not increase

cancer risks of other family members. 1(50) 350) | 2(50) 3 (60)

Perceptions on disease inheritance: “Namana” means...

Having inherited the disease from a parent 1 (50) 4 (67) |4(100) 5(100) |

Being predisposed or susceptible to develop the same

disease as the proband 1(50) 233) | 2(50) 3 (60)

141

Constructs hae i Sibling (n=8) Offspring (n = 9)

Male Female | Male — Female
n=2 n=4 n=5

Having a “positive family history” of disease (Def. 2) 1 (50) 1(25) 360)
Having received disease traits through blood 0(0) 1(25) 2 (40)

Having inherited the disease from an ancestor 1 (50) 1(25) 120)

Having inherited the disease of the parent with the same

sex 00) 0(0) 0(0)

Having the “genes for cancer” 0(0) 1(17) 0 (0) 0(0)

Perceptions on how diseases are inherited:

Diseases are passed through vertical transmission (vertical
gene transfer) from parent to child.

Diseases are passed through blood. 1 (50) 2(33) | 1(25) 2(40)

2(100) 5 (83) |4(100) 4 (80)

Combined disease traits from parents and grandparents

are passed to the child/offspring. 160) 1(17) | 1(25) —-1(20)

Horizontal transmission or horizontal gene transfer (i.e.,

sibling to sibling) is not possible 0) 233) | 125) 1(20)

An inherited disease can skip one/two generations before

presenting again. ©) 9) ©) 1 (20)

Diseases of the mother are passed to their daughters while
father’s passed their disease traits to their sons.

0 (0) 1017) | 0) 0)

Individuals “inherit” their relative’s disease when they

use the same utensils and eat the same food 90) 9) 9) 120)

Diseases become more severe and appear at an earlier age
as it is passed from one generation to another.

Diseases are inherited based on the will of a higher being. 0 (0) 0(0) 0 (0) 1 (20)

0(0) 0(0) | 1°25) 00)

Perceived heritability of colorectal cancer:

CRC is hereditary and proband’s CRC is inherited 1 (50) 1(17) } 2(50) 1 (20)

CRC is hereditary but proband’s CRC is not inherited 0(0) 1(17) | 1(25) —-1.(20)

CRC is hereditary but not sure if proband’s CRC is
inherited
CRC is not hereditary and proband’s CRC is not inherited 1 (50) 2 (33) 0(0) 0(0)

00) 117) | 1@5) 2(40)

Uncertain if CRC is hereditary and if proband’s CRC is

inherited 0(0) 0(0) 0(0) 1 (20)

Cancer runs in the family when a number of relatives (at
least 2-5) are affected in addition to at least one of the ff:

Affected with cancer, regardless of cancer type 1 (50) 4(67) |4(100) 0(0)

Affected relatives are first-degree or second-degree 0
F (0)
relatives of each other

4(67) | 2(50) 3 (60)

142

Offspring (¥

“Constructs Sibling (n

Male Male — Female
n= n=4 n=5
Affected with cancer, of the same cancer type 0(0) 0(0) 4(80)

Affected relatives should be from the same side of the
family (maternal or paternal)

A parent and a child are affected (two FDRs) 0(0) 2 (33) 0 (0) 3 (60)
Affected relatives from any/both sides of the family 1 (50) 3 (50) 0(0) 0 (0)

0(0) —1(17) | 2(50) 3 (60)

At least one individual affected in every generation for
three (3) succeeding generations (e.g., affected 0(0) 1(17) | 2 (50) 0 (0)
grandparent, parent & child)

Disease developed at a young age, specifically 8-19 years 150) 0) 0(0) 0(0)

old
Perceived presence of familial or hereditary risk for CRC:
I think cancer runs in my family. 1 (50) 1(17) | 2 (50) 0 (0)
I think cancer does not run in my family. 1 (50) 5 (83) | 2(50) 3 (60)
I am uncertain if cancer runs in my family. 0 (0) 0(0) 0 (0) 2 (40) ‘|

143

Table 4.41 Comparison of constructs between siblings and offspring, stratified by
educational attainment of participants

Constructs Sibling (n=8) Offspring (n = 9)

HS/VG_—-CU/CG | HS/VG__CU/CG
n=3 n=4 n=3 n=6

+FH Definition 1: A positive family history means “having at

least one relative affected with the disease in question”. 900) 90) 163) 16°)

+FH Definition 2: A positive family history means “having
multiple relatives affected with the disease in question, with 3(100) 4(100) | 2(67) 5 (83)
the disease seeming to run in the family”, as described below:

Multiple generations are affected. 1(33) 4 (100) | 1(33) 3. (50)

Multiple relatives are affected in one generation. 2 (67) 1(25) | 2(67) 4(67)

The disease seems to be inherited or passed down in the

family. 3(100) 375) | 1(33) 2(33)

The disease came from an ancestor (often a fourth-degree

or a more distant relative). 267) 1(25) | 0(0) = 2(33)

The disease mainly affects or presents in one side of the

family (i.e., maternal or paternal). 0(0) 125) | 00) 360)

The disease is the main cause of death of multiple family
members.

000) 00) | 0@) 147

Family history should include both FDRs and SDRs. 2 (67) 2(50) | 2(67) 5(83)

Family history should also include TDRs and/or more distant

relatives (aside from FDRs & SDRs). 2(67) = 2(50) | 1033) 3. (50)

Family history includes closely-associated relatives (based on

degree of familiarity). 163) 0@) | 163) 147

Family history should include those with the same disease as

the proband. 2 (67) 1(25) | 133) 5 (83)

Family history should include those with the same disease and

from the same lineage as the proband. 1633) 0(0) | 00) 3650)

Family history should only include living relatives. 1 (33) 0(0) 0(0) 0(0)
I have a family history of cancer. 1 (33) 0(0) 2(67) = 2:(33)
T have no family history of cancer. 2 (67) 3(75) | 1(33) 4(67)

Having an affected relative increases cancer risks of other

family members. Ky) 2(50) | 00) 467)

Having an affected relative has no effect or does not increase

cancer risks of other family members. 133) 2(50) |3(100) 233)

Perceptions on disease inheritance: “Namana” means...

Having inherited the disease from a parent 3 (100) 1 (25) [3 (100) 6 (100)

Being predisposed or susceptible to develop the same

disease as the proband 13) 125) | 267) 3 (80)

144

Constructs

Sibling (n = 8)

Offspring (n = 9)

HS/VG_ CU/CG | HS/VG_ CU/CG
n=3 n=4 n=3 n=6
Having a “positive family history” of disease (Def. 2) | 1 (33) 1(25) | 133) 3°(50)
Having received disease traits through blood | 1 (33) 1(25) | 2(67) = 1(17)
Having inherited the disease from an ancestor 0 (0) 2(50) | 0(0) 2(33)
Having inherited the disease of the parent with the same
sex 1 (33) 0(0) | 0(0) 0)
Having the “genes for cancer” 0 (0) 1(25) | 0(0) 0 (0)
Perceptions on how diseases are inherited:
Diseases are passed through vertical transmission
(vertical gene transfer) from parent to child. 3(100) — 3(75)_}3(100) 5 (3)
Diseases are passed through blood. 1 (33) 2(50) | 1(33) 2(33)
Combined disease traits from parents and grandparents
are passed to the child/offspring. 163) 125) | 163) 107)
Horizontal transmission or horizontal gene transfer (i.e.,
sibling to sibling) is not possible 9@) 1@5) | 13) 107)
An inherited disease can skip one/two generations before
presenting again. 9) 125) 00) 360)
Diseases of the mother are passed to their daughters while
father’s passed their disease traits to their sons. 163) °@) 9) 9)
Individuals “inherit” their relative’s disease when they
use the same utensils and eat the same food 9) 9) 163) 9)
Diseases become more severe and appear at an earlier age
as it is passed from one generation to another. 9) 0) 9) 10a
Diseases are inherited based on the will of a higher being. 0(0) 0 (0) 0) 1(17)
Perceived heritability of colorectal cancer:
CRC is hereditary and proband’s CRC is inherited 1 (33) 1(25) | 0(0) 3(50)
CRC is hereditary but proband’s CRC is not inherited 1 (33) 0(0) 1033) —-1 (17)
CRC is hereditary but not sure if proband’s CRC is
inherited 1 (33) 0(0) 13) 233)
CRC is not hereditary and proband’s CRC is not inherited 0 (0) 3(75) | 0(0) 0(0)
Uncertain if CRC is hereditary and if proband’s CRC is
inherited 90) 0) | 163) 0)
Cancer runs in the family when a number of relatives (at
least 2-5) are affected in addition to at least one of the ff:
Affected with cancer, regardless of cancer type 2 (67) 2(50) | 1(33) 350)
Affected relatives are first-degree or second-degree
relatives of each other 1(33) 2(50) | 2(67) 3 (50) |

145

Constructs inne iy ‘Sibling (n =8) Offspring (n = 9)

HS/VG CU/CG | HS/VG_ CU/CG
n=3 n=4 n=3 n=6

Affected with cancer, of the same cancer type 0(0) 0(0) | 2(67) 233)

Affected relatives should be from the same side of the

family (maternal or paternal) 900) 125) | 163) 467)

A parent and a child are affected (two FDRs) 1 (33) 0(0) | 2(67) 1(17)
Affected relatives from any/both sides of the family 1 (33) 2(50) | 0(0) 0(0)
At least one individual affected in every generation for |
three (3) succeeding generations (e.g., affected 0 (0) 1(25) | 1(33) 1 (17)

grandparent, parent & child)

Disease developed at a young age, specifically 8-19 years

old 0(0) 1(25) | 00) ~=—-0(0)

Perceived presence of familial or hereditary risk for CRC:

I think cancer runs in my family. 1 (33) 1 (25) 0(0) 2 (33)
I think cancer does not run in my family. 2 (67) 3(75) }3(100) 2 (33)
1 am uncertain if cancer runs in my family. 0(0) 0(0) 0(0) 2(33)

Understanding of Family History

All eight (8) siblings of probands define a positive family history as “having
multiple relatives affected with cancer, with the disease seeming to run in the family”,
while offspring of cancer probands mentioned two definitions of family history.
Offspring under the 18-34 age group (from both sexes, with one high school graduate and
one college undergraduate) define a positive family history as either having at least
affected relative (2/9), and those in the 35-54 age group define it as having multiple
relatives affected with cancer with the additional conditions discussed before (7/9).
Among the offspring group, the second definition is more apparent among participants

with college education.

146

When it comes to relatives included in the family history, the difference comes in
the inclusion of second-degree relatives, living relatives and relatives with the same

disease as the proband in their family history.

More offspring of proband (7 out of 9, 78%) identified second-degree relatives as
family members that need to be included in the family history. This is in comparison to
four (4) of eight siblings (50%) who have mentioned SDRs as part of the family history.
Male participants with college education from offspring group are also more likely to

include both FDRs and SDRs in their family history.

Living status as a basis for inclusion in the family history is only mentioned by
siblings of probands, specifically female participants from the high school / vocational
group. Inclusion of relatives based on presence of the same disease as proband is
mentioned mostly by offspring (7 out of 9) than siblings of proband (3 out of 8). The

latter is more apparent among females with college education.

A higher portion of recruited offspring also mentioned inclusion of relatives with
the same disease from the same side of the family as the proband (3 out of 9). Most of

them are female college undergraduates or graduates from both age groups.

When it comes to acknowledgement of presence of family history of cancer, only
one sibling (1 out of 8) classified herself as having a family history of cancer while four
(4) out of nine offspring identified themselves as having a positive family history of the

disease. Most of these offspring are under the high school / vocational group.

147

As for whether having an affected relative affects cancer risk of other relatives,
each group are divided in half; 50% answered that it has no effect while the other half

thinks it has an effect.

Perceptions on Disease Inheritance

At least three (3) of siblings and offspring define the term “namana” or

“namamana” in relation to disease inheritance using the following constructs:

= Siblings: “Namana”, in relation to disease inheritance, means having inherited the
disease from a parent (5/8, 63%), and having increased susceptibility to develop
the disease (3/8, 38%).

= Offspring: “Namana”, in relation to disease inheritance, means having inherited
the disease traits from a parent (9/9, 100%) through blood (3/9, 30%), increasing
susceptibility to develop the disease (5/9, 56%). The term can also mean as
having a positive family history of disease (4/9, 44%), with the definition of

“family history” similar to that of the disease seeming to run in the family.

In terms of how diseases are inherited, at least three (3) siblings or offspring

explained disease inheritance using the following constructs:

= Siblings: Diseases are inherited through vertical transmission from parent to child
(7/8, 88%) via blood (3/8, 38%). Disease inheritance is often explained using
another chronic disease, often diabetes, considered as running in the family (4/8,

50%).

148

= Offspring: Diseases are inherited through vertical transmission from parent to
child (8/9, 89%) via blood (3/9, 30%), and the disease can skip one or two

generations before presenting again (3/9, 30%).

The offspring group tends to use constructs, such as inheriting the disease from a
parent and being predisposed to develop the disease, to define disease inheritance.
Equating “namana” with the emerged second definition of family history and describing
inherited diseases as having the potential to skip by one or two generations are more
common among female offspring with college education. The concept of anticipation is
raised by a male offspring with a college education under the Middle Adulthood age
group. The ideas that disease traits are inherited only from a parent of the same sex or
through the use of the same utensils/intake of the same food are raised by participants
with high school or vocational degrees (by a sibling for the former, and by an offspring

for the latter).

When it comes to participants’ opinion whether colorectal cancer can be inherited,
only siblings of proband, from the 18-34 age group who have tertiary education (3/8,
38%), mentioned that CRC is not hereditary. Majority of the siblings (4/8, 50%) believe
that their probands’ CRC is not inherited (two believe it is inherited, one remains
uncertain, and another one did not answer). On the other hand, majority of offspring, who
are 35-54 years old under the high school/vocational group, are uncertain on whether the

disease is inherited or not, and whether the proband’s CRC was inherited.

149

Constructs that describe when cancer is perceived to run in the family differ
between the two study groups. At least three (3) of siblings and offspring describe it

using the following constructs:

* Siblings: Cancer runs in the family if at least three relatives (range: 2-5; 8/8,
100%), who are FDRs/SDRs (4/8, 50%) from both maternal and paternal sides of
the family (4/8, 50%) are affected with cancer, regardless of cancer type (5/8,
63%).
= Offspring: Two definitions emerged based on the interviews:
A. Cancer runs in the family if at least three relatives (range: 2-4, 9/9, 100%),
who are FDRs/SDRs (5/9, 56%) from the same side of the family (5/9, 56%)
or a parent and child (3/9, 30%) are affected with cancer, regardless of cancer
type (4/9, 44%).
B. Cancer runs in the family if at least three relatives (range: 2-4, 9/9, 100%),
who are FDRs/SDRs (5/9, 56%) from the same side of the family (5/9, 56%)
or a parent and child (3/9, 30%) are affected with the same cancer type (4/9,
44%).
Based on these definitions, majority of siblings (6/8, 75%) and offspring (5/9,
56%) believe that cancer does not run in their families. Though, offspring of probands,
specifically female participants who are college undergraduates or graduates, also tend to
be more uncertain on the question of cancer running in their families, compared to the

other group of FDRs.

150

Actual VS Perceived Risk
Table 4.42 compares the actual and perceived risks between siblings and
offspring.

Table 4.42 Actual vs perceived risk, siblings vs offspring

SIBLINGS OFFSPRING

Sex of
Consultand
Sex of
Proband
Educational
Attainment
Age of
Consultand
Age Category
Age of
Proband
Relation with
Proband
Cancer Risk
Scheuner
Cancer Risk
CDC-NCCN
Perceived
Cancer Risk
Perceived vs
Actual*

LA = Later Adolescence (18-24), EA = Early Adulthood (25-34), MA = Middle Adulthood (35-54)

HV = HS/vocational degree graduate, CC = College undergraduate or College graduate

M = Male; F = Female; S = Sibling; O = Offspring; Hr = High Risk; Mr = Moderate Risk; Ar = Average Risk; Nr = No Risk

1 Perceived vs Actual - this compares the perceived risk from the actual risk (based on pedigree analysis, considering NCCN criteria); e.g., P1’s
perceived risk category is higher than P1's actual risk

Majority of the siblings group (5/8, 63%) have moderate risk based on their
pedigrees and the CDC-NCCN risk stratification criteria. One is a potential high risk and
two have average risks. In contrast to their actual risks, recruited siblings of probands
classified themselves to be at moderate risk (4/8, 50%), average risk (2/8, 25%) and no
risk (2/8, 25%). Comparing the perceived and actual risks, siblings of probands,
regardless of sex, age, and educational attainment, tend to classify themselves at a lower

risk category than their actual cancer risk (5/8, 63%).

151

On the other hand, majority of the offspring group (7/9, 78%) have average risk
based on their pedigrees and the CDC/NCCN risk stratification criteria. The remaining
two participants under this group have moderate risks. In contrast to their actual risks,
recruited offspring of probands classified themselves to be at average risk (3/9, 30%),
moderate risk (3/9, 30%), high risk (2/9, 22%), and no risk (1/9, 11%). Comparing the
perceived and actual risks, offspring of probands, most often those under the high
school/vocational group (regardless of age and sex), tend to classify themselves at a
higher risk category than their actual cancer risk (4/9, 44%). Also, most of the
participants with a higher perceived risk than actual risk have the same sex as their

probands.

FDRs of patients with early-onset CRC VS FDRs of patients with typical-onset CRC

Tables 4.43 to 4.45 compare the perspectives between between FDRs of patients
with early-onset CRC and FDRs of patients with typical-onset CRC, while considering
age, sex and educational attainment of the participants. Constructs on their personal
definition of family history, family composition, acknowledgement of familial risk, and

perceptions on cancer and CRC inheritance were compared in the said table.

152

Table 4.43 Comparison of constructs between early-onset and typical-onset FDR group,
stratified by age group

Early-Onset Typical-Onset
Constructs FDR Group FDR Group
(n= 8) (n= 9)
LA/EA MA LA/EA MA
18-34 35-54 18-34 35-54
n=5 n=3 n=3 n=6
+FH Definition 1: A positive family history means “having at
least one relative affected with the disease in question”. 120) 000) 163) 00)
+FH Definition 2: A positive family history means “having
multiple relatives affected with the disease in question, with the | 4 (80) 2 (67) | 2(67) 6(100)
disease seeming to run in the family”, as described below:
Multiple generations are affected. 3 (60) 1 (33) 0(0)  6(100)
Multiple relatives are affected in one generation. 3 (60) 2 (67) | 2(67)  3(50)
The disease seems to be inherited or passed down in the 360) 2(67) | 133) 3650)
family.
The disease came from an ancestor (often a fourth-degree
or a more distant relative). 1(20) 133) | 0@) ~—- 23)
The disease mainly affects or presents in one side of the
family (i.e., maternal or paternal). 2 (40) (0) 0) = 2(33)
The disease is the main cause of death of multiple family
members. 9(0) 90) 0) 107
Family history should include both FDRs and SDRs. 3(60)  1(33) |3(100) 4(67)
Family history should also include TDRs and/or more distant
relatives (aside from FDRs & SDRs). 2 (40) 2(67) | 2067) 2.33)
Family history includes closely-associated relatives (based on
degree of familiarity). 9@) 13) | 163) 117)
Family history should include those with the same disease as
the proband. | 3(60) 133) | 2(67) 3 (50)
Family history should include those with the same disease and
from the same lineage as the proband. 2 (40) 90) 90) 2 (33)
Family history should only include living relatives. 0 (0) 2(67) | 0(0) 0(0)
I have a family history of cancer. 2 (40) 0 (0) | 1(33) = 2. (33)
I have no family history of cancer. 3 (60) 3(100 |} 2(67) 3(50)
Having an affected relative increases cancer risks of other 2 (40) 1033) | 1@3) 467)
family members. |
Having an affected relative has no effect or does not increase |
cancer risks of other family members. 3 (60) 2(67) | 2(67)  2(33)

153

s - Early-Onset ~ Typical-Onset
Constructs i - 2 FDR Group FDR Group

(n=8) (n= 9)

LA/EA MA LA/EA MA
18-34 35-54 18-34 35-54

n=5 n=3 n= n=6
Perceptions on disease inheritance: “Namana” means...
Having inherited the disease from a parent 3(60)  3(100) 5 (100) 5 (83)
Being predisposed to develop the same disease as proband | 2 (40) 2 (67) |3(100) 1(17) |
Having a “positive family history” of disease (Def. 2) 1 (20) 1(33) | 2(67) 2(33)
Having received disease traits through blood 0(0) 0(0) |3 (100) 2(33)
Having inherited the disease from an ancestor 2 (40) 0(0) 0(0) 2 (33)

Having inherited the disease of the parent with the same

sex 0(0) 1(33) | 0(0) 0 (0)

Having the “genes for cancer” 1 (20) 0(0) 0(0) 0 (0)

Perceptions on how diseases are inherited:

Diseases are passed through vertical transmission (vertical

gene transfer) from parent to child. 3(60) (100) | 3(100) 6 (100)

Diseases are passed through blood. 1 (20) 0(0) 2 (67) 3(50)

Combined disease traits from parents and grandparents

are passed to the child/offspring. 90) 90) | 163) 36650)

Horizontal transmission or horizontal gene transfer (i.e.,

sibling to sibling) is not possible 120) 13) | 13) 117)

An inherited disease can skip one/two generations before
presenting again.

1(20)  0(0) | 13) 2@3)

Diseases of the mother are passed to their daughters while

father’s passed their disease traits to their sons. 9) 163) | 0@) 90)

Individuals “inherit” their relative’s disease when they

use the same utensils and eat the same food 90) 0(0) | 13) 00)

Diseases become more severe and appear at an earlier age

as it is passed from one generation to another. 90) 0@) | 0@) 107

Diseases are inherited based on the will of a higher being. 0 (0) 0 (0) 1 (33) 0(0)

Perceived heritability of colorectal cancer:

CRC is hereditary and proband’s CRC is inherited 2 (40) 0(0) 0 (0) 3 (50)

CRC is hereditary but proband’s CRC is not inherited 0(0) 1(33) | 1@3)  1(17)

CRC is hereditary but not sure if proband’s CRC is 120) 1(33) | 267) 0(0)

inherited

CRC is not hereditary and proband’s CRC is not inherited | 2 (40) 0 (0) 0 (0) 1(17)
Uncertain if CRC is hereditary and if proband’s CRC is “|

inherited 000) 00) | 00) 107

154

- i Early-Onset Typical-Onset
»Constructs - FDRGroup- FDR Group

(n= 8) (n= 9)

LA/EA MA LA/EA MA
18-34 35-54 18-34 35-54

n=5 n=3 n=3 n=6
_
Cancer runs in the family when a number of relatives (at
least 2-5) are affected in addition to at least one of the ff:
Affected with cancer, regardless of cancer type 2(40) 267) | 1033) 4(67)

Affected relatives are first-degree or second-degree

relatives of each other 2 (40) 1(33) | 2(67)  4(67)

Affected with cancer, of the same cancer type 1 (20) 0 (0) 1(33) = 2 (33)

Affected relatives should be from the same side of the

family (maternal or paternal) XS) 9) 2(67) 233)

A parent and a child are affected (two FDRs) 0 (0) 2(67) | 2(67)  1(17)

Affected relatives from any/both sides of the family 1 (20) 2 (67) 0 (0) 1(17)

At least one individual affected in every generation for
three (3) succeeding generations (e.g., affected 1 (20) 0 (0) 1(33) 1 (17)
grandparent, parent & child)

Disease developed at a young age, specifically 8-19 years

old 1 (20) 0(0) 0(0) 0(0)

Perceived presence of familial or hereditary risk for CRC:

I think cancer runs in my family. 2 (40) 0 (0) 0(0) 2 (33)
I think cancer does not run in my family. 2(40)  3(100) |3(100) 3(50)
I am uncertain if cancer runs in my family. 1 (20) 0(0) 0(0) 1(17)

155

Table 4.44 Comparison of constructs between early-onset and typical-onset FDR group,
stratified by sex of participants

Early-Onset Typical-Onset
Constructs FDR Group FDR Group
(n= 8) (n=9)
Male Female Male Female
n=3 n=5 n=3 n=6
+FH Definition 1: A positive family history means “having at
least one relative affected with the disease in question”. 90) 1@0) | 163) 00)
{—
+FH Definition 2: A positive family history means “having
multiple relatives affected with the disease in question, with the 2 (67) 4(80) | 2(67) 4(67)
disease seeming to run in the family”, as described below:
Multiple generations are affected. 2 (67) 2(40) | 2(67)  4(67)
Multiple relatives are affected in one generation. 3(100)  2(40) | 0(0) 5 (83)
The disease seems to be inherited or passed down in the 267) 360) | 2(67) 233)
family.
The disease came from an ancestor (often a fourth-degree
or a more distant relative). 163) 120) | 163) 23)
The disease mainly affects or presents in one side of the
family (i.e., maternal or paternal). 2(67) 9) 0(0) 233)
The disease is the main cause of death of multiple family 0(0) 0(0) 00) 1(17)
members.
Family history should include both FDRs and SDRs. 3(100)  1(20) |3(100) 4(67)
Family history should also include TDRs and/or more distant
relatives (aside from FDRs & SDRs). 267) 2(40) | 13) 3.650)
Family history includes closely-associated relatives (based on
| degree of familiarity). 90) 120) | 2067) 000)
4
Family history should include those with the same disease as
1 (60, 1
| the proband. 33) 3 (60) (33) 467)
Family history should include those with the same disease and
from the same lineage as the proband. 13) 1 (20) 9) 2 (33)
Family history should only include living relatives. 0 (0) 2 (40) 0(0) 0(0)
I have a family history of cancer. 1 (33) 1 (20) | 1(33) 2 (33)
I have no family history of cancer. 2 (67) 4(80) | 2(67) 3(50)
Having an affected relative increases cancer risks of other 133) 2(40) | 2(67) 350)
family members.
Having an affected relative has no effect or does not increase 267
cancer risks of other family members. (67) 360) | 13) 350)

156

Early-Onset _Typical-Onset
Constructs FDR Group FDR Group
(n= 8) (n= 9)

Perceptions on disease inheritance: “Namana” means...

Having inherited the disease from a parent 2 (67) 4(80) |3(100) 5(83) |

Being predisposed or susceptible to develop the same

disease as the proband 163) 3(60) | 2(67)  2(33)

Having a “positive family history” of disease (Def. 2) 1 (33) 1(20) | 1(33) 350)

Having received disease traits through blood 0(0) 0 (0) 1(33) 4 (67)

Having inherited the disease from an ancestor 2 (67) 0(0) 0(0) 2 (33)

Having inherited the disease of parent with the same sex 0 (0) 1 (20) 0 (0) 0(0)

Having the “genes for cancer” 0(0) 1 (20) 0 (0) 0(0)
Perceptions on how diseases are inherited:

Diseases are passed through vertical transmission (vertical

3 (100:

gene transfer) from parent to child. SLD) eX) ELD)

Diseases are passed through blood. 0 (0) 1(20) | 2(67) 3 (50)

Combined disease traits from parents and grandparents

are passed to the child/offspring. 0) 9) 267) 2(33)

Horizontal transmission or horizontal gene transfer (i.e.,

sibling to sibling) is not possible 1G3) 120) | 00) = 2.33)

An inherited disease can skip one/two generations before

ean ean 1(33)  0(0) | 103) 2(33)

Diseases of the mother are passed to their daughters while

father’s passed their disease traits to their sons. 9) 120) | 00) 90)

Individuals “inherit” their relative’s disease when they

use the same utensils and eat the same food 9) °@) 90) 17)

Diseases become more severe and appear at an earlier age

as it is passed from one generation to another. 90) 9) 13) 00)

Diseases are inherited based on the will of a higher being. 0(0) 0(0) 0(0) 1(17)
Perceived heritability of colorectal cancer:

CRC is hereditary and proband’s CRC is inherited 2 (67) 0(0) 1(33) =—2.(33)

CRC is hereditary but proband’s CRC is not inherited 0(0) 1(20) | 1(33) 117)

CRC is hereditary but not sure if proband’s CRC is

inherited 0) = 2(40) |! (33) -1(17)

CRC is not hereditary and proband’s CRC is not inherited | 1 (33) 1(20) | 0(0) 1(17)

Uncertain if CRC is hereditary and if proband’s CRC is

z 00 0
res @ 0) | 0@) 1417)

157

Early-Onset Typical-Onset
Constructs FDR Group FDR Group
(n = 8) (n=9)
Male Female | Male Female
n=3 n=5 n=3 n=6
Cancer runs in the family when a number of relatives (at
least 2-5) are affected in addition to at least one of the ff:
Affected with cancer, regardless of cancer type 2 (67) 2(40) |3(100) 2(33)
Affected relatives are first-degree or second-degree
relatives of each other 13) 2(40) | 13) 5 (83)
Affected with cancer, of the same cancer type 0 (0) 1 (20) 0 (0) 3 (50)
4
Affected relatives should be from the same side of the
family (maternal or paternal) 163) 120) | 163) 360)
A parent and a child are affected (two FDRs) 0 (0) 2 (40) 0(0) 3 (50)
Affected relatives from any/both sides of the family 1 (33) 2 (40) 0(0) 1(17)
At least one individual affected in every generation for
three (3) succeeding generations (e.g., affected 1 (33) 0 (0) 1(33) 117)
grandparent, parent & child)
Disease developed at a young age, specifically 8-19 years 13) 00) 0(0) 0(0)
Perceived presence of familial or hereditary risk for CRC:
I think cancer runs in my family. 2 (67) 0(0) 1033) =—-1 (17)
| I think cancer does not run in my family. 1 (33) 4(80) | 2(67) 4(67)
| I am uncertain if cancer runs in my family. 0 (0) 1 (20) 0(0) 1(17)

158


Table 4.45 Comparison of constructs between early-onset and typical-onset FDR group,

stratified by educational attainment of participants

Constructs

Early-Onset

FDR Group
dng 2)

Ty pical-Onset
FDR Group
(n= 9)

HS/VG_ = CU/CG _|HS/VG_ CU/CG
n=2 n=5 n=4 n=5
+FH Definition 1: A positive family history means “having at
least one relative affected with the disease in question”. 900) 120) | 125) 0(0)
+FH Definition 2: A positive family history means “having
multiple relatives affected with the disease in question, with 2(100)  4(80) | 3(75) 5 (100)
the disease seeming to run in the family”, as described below:
Multiple generations are affected. 0(0) 3 (60) | 2(50)  4(80)
Multiple relatives are affected in one generation. 1 (50) 3 (60) | 3(75) 2(40)
The disease seems to be inherited or passed down in the 2(100) 3(60) | 3(75) 240)
family.
The disease came from an ancestor (often a fourth-degree
or a more distant relative). 160) 1(20) | 125) 2(40)
The disease mainly affects or presents in one side of the
family (i.e., maternal or paternal). 900) 2(40) | 0) — 2(40)
The disease is the main cause of death of multiple family 00) 000) 00) 1020)
members.
Family history should include both FDRs and SDRs. 1 (50) 3(60) | 3(75)  4(80)
Family history should also include TDRs and/or more distant
relatives (aside from FDRs & SDRs). 2(100)  2(40) | 1@25) — 3.(60)
Family history includes closely-associated relatives (based on
é 1 (50) 0
degree of familiarity). (50) ©) 125) 120)
Family history should include those with the same disease as
the proband. 1(50) 3 (60) | 2(50) 3 (60)
Family history should include those with the same disease and 00 2
40) 1(2.
from the same lineage as the proband. ©) (40) (25) 1 (20)
Family history should only include living relatives. | 1 (50) 0 (0) 0(0) 0(0)
I have a family history of cancer. 0(0) 2(40) | 3(75) 00)
I have no family history of cancer. 2 (100) 3(60) | 1(25) 4(80)
Having an affected relative increases cancer risks of other 1(50) 2 (40) | 125) 4(80)
family members.
Having an affected relative has no effect or does not increase 1650 3(60 7
cancer risks of other family members. (50) (60) | 3(75) 1(20)


Constructs

Early-Onset
FDR Group

(n=7)

Typical-Onset
~ FDR Group
(n= 9)

HS/VG CU/CG | HS/VG CU/CG
n=2 n=5 n=4 n=5
Perceptions on disease inheritance: “Namana” means...
Having inherited the disease from a parent 2 (100) 3(60) |4(100) 4(80)
Being predisposed or susceptible to develop the same
disease as the proband 1650) 3 (60) | 2(50)  2.(40)
Having a “positive family history” of disease (Def. 2) 1 (50) 1(20) | 1(25) 3 (60)
Having received disease traits through blood 0(0) 0(0) | 3(75)  2(40)
Having inherited the disease from an ancestor 0 (0) 2 (40) 0(0) 2 (40)
Having inherited the disease of parent with the same sex 1 (50) 0(0) 0(0) 0(0)
Having the “genes for cancer” 0(0) 1(20) | 0(0) 0(0)
Perceptions on how diseases are inherited:
Diseases are passed through vertical transmission
4 (100. 10
(vertical gene transfer) from parent to child. 2100) 260) (100) 5.(100)
Diseases are passed through blood. 0(0) 1(20) | 2(50) 3(60)
Combined disease traits from parents and grandparents
are passed to the child/offspring. 9) 90) 2(50)  2(40)
Horizontal transmission or horizontal gene transfer (i.e.,
sibling to sibling) is not possible 90) 120) | 1025) 120)
An inherited disease can skip one/two generations before 0©) 120) | 00) 30)
presenting again.
Diseases of the mother are passed to their daughters while
father’s passed their disease traits to their sons. 160) 9) 9) ©)
Individuals “inherit” their relative’s disease when they
use the same utensils and eat the same food 9(0) 9) 1@5) 0)
Diseases become more severe and appear at an earlier age
as it is passed from one generation to another. 900) ony 00) 10)
Diseases are inherited based on the will of a higher being. 0(0) 0 (0) | 0(0) 1 (20)
Perceived heritability of colorectal cancer:
CRC is hereditary and proband’s CRC is inherited 0(0) 2(40) | 1(25) 2(40)
CRC is hereditary but proband’s CRC is not inherited | 1 (50) 0 (0) 1(25) 1 (20)
CRC is hereditary but not sure if proband’s CRC is 1(50) 120) / 125) 120)
inherited
CRC is not hereditary and proband’s CRC is not inherited 0(0) 2(40) | 0(0) 1 (20)
Uncertain if CRC is hereditary and if proband’s CRC is
1 00 0(0) | 1025
inherited (0) (0) (25) 00)

160


z y Early-Onset Typical-Onset
Constructs aie FDR Group FDR Group

(n=7) (n= 9)

HS/VG_ = CU/CG | HS/VG__CU/CG

n=2 n=5 n=4 n=5
Cancer runs in the family when a number of relatives (at
least 2-5) are affected in addition to at least one of the ff:
Affected with cancer, regardless of cancer type 1 (50) 2 (40) | 2(50) 3 (60)

Affected relatives are first-degree or second-degree

relatives of each other 9 (0) 2(40) | 3(75) — 3,(60)

Affected with cancer, of the same cancer type 0 (0) 1(20) | 2(50) 1 (20)

Affected relatives should be from the same side of the

family (maternal or paternal) 9) 2(40) | 1(25) _— 3.(60)

A parent and a child are affected (two FDRs) 1 (50) 0(0) 2 (50) 1 (20)

Affected relatives from any/both sides of the family 1 (50) 1 (20) 0 (0) 1 (20)

At least one individual affected in every generation for
three (3) succeeding generations (e.g., affected 0 (0) 1(20) | 1(25) 1 (20)
grandparent, parent & child)

Disease developed at a young age, specifically 8-19 years

an 0(0) 1(20) | 0) 00)

Perceived presence of familial or hereditary risk for CRC:

T think cancer runs in my family. 0(0) 2(40) | 1(25) = 120)
I think cancer does not run in my family. 2 (100) 2(40) | 3(75) 3°60)
JT am uncertain if cancer runs in my family. 0(0) 1 (20) 0(0) 1 (20) |

161

Understanding of Family History

Among recruited participants, eight (8) have relatives with early-onset cancer
(ie., the early-onset FDR group) while nine (9) have typical-onset cancer (i.e., the

typical-onset FDR group).

As shown in the tables, personal definitions of family history and family
composition of those with early-onset and typical-onset cancer are relatively similar. The
difference only comes in the idea that a positive family history of a disease means that the
disease is often the cause of death of the family members. The latter only appeared in the
interviews with the typical-onset FDR group, specifically from a female middle adult

participant with college education.

Participants under the typical-onset FDR group, mostly at 18-34 years old males
with college education, mentioned inclusion of both FDRs and SDRs in their family
history. However, the idea of only including living relatives in the family history is as an
emerged concept among those FDRs with probands diagnosed with cancer before age 50,
specifically female middle adult participants with high school or vocational degrees. The

latter idea was not mentioned by participants under the typical-onset cancer group.

Approximately equal number of participants from each group has classified
themselves as having and not having a positive family history of cancer. The difference
appears to be on their perception of whether having a relative with cancer affects cancer

risks of other family members.

162

Five (5) out of nine participants under the typical-onset group (56%) believe that
having a relative with cancer affects other relatives’ cancer risks, while only three out of

eight (3/8, 38%) participants with probands diagnosed with early-onset cancer believe the

same thing.
Perceptions on Disease Inheritance

At least three (3) of FDRs with early-onset cancer and typical-onset affected
probands define the term “namana” or “namamana” in relation to disease inheritance

using the following constructs:

= Early-onset FDR group: “Namana”, in relation to disease inheritance, means
having inherited the disease from a parent (6/8, 75%), and having increased
susceptibility to develop the disease (4/8, 50%).

* Typical-onset FDR group: “Namana”, in relation to disease inheritance, means
having inherited the disease traits from a parent (8/9, 89%) through blood (5/9,
56%), increasing susceptibility to develop the disease (5/9, 56%). The term can
also mean as having a positive family history of disease (4/9, 44%), with the
definition of “family history” similar to that of the disease seeming to run in the

family.

The concept of inheriting through blood appeared more among participants at 18-
34 years old under the typical-onset group. However, constructs, such as only inheriting
from a parent with the same sex or having the genes for cancer, mostly appeared among

the early-onset FDR group.

163

In terms of how diseases are inherited, at least three (3) of FDRs with early-onset
cancer and typical-onset affected probands explained disease inheritance using the

following constructs:

= Early-onset FDR group: Diseases are inherited through vertical transmission from
parent to child (6/8, 75%). Disease inheritance is often explained using another
chronic disease, often diabetes, considered as running in the family (4/8, 50%).

= Typical-onset FDR group: Combined disease traits from both sides of the family
(4/9, 44%) are inherited through vertical transmission from parent to child (9/9,
100%) via blood (5/9, 56%), and the disease can skip one or two generations

before presenting again (3/9, 30%).

When it comes to participants’ opinion whether colorectal cancer can be inherited,
majority of FDRs with early-onset cancer (6/8, 75%) and typical-onset affected probands
(7/9, 78%) believe that colorectal cancer can be hereditary. FDRs with typical-onset
affected probands have divided views on whether their relatives’ CRC was inherited (3/9
= inherited, 3/9 = not inherited, 3/9 = uncertain). Majority of FDRs with early-onset
cancer affected probands (3/8, 38%), on the other hand, believe that their probands’ CRC

is not inherited (2/8 = inherited, 2/8 = uncertain).

Constructs that describe when cancer is perceived to run in the family differs between
the two study groups. At least three (3) of FDRs with early-onset and typical-onset cancer

affected probands describe it using the following constructs:

164

= Early-onset FDR group: Cancer runs in the family if at least three relatives (range:

2-5; 8/8, 100%), who are FDRs/SDRs (3/8, 38%) from both maternal and paternal

sides of the family (3/8, 38%) are affected with cancer, regardless of cancer type

(4/8, 50%).

= Typical-onset FDR group: Two definitions emerged based on the interviews:

A. Cancer runs in the family if at least three relatives (range: 2-4, 9/9, 100%),
who are FDRs/SDRs (6/9, 67%) from the same side of the family (4/9, 44%)
or a parent and child (3/9, 30%) are affected with cancer, regardless of
cancer type (5/9, 56%).

B. Cancer runs in the family if at least three relatives (range: 2-4, 9/9, 100%),
who are FDRs/SDRs (6/9, 67%) from the same side of the family (4/9, 44%)
or a parent and child (3/9, 30%) are affected with the same cancer type (3/9,

30%).

Based on these definitions, majority of FDRs with early-onset (5/8, 63%) and
typical-onset (6/9, 67%) cancer affected probands believe that cancer does not run in their

families.

165

Actual VS Perceived Risks

Table 4.46 compares the actual and perceived risks between first-degree relatives

of probands with early-onset and typical-onset colorectal cancers.

Table 4.46 Actual vs perceived risk, early-onset FDR group vs typical-onset FDR group

EARLY-ONSET CANCER FDR GROUP

TYPICAL-ONSET CANCER FDR GROUP

Sex of
Consultand
Sex of
Proband
Educational
Attainment
Age of |
Consultand
Age

Categor
Age of
Proband
Relation with
Proband
Cancer Risk
Scheuner
Cancer Risk
CDC-NCCN
Perceived
Cancer Risk
Perceived vs
Actual’

UA = Later Adolescence (18-24), EA = Early Adulthood (25-34), MA = Middle Adulthood (35-54)

HV = HS/vocational degree graduate, CC = College undergraduate or College graduate

M= Male; F = Female; S = Sibling; O = Offspring; Hr = High Risk; Mr = Moderate Risk; Ar = Average Risk; Nr = No Risk

1 Perceived vs Actual — this compares the perceived risk from the actual risk (based on pedigree analysis, considering NCCN criteria); e.g., P1’s
perceived risk category is higher than P'1's actual risk

Based on their pedigrees, all participants under the early-onset cancer FDR group
are classified under moderate risk (8/8, 100%). In contrast to their actual risks, the group
classified themselves to be at average risk (4/8, 50%), moderate risk (3/8, 38%) and no
risk (1/8, 13%). Comparing the perceived and actual risks, the early-onset FDR group
tend to classify themselves at a lower risk category than their actual cancer risk (5/8,
63%). The latter is more apparent among participants who have received college

education and are at 18-34 years old.

166

On the other hand, majority of the participants under the typical-onset cancer
FDR group (8/9, 89%) have average risk based on their pedigrees and the NCCN risk
stratification criteria. Only one participant under this group is classified as a potential
high risk. In contrast to their actual risks, the group classified themselves to be at average
risk (1/9, 11%), moderate risk (4/9, 44%), high risk (2/9, 22%), and no risk (2/9, 22%).
Comparing the perceived and actual risks, the typical-onset FDR group, mostly offspring
of probands but regardless of age, sex and educational attainment, tend to classify

themselves at a higher risk category than their actual cancer risk (5/9, 56%).

167

Siblings/Offspring of Probands with Early-Onset Cancer vs Siblings/Offspring of
Probands with Typical-Onset Cancer

Table 4.47 compares the actual and perceived risks between siblings and offspring

of probands with early-onset and typical-onset colorectal cancers.

Table 4.47 Actual vs perceived risk, siblings/offspring of probands with early-onset vs
siblings/offspring of probands with typical-onset cancer

EARLY-ONSET CANCER FDR GROUP TYPICAL-ONSET CANCER FDR GROUP

Sex of
Consultand
Sex of
Proband

Age of
Consuttand
Age of
Proband
Relation with
Proband
Cancer Risk
Scheuner et al
Cancer Risk
CDC-NCCN
Perceived
Cancer Risk
Perceived vs
Actual!

M = Male; F = Female; S = Sibling; O = Offspring; H = High Risk; M = Moderate Risk; A = Average Risk; N = No Risk
1 Perceived vs Actual — this compares the perceived risk from the actual risk (based on pedigree analysis, considering NCCN criteria); e.g., P1's
Perceived risk category is higher than P1’s actual risk

When grouping takes into consideration both the relationship with the proband

and the proband’s age of cancer diagnosis, it resulted to four (4) groups:

= Siblings of probands with early-onset cancer (5/17)
o Cancer risk based on NCCN: 5/5 (100%) moderate risk

o Perceived cancer risk: 2/5 moderate risk, 2/5 average risk, 1 no risk

168

Siblings of probands with typical-onset cancer (3/17)
o Cancer risk based on NCCN: 2/3 (66%) average risk, 1/3 (33%) high risk

o Perceived cancer risk: 2/3 moderate risk, 1/3 no risk

Comparing the groups mentioned above, both groups tend to have a perceived

tisk /ower than their actual risk.

Offspring of probands with early-onset cancer (3/17)
o Cancer risk based on NCCN: 3/3 (100%) moderate risk

o Perceived cancer risk: 2/3 average risk, 1/3 moderate risk

Offspring of probands with typical-onset cancer (6/17)
o Cancer risk based on NCCN: 6/6 (100%) average risk
o Perceived cancer risk: 2/6 high risk, 2/6 moderate risk, 1/6 average risk,

1/6 no risk

Comparing the groups mentioned above, offspring of proband with early-
onset cancer tend to have a perceived risk /ower than their actual risk. In contrast
to that, offspring of proband with typical-onset cancer tend to have a higher

perceived risk than their actual risk.

169

CHAPTER V

DISCUSSION

Studies relating to family history and cancer risk perception of first-degree
relatives generally focus on identifying the relationship between family history, perceived
risk and adoption of screening practices; and results of these researches have supported
the idea of perceived susceptibility due to family history as a compelling factor that
promotes lifestyle and behaviour modification, including screening compliance. In this
paper, we have studied these concepts in the context of Filipino culture, with the
expectation that the results will help in identifying measures to improve colorectal cancer
prevention and management services in the country by improving the ways colorectal

cancer, and familial or personal cancer risks are communicated.

This study explored lay notions of Filipinos with at least one first-degree relative
diagnosed with colorectal cancer on how they understand and give meaning to the
presence of cancer history in the family, their perceptions of disease causation and
inherited gene risks, their views on their personal risks, and how they cope or manage
these risks. We also explored variations in meanings of family history between two
generations of FDRs — siblings and offspring of probands, and between FDRs of

probands with early-onset cancer and typical-onset cancer.

170

Filipino First-Degree Relatives’ Perspectives on Family History, Disease and
Inherited Gene Risks

The Model of Familial Risk Perception of Walter et al (2004), the conceptual
framework adapted in the study, guided the creation of the data collection tools and the
data analysis process. The model illustrates the dynamic process of how lay people
interpret their family history of chronic disease and develop personal risk perceptions. It
takes into account the five interconnected themes that emerged in the meta-analysis of
related qualitative investigations. These five themes — diseases running in the family,
experiencing a relative’s illness, personal mental models, personalizing vulnerability, and
control of familial risk — were incorporated into four main concepts: Salience of Family
History of Cancer, Personalizing Process, Perceived Personal Risk, and Risk

Management.

Findings to address the first specific objective of the study, which aims to explore
lay notions on family history and perceptions on disease, disease inheritance and risk
management, were presented following the four major themes of the adapted conceptual
framework. The concepts noted in the first specific objective and the relationships

between these concepts were also discussed below.

Theme 1: Salience of Family History of Cancer

Salience of family history refers to an individual’s perceived significance of
having an affected family member. It is determined by the individual’s acknowledgement
that a familial risk for the disease exists (Walter et al, 2004), which can be influenced by
how they give meaning to or define their family history of disease (Helman, 2002; Hunt

et al, 2001).

171

In this study, we explored the factors considered to influence salience namely,
one’s personal definition of family history, their views on who should be included in their
family history, and their perception of their familial risk. Findings on these latter
concepts address the first parts of both specific objective 1 (i.e., to explore lay notions of
family history of cancer) and specific objective 2 (i.e., to identify variations in meanings

of family history).

Defining “Positive” Family History of Disease

At its simplest definition, a positive family history of disease means having at
least one relative affected by the disease. For colorectal cancer, a positive family history
is defined as having a first- or second-degree relative affected with CRC and/or other
cancers related to hereditary colorectal cancer syndromes (NCCN, 2013; CDC-Public

Health Genomics, 2014).

In this study, two definitions of positive family history of disease emerged (note
that the term “family history” was used untranslated when the participants were asked
about their understanding of the concept). The first follows the simplest definition, which
states that “having at least one affected relative is enough” to say that the individual has a
positive family history of cancer. The second definition defines a positive family history
as “having multiple relatives affected with cancer”. Fifteen of the seventeen participants
define family history based on the latter description. With ten of them further describing
a positive family history with at least one of these constructs: (1) multiple relatives in one
generation are affected, (2) multiple relatives in multiple generations are affected, and (3)

the disease affecting these family members was inherited or “namana”. These

172

descriptions imply that if we are to follow their definition of a positive family history,
most of the Filipino FDRs recruited in the study would have considered themselves as
having no family history of cancer. This premise was confirmed when eleven of the
participants identified themselves as not having a family history of colorectal cancer,

mainly because only one relative (i.e., a parent or sibling) presented with the disease.

The descriptions, supporting the second definition of family history provided by
the participants, are akin to the criteria for hereditary and/or familial cancer. This second
definition of family history denotes the same meaning as the phrase describing a disease
as “running in the family”. The notion that the recruited participants generally equates
having a family history of disease with having a hereditary or familial cancer is further
supported by mentions of the concepts of disease or gene inheritance and lineage or
ancestry in their definition of family history, as demonstrated by the use of the words
“namamana”, “lahi”, “salinlahi” (i.e., transfer of racial genes), “kanununuan” and
“ninuno”. Aside from that, mentions of existing chronic diseases, such as diabetes and
hypertension, which are believed to run in their family to explain their understanding of

family history of disease, also support the said impression.

Family Composition: Basis for Inclusion in the Family History

McGrath and Edwards (2009) noted one challenge that hinders effective use of
family history is concerning the way clinicians and lay people define family. Health
professionals use the biologic meaning of family whereas lay people may have a different
perspective on who are considered family. This non-congruence on who are to be

included in one’s family history is apparent in the findings of this study.

173

Interviews with Filipino FDRs recruited in the study showed that inclusion of
relatives in the family history can be based on these four concepts: their degree of
consanguinity or blood relationship with the relative, their degree of familiarity or social
closeness with the relative, the presence of the disease in question, and the living / vital

status of the relative.

In the intake and analysis of a family history or pedigree, the degree of
consanguinity with the relative and the presence of the disease in question are two of the
factors considered (Bennett, 2010). At least a three-generation pedigree, which mainly
includes the individual’s biologic first- and second-degree relatives and takes note who
among these FDRs and SDRs have developed the disease, is ideally used for diagnostic

consideration and risk assessments (Wattendorf & Hadley, 2005; Bennett, 2010)

In the interviews, majority of the participants have identified first-degree relatives
(parents, sibling and offspring) and second-degree relatives (specifically grandparents
and uncles/aunts) as those included in their family history. Their rationale behind this
inclusion mainly revolves on the understanding that health conditions of FDRs and SDRs
are likely related or similar due to their close blood relations. One of the notions, which
emerged from the interviews, is that close blood ties allow diseases to be “passed to” or
inherited by these relatives, either through gene inheritance or through similar behaviours
(e.g., having the same diet and eating habits) and/or environmental exposure (e.g., living
in the same area). Participants of the study have also identified third-degree relatives (i.e.,
cousins and great grandparents) as well as fourth-degree relatives (i.e., great, great

grandparents) as family members that should be included during intake of family history.

174

One participant summarizes the rationale for this by saying that “everyone in the family,

including ancestors, should be included since it is a family history”.

The degree of familiarity or social closeness with a relative is also another basis
for inclusion in the family history. Some participants mentioned that only relatives whom
they are familiar with will be included in the family history since they are more likely to
know the health condition of the said relatives. This concept of family is actually in line
with studies that associate family with social relationships rather than genetic

relationships (Finkler, 2005).

Relatives, who developed the disease in question, regardless of their degree of
consanguinity with the consultand/proband, are likely to be included as well in the family
history. The relative’s living status also emerged as a basis for inclusion to the family
history intake, with some participants sharing that they tend to exclude non-living
relatives, and focus more on the health conditions of the living family members. This
exclusion of deceased relatives may also be related to one’s familiarity with the relatives’
medical history. Family members may be unfamiliar with the cause of death or history of
morbidities of the deceased relative, especially if the said family member had died when

the consultand was young.

175

Acknowledgement of Familial Risk

Acknowledging a familial risk for cancer is evaluated in this study based on the
recognition that a family history of cancer exists (discussed above), and on the
participant’s answers to these two questions: (1) “Do you think having an affected
relative affect the cancer risks of other family members?” and (2) “Do you think having

an affected relative affect your risk of developing cancer?”

When it comes to the first question, the recruited first-degree relatives of CRC
patients were divided in half, with eight participants having the notion that having a
relative with cancer affects the cancer risks of other relatives, and the remaining nine
believing that it has no effect. However, when the second question was asked, majority
(10 out of 17) of the participants answered that having an affected relative does not
increase their risk of developing cancer. One rationale behind this answer is the belief
that cancer development is something that cannot be determined either by family history
or by other factors. Colorectal cancer is also believed to develop mainly due to lifestyle
or behavioural factors. Having a family history of cancer, in this case, was not seen as a
significant risk factor for CRC development among the recruited FDRs. There is also the
participants’ refusal to think of the possibility that their family history of cancer will
increase their cancer risk. This refusal to consider negative outcomes, specifically when it
comes to the possibility of developing the disease, is a common construct emerging from

the interviews.

176

Theme 2: Personalizing Process
Theme 2 discusses factors, such as the emerged personal models of disease
causation and inheritance, known to influence the interpretation (the personalizing) of the

salient features of the family history.

Beliefs about Cancer

Recruited FDRs of cancer patients often perceived cancer as a fatal and
frightening disease, causing anxiety or worry to families of individuals affected with

cancer. The disease is also seen as incurable (or without cure), regardless of cancer stage.

Low awareness of colorectal cancer also emerged during the interviews with
Filipino FDRs. One participant mentioned being familiar with other cancer types such as
breast and cervical cancers due to community and awareness programs. However,
presence of similar programs for colorectal cancer appears to be unknown to the

interviewed participants.

Colorectal cancer is identified as a disease of the affluent. This may be because
most personalities known to develop cancer came from affluent families. One personality
often mentioned was the former President Corazon Aquino. CRC also has a higher
incidence in more affluent countries, where obesity and consumption of processed meat

is more common, compared to less developed nations (Ballinger & Anggiansah, 2007).

There also exists a notion that CRC mainly affects women with giving birth as a
factor perceived to increase the chance of developing colorectal cancer. Childbirth is

perceived to cause straining of the rectal muscles, which might have triggered tumor

177

development. Studies associating reproductive factors, including number of live births, to
colorectal cancer development have been documented. Findings of the studies show an
approximate 30-50% reduction in colon cancer risk with gravidity and parity, and
increasing number of live births and pregnancies were associated with decreasing trend in
risk for rectal cancer (Wernli, Wang, Zheng, Potter, & Newcomb, 2009). This countered

the notion that giving birth increases colon cancer risk.

Perception of Disease Causation

Development of colorectal cancer of participants’ relatives is often associated
with multiple factors perceived to have caused the disease. CRC is thought to develop
due to one or several of these perceived causes: lifestyle or behavioural, genetic or
physiologic, environmental, psychological, physical, sporadic, and/or supernatural

Teasons.

Recruited FDRs identified lifestyle or behavioural factors as the likely (or number
one) cause of colorectal cancer of their relatives. Lifestyle or behavioural causes include
intake of foods associated with CRC development, such as foods that are not easy to
digest (e.g., burnt or grilled foods, meat, meat products, green, leafy vegetables, etc) and
foods that irritate the colon or cause haemorrhoid development (e.g., spicy foods).
Ignoring signs and symptoms resulting to delayed management is also considered as a
possible cause of their relatives’ CRC. An unresolved haemorrhoid or cyst is believed to
“evolve” or advanced to a malignant tumor. Having poor eating habits, described as
having tendencies to miss meals, binge eat or eat lesser than usual, has also been

identified as a cause of CRC.

178

Alcohol drinking and cigarette smoking were also associated with CRC
development. Physical inactivity, poor hygiene and insufficient water intake were also

among the perceived causes of the disease.

Perceived genetic and physiologic causes of cancer include inheritance of cancer
genes from parents or ancestors, triggered growth in number of already existing cancer
cells, old age, weak immunity, and an existing health condition, such as haemorrhoids or

tumor.

Exposure to dirty environment, pollution and/or chemicals was also identified as a
potential cause of their relatives’ CRC. There is a belief that individuals nowadays are
likely to develop cancer due to the increasing number of goods with chemicals, vectors
such as mosquitoes and other insects, which may have evolved to carry and cause cancer,
and pollution. Inhalation of anti-cancer medicines given to the patients was also

mentioned by one participant as a factor that can cause CRC.

Presence of psychological stress was also associated with colorectal cancer
development. Over-fatigue or physical stress, repeated trauma or falling on one’s

buttocks and childbirth were identified as physical causes of CRC.

Development of colorectal cancer is also believed to sporadically happen,
regardless of lifestyle or gene inheritance. Supernatural causes for colorectal cancer, on
the other, have rarely surfaced during the interviews with only one participant believing

that their relative’s CRC serves as a “wake-up call” from God to remember one’s faith.

179

Perception of Disease Inheritance

For the recruited siblings and children of cancer patients, “namana” in relation to
disease inheritance means having inherited the disease from a parent and/or being
predisposed or likely to develop the disease. The term is also associated with “having a

family history” of the disease.

Disease traits are believed to be inherited or passed through blood from parent to
child. There is a notion that diseases that mothers developed are likely to be passed to
their daughters while diseases that fathers developed are inherited by their sons. It is also
believed that combined disease traits from parents, grandparents and even earlier

ancestors are passed to the current generation.

Horizontal transmission, specifically passing of disease traits between siblings, is
deemed not possible by the recruited FDRs. Though, the possibility of the disease
“skipping one or two generations”, such as when a grandfather developed the disease and
his grandchildren also presented with the same disease even with unaffected parents, was
mentioned. This idea of the disease skipping generations matches features of cancers with
autosomal recessive inheritance pattern and also of familial cancers. In colorectal cancer,
hereditary CRC syndromes are commonly autosomal dominant in inheritance, with only
two syndromes (MYH-associated polyposis and NTHL1) recorded as having an
autosomal recessive inheritance pattern (National Cancer Institute (US), 2017). Cancer

that seems to skip a generation may also present in familial colorectal cancers.

180

The concept of anticipation, which refers to the phenomenon where signs and
symptoms of a genetic condition become more severe and appear at an earlier age as it is
passed from one generation to the next (National Library of Medicine (US), 2017), also
surfaced from the interviews. One participant mentioned that cancer may become more
severe and develop at an earlier age relative to the proband’s age of cancer diagnosis, in

the succeeding generations.

Eating the same food, using the same utensils and/or living in the same
environment are also believed as means to “inherit” or “catch” the disease of their
affected relative. This mode of transmission is similar to those of infectious and/or food-
borne diseases. Diseases are also believed to be inherited based on the will of a higher

being.

Based on their responses, recruited FDRs agree with the idea that diseases can be
inherited. Colorectal cancer is perceived by the majority as one of these hereditary
diseases. However, when it comes to the question as to whether their relatives’ disease is
inherited, no consensus was reached (with six believing it to be inherited, five thinking
the opposite, and the other answers falling at the middle). This finding is consistent with
the FDRs answer on whether cancer runs in their family, in which majority of the
participants responded otherwise. The latter is influenced by the participants’ notions on

when cancer appears to be familial or hereditary in the family.

Most of the recruited Filipino FDRs believe that cancer runs in the family when at
least two relatives, who are first-degree (parent and child) or second-degree relatives

(grandparent and grandchild), are affected with cancer, regardless of cancer type.

181

However, there are several notions, which emerged from the interviews, on when cancer
is considered “common” in the family. The main criterion is that a number of relatives
should be affected. This is added to at least one of the following conditions: (a) affected
with cancer, regardless of cancer type or (b) affected with cancer, of the same cancer
type, and/or (c) affected relatives are first-degree or second-degree relatives of each
other, and/or (d) affected relatives from any/both sides of the family, or (e) affected
relatives should be from the same side of the family (maternal or paternal), and/or (f)
having at least one individual affected in every generation for three (3) succeeding
generations (e.g., affected grandparent, parent and child), and/or (g) the disease

developed at a young age, specifically at 8-19 years old, in at least one family member.

Based on the provided conditions, it is apparent that recruited FDRs consider the
number of relatives and generations affected, the type of cancer affecting the relatives,
the degree of consanguinity and lineage of affected relatives, and/or the age of cancer
diagnosis in determining if cancer runs in their family or not. These features actually

conform to the medical model for assessing familial or hereditary cancer risks.

Theme 3: Perceived Personal Risk (Personal Sense of Vulnerability)

Perceived personal risk refers to the individual’s perception of his or her risk of
developing cancer. This concept is affected by changes in perceived salience of family
history and personal mental models of disease and inheritance (Walter et al, 2005). For
this part, the perceived personal risk of recruited Filipino FDRs will be explored, in

relation to the first and second themes discussed previously.

182

Effect of Having an Affected FDR to Personal Risk

Recruited FDRs were divided on whether having a positive family history
(specifically, having an affected FDR) has an effect on their personal cancer risk, with ten
participants believing it to have no effect while the remaining seven thinking that it
increases their risk of developing CRC. Among those who have determined presence of
increased risk due to family history, first-degree relatives, specifically siblings and
offspring of proband, were identified as having a higher “increased risk” for developing
cancer compared to second- or third-degree relatives. Children of proband were also
pointed out as more likely to develop CRC compared to the siblings of the affected

individual.
Perceived Risk Factors and Protective Factors for CRC

Aside from having a family history of the disease, participants have also
identified inheritance of disease traits, unhealthy lifestyle, poor eating habits, weak
immunity, exposure to dirty or polluted environment, poor self-care or hygiene, lifting
heavy objects and childbirth as risk factors for colorectal cancer. These “risk factors”

match the probable causes of their relatives’ CRC.

There were also other factors the participants associate with CRC development
that were not recognized as the cause of their proband’s cancer. Sex is one such factor.
Most participants believe that CRC predominantly affects females, with childbirth as one
factor supporting this notion. However, there are also mentions of males being more
prone to develop the disease as they tend to have more unhealthy habits (e.g., vices, poor

eating habits, etc). Age, specifically being in the 30-60+ age range, is also associated with

183

increased chance of CRC development. Having physical likeness with the affected
relative, which can mean having the same sex or similar physical features (e.g., facial
features, skin color, etc), is also believed to increase the likelihood of developing the

same disease as the proband.

Recruited FDRs have also identified protective factors that are believed to
decrease cancer risk. These include having a healthy lifestyle, avoiding foods known to
cause cancer, having faith in God, taking herbal concoctions, and thinking positively.
Presence of behavioural differences with the proband, especially on actions believed to

have caused the proband’s CRC, also emerged as a protective factor.

Perceived Personal Risk of Developing Cancer

Perceived personal risk of developing cancer varies between individual
participants. Majority of the recruited FDRs considered themselves at moderate risk of
developing the disease, while the others perceived themselves to be at average (general
population risk), high or no risk at all. These perceived risks are influenced by existing
factors that are thought to increase or decrease their personal cancer risk. Perceived good
health, behavioural differences with proband, having a healthy lifestyle, belief that God
will prevent disease occurrence, and the notion of unpredictable development of CRC
have been mentioned as factors that decreases their personal risk. On the other hand, a
positive family history, unhealthy lifestyle and presence of an existing health condition,
specifically tumours or colon-related health problems, justified the perceived increased

risk of participants.

184

Some of the recruited FDRs have also expressed their risks based on percentages
before classifying them into average, moderate and high risks. Majority of these FDRs
have assigned 50% as their risk of developing CRC. However, classification and
understanding of the threat behind this probability differs between participants. A fifty-
percent (50%) chance of developing CRC is considered high risk, moderate risk and even
average or low risk by the FDRs. One participant explained that having a 50 out of 100
chance of developing cancer is considered moderate risk since it means there is also a 50
out of 100 chance of not developing cancer (50 people may develop cancer while the
other 50 will not). However, the idea that a 50 to 100 chance also means a | in 2 chance
of developing the disease did not appear in the interviews. This perception of numerical
risk is something that needs to be considered when communicating cancer risks to

individuals and their families.

Actual Risk VS Perceived Risk

The risk stratification criteria by Scheuner et al (1997) put first-degree relatives of
proband at moderate or high risk to develop cancer. On the other hand, the stratification
criteria of NCCN and CDC-Public Health Genomics take into account the proband’s age
at cancer diagnosis, putting those with FDRs affected with CRC at less than 50 years of
age at moderate risk while those with FDRs affected with CRC at 50 or older at average
risk of developing the disease. However, the FDRs perceived risks are mainly determined
by how participants classify and determine risks considering their family history and the

risk mitigating/enabling factors identified to be present.

185

Pedigree analysis was done to identify the actual cancer risk of the recruited
FDRs. Based on Scheuner’s risk stratification criteria, nine participants have moderate
cancer risk, while eight of them fall under the high risk category. On the other hand,
based on the CDC-Public Health Genomics and NCCN risk stratification, eight of the
seventeen FDRs are classified under the average risk category for having a first-degree
relative diagnosed with typical-onset cancer; another eight FDRs are considered as
having moderate risk (having an FDR diagnosed with cancer at age <50), while one is

classified as a potential high risk.

Comparing the FDRs actual risk from their perceived risk, we found that the
majority perceived their chance to develop cancer relatively lower than their actual
colorectal cancer risk (i.e., actual cancer risk based on CDC-Public Health Genomics and
NCCN criteria). This finding conforms to the concept of risk mitigation during the

personalizing process.

Theme 4: Risk Management

Individuals with a family history of disease such as cancer may hold different
beliefs about the means to control their risk. A person who acknowledged his or her
susceptibility to cancer may adopt health-seeking behaviours, utilize screening services
or gain a stronger intention to undergo future screening (Rubinstein, 2011). Acceptance
of familial and personal risks may ease up the individual’s anxiety or do the opposite
(Walter & Emery, 2005). Perception of control is an important aspect that influences not
just the coping behaviour of the individual but also affects the continuing interpretation

of salience of cancer family history.

186

One of the questions in the interview explores feelings of anxiety or worry about
having an affected relative. Anxiety due to the uncertainty of having inherited the disease
or of other family members developing the disease is present in some of the participants.
Others have expressed no feelings of worry regarding their positive family history. These
individuals are often those who believe that having an affected relative does not increase

their cancer risk.

Ignoring their risk or not thinking about the possibility of developing the disease
is acommon coping mechanism among the recruited FDRs. One participant expressed
that putting too much thought about cancer risks may make the person actually develop
the disease. Lifestyle or behavioural changes were also identified as one of the things
they can do or they are doing to cope with their perceived risk of developing cancer.
Continued faith and praying reportedly reduces worries and even decreases their chances
of having CRC. Consultation with a specialist is also mentioned through only after they
find themselves presenting with the signs and symptoms previously demonstrated by the
probands. The signs and symptoms they are referring to include presence of blood in the
stool, sudden weight loss, constipation and/or having a haemorrhoid. Intention to do CRC
screening, even among FDRs of probands’ with early-onset colorectal cancer and
regardless of perceived/actual risk and other demographic characteristics, is hardly
mentioned. Most of the recruited FDRs were unaware of the availability of screening

services for CRC.

187

Demographic Differences in Perceptions of Filipino FDRs

The study findings demonstrate demographic differences in perceptions of
recruited Filipino first-degree relatives. Views on family history, disease inheritance, risk
management and other concepts vary between age groups, sexes and educational

attainment of the participants.

The definition of positive family history that conforms to the medically-accepted
meaning of having at least one affected relative was only mentioned by the two
participants, one male and the other female, under the 18-34 age group (i-e., individuals
belonging to the Later Adolescence and Middle Adulthood age groups). One of the said
participants finished high school education, while the other has attained a college degree.
The remaining fifteen participants, including all recruited individuals aged 35-54 years
old (i.e., the Middle Adulthood age group), defined the term using the emerged second
definition. This implies that middle-adult Filipino first-degree relatives of cancer patients
are more likely to describe themselves as having no family history, when only one family

member developed the disease.

The second definition, which describes a positive family history as having
multiple relatives affected with a disease that seems to be common in the family, is also
equally apparent among male and female participants. However, male participants tend to
use constructs such as the disease being inherited or presenting in one lineage of the

family when describing a positive family history.

188

When it comes to family composition (i.e., who are to be included or excluded in
their family history of disease), all male participants noted inclusion of both first-degree
relatives (FDRs) and second-degree relatives (SDRs) in their family history, while only
half of the female participants have stated the same. Female participants, specifically
those 35-54 year old high school or vocational graduates, also mentioned their inclination
to only include living relatives when sharing their family history of disease. Male
participants, on the other hand, noted that they are likely to exclude relatives they are
unfamiliar or not socially-closed with. These findings imply that male FDRs of cancer
patients are likely to provide a more complete pedigree that includes both first- and
second-degree relatives than their female counterparts. However, unfamiliarity with the
health conditions of their relatives, due to non-proximity or other factors, may influence

completeness of family history assessment and consequent risk analysis in this group.

Misconceptions about the causes of colorectal cancer (CRC) and how diseases are
inherited were apparent in both age groups and sexes. Participants from the 18-34 age
group were the only ones who mentioned physical factors, such as physical stress,
repeated falls and trauma to one’s backside (mentioned by male participants), and
childbirth (mentioned by a female participant), as potential causes of their relatives’

CRC. Though almost all participants identified multi-factorial causes of their relatives’
colorectal cancer, college undergraduates/graduates mentioned more perceived causes of
CRC than those with high school or vocational degree. Participants who have received
tertiary education are more likely to mention genetic/physiologic, environmental, and
physical causes, as well as sporadic occurrence, than the high school or vocational degree

holders, when asked about their perceived causes of their relatives’ cancer.

189

As for their definition of the term “namana”, participants with high school and/or
vocational degree, aged 35-54, are more likely to describe the term as inheriting disease
traits through blood, and inheriting only from the parent with the same sex. Younger
participants (i.e., aged 18-34) with similar educational attainment also mentioned the idea

of inheriting diseases through use of the same utensils/eating the same food.

Descriptions on when cancer is perceived as running in the family are generally
the same between the two age groups. However, the younger age group are more likely to
describe the disease as running in the family when it manifests mostly in one lineage, or
if the disease, specifically colorectal cancer, presents at 8-19 years old. The age range
provided on when cancer is perceived as familial or hereditary does not agree with the

medical criterion for early-onset CRC, which puts the age of diagnosis before age 50.

When it comes to the difference between their perceived and actual risks, the
participants, who have received college education and those at 18-34 years old, tend to

classify themselves at a lower risk category than their actual cancer risk.

Female participants and those aged 35-54 years old were also found to be more
anxious about the possibility of developing cancer due to their family history than
participants who are males or aged 18-34. The said participants tend to cope with their
perceived risk and anxiety through continued faith and prayers. They are also the ones
who mentioned planning to go for check-up if they experienced signs and symptoms seen
in their relatives affected with cancer. Mentions of colorectal cancer screening as part of
the plan to prevent CRC development were only mentioned by Filipino first-degree

relatives, who have attained college education.

190

Variations in the Meanings of Family History of Disease among Filipino First-
Degree Relatives of Colorectal Cancer Patients

The second specific objective calls for comparison in the meanings of family
history between siblings and children of Filipinos diagnosed with CRC, and participants

with first-degree relatives with early-onset and typical-onset colorectal cancer.

Based on the study findings, the individual’s understanding of their family history
of disease is influenced by their definitions of positive family history and their
perceptions on disease inheritance, and how these concepts relate to their perceived
familial and personal risk of developing the disease. Thus, variations in the said concepts
were also analysed and discussed.

Differences in Perceptions of Family History & Disease Inheritance between Siblings
and Offspring of Probands

Out of the seventeen recruited FDRs, eight are siblings of cancer patients and the
remaining nine are children of these affected individuals. Participating siblings have a
mean age of 44.0 (under the age category “Middle Adulthood) while offspring/children
of cancer probands have a mean age of 30.3 (under the age category “Early Adulthood”).
Both groups are generally consisted of females who are College Undergraduates and
Roman Catholics, from the Tagalog ethnic group and without an occupation at the time

of interview.

191

Filipino FDRs’ Understanding of Family History of Disease

Siblings and children of Filipino probands both define having a positive family
history of cancer using the emerged second definition discussed earlier, which says that a
positive family history means “having multiple relatives affected with cancer, with the
disease seeming to run in the family”. All recruited siblings have used the definition that
conforms to the features indicative of familial or hereditary colorectal cancer in the
family. The definition of positive family history as “having at least one relative affected

with cancer” only emerged from interviews with the offspring of cancer probands.

More children of cancer patients identified second-degree relatives as family
members that need to be included in the family history compared to siblings of CRC
patients. The idea noting inclusion of relatives affected with the same disease as proband
was also expressed more during interviews with the offspring group. However, when it
comes to living status of the relative as a basis for inclusion in the family history, only

siblings of probands have mentioned this.

Offspring of probands are also more likely to identify themselves as having a
family history of cancer compared to siblings. A potential reason for this is the finding
that children of probands defined positive family history as either “having at least one
affected relative” or “having multiple affected relatives” while recruited siblings only use
the latter definition. However, when asked on whether having an affected relative affects

cancer risk of other relatives, no consensus was made by each group.

192

Filipino FDRs’ Understanding of Disease Inheritance

For siblings of probands, “namana”, in relation to disease inheritance, means
having inherited the disease from a parent, which results to increased susceptibility to
develop the disease. Diseases are believed to be inherited through vertical transmission
from parent to child via blood. Siblings of patients with cancer also tend to explain their
views on disease inheritance using another chronic disease that is considered as running

in the family, such as diabetes.

Offspring of probands, on the other hand, define “namana”, in relation to disease
inheritance, as having inherited the disease traits from a parent through blood, which
increases the individual’s susceptibility to develop the disease. The term was also defined
as having a positive family history of the disease, using the definition of “family history”
that conforms to features demonstrating presence of familial or hereditary CRC. Children
of probands believe that diseases are inherited through vertical transmission from parent
to child via blood, and that the disease can skip one or two generations before presenting

again.

Colorectal cancer as one of the diseases that can be inherited or passed to the next
generation has been recognized by all recruited children of probands. Some siblings of
cancer patients, on the other hand, have the notion that CRC is not hereditary as it is

mainly due to lifestyle or behavioural risk factors.

193

When it comes to the question as to whether their relatives’ CRC is hereditary,
siblings tend to be more decisive and answered that it is likely not inherited. Answers
from the offspring group, on the other hand, play between being uncertain and thinking

that their parents’ CRC is likely hereditary.

Constructs that describe when cancer is perceived to run in the family also differs
between the two study groups. The siblings group generally believes that cancer runs in
the family if at least three relatives (range: 2-5), who are FDRs/SDRs from both maternal
and paternal sides of the family, are affected with cancer, regardless of cancer type.
Among offspring, two definitions emerged based on the interviews. One is that cancer
runs in the family if at least three relatives (range: 2-4), who are FDRs/SDRs from the
same side of the family, or a parent and child, are affected with cancer, regardless of
cancer type. Second is that cancer runs in the family if at least three relatives (range: 2-4),
who are FDRs/SDRs from the same side of the family, or a parent and child, are affected
with the same cancer type. Based on these definitions, majority of siblings and offspring

believe that cancer does not run in their families.

194

Differences in Perceptions of Family History & Disease Inheritance between FDRs of
Probands with Early-Onset CRC and FDRs of Probands with Typical-Onset CRC

Out of the seventeen participants, eight have relatives diagnosed with early-onset

colorectal cancer (i.¢.,, CRC before age 50) while nine have typical-onset CRC.

FDRs with probands affected with early-onset cancer are mostly consisted of
siblings of probands (5 siblings to 3 offspring), while the typical-onset cancer FDR group
mostly involves offspring (in a 6 to 3 ratio). Because of this, some of the emerged
constructs between the group composed of siblings and those composed of FDRs with

probands affected by early-onset cancer are mostly similar.

These anticipated similarities were also applicable to the groups composed of

offspring and those composed of FDRs with typical-onset cancer probands.

Filipino FDRs’ Understanding of Family History of Disease

Personal definitions of family history and family composition of FDRs of
probands affected with early-onset cancer and FDRs of those with typical-onset cancer
are relatively similar. Two definitions of positive family history, discussed earlier,
emerged from both groups. This means that both study groups perceive positive family
history as either “having at least one affected relative” or “having multiple relatives
affected with cancer”. Interviews showed that both groups identified who will be
included in the family history based on degree of consanguinity, degree of familiarity or
social closeness, and presence of the disease in question. However, living status as an
inclusion criterion only appeared from interviews of FDRs of probands with early-onset

cancer.

195

Both groups are divided on whether they have or not have a positive family
history of cancer. However, when it comes to their perception on whether having an
affected relative affects cancer risks of other family members, FDRs of probands with
typical-onset cancer are more likely to consider increased risk due to their family history
than FDRs of those with early-onset cancer. This finding contests with the knowledge
that FDRs of patients with early-onset CRC have a more significant familial risk than

FDRs of those with typical-onset CRC.

Filipino FDRs’ Understanding of Disease Inheritance

The term “namana” is similarly defined between the groups. “Namana”, in
relation to disease inheritance, is perceived by both groups as referring to inheritance of
disease traits from a parent, which then increases one’s susceptibility to develop the

disease.

In terms of how diseases are inherited, the early-onset FDR group believes that
diseases are inherited through vertical transmission from parent to child, while the
typical-onset FDR group has additional constructs on how diseases are passed to the next
generation. For the latter group, the combined disease traits from both sides of the family
are inherited through vertical transmission from parent to child through blood, and the

disease can skip one or two generations before presenting again.

196

Both groups believe that colorectal cancer can be inherited. However, when it
comes to the possibility of their relatives’ CRC being inherited, no consensus was made.
As for whether cancer runs in their families, majority of FDRs from both groups believe
that cancers in their families are likely not familial or hereditary. This answer is

supported by their perceptions on when cancer is believed to “run in the family”.

FDRs of probands affected with early-onset cancer believe that cancer runs in the
family if at least three relatives, who are FDRs/SDRs, from both maternal and paternal
sides of the family are affected with cancer, regardless of cancer type. This is similar to

the definition provided by the siblings group.

As for FDRs of patients with typical-onset cancer, they describe cancer as running
in the family when at least three relatives, who are FDRs/SDRs, from the same side of the
family, or a parent and child are affected with cancer, regardless of cancer type. This
group also considered that cancer appears to run in the family if the multiple relatives

affected developed the same cancer type.

Differences in Perceptions of Risks between Study Groups

Perceived risks of the four subgroups of the study (i.e.,, siblings, offspring, FDRs
of probands with early-onset cancer and FDRs of those with typical-onset cancer) do not
generally match their actual risk based on their family history (following the CDC-Public
Health Genomics & NCCN criteria for risk stratification). Findings show that only four
out of the seventeen participants have perceived risks that are the same as their actual
risks. However, even among these individuals, their perceived numerical or percent risk

differs from that of their actual risk.

197

Comparing the perceived and actual risks of the study groups show that offspring
of probands tend to classify themselves at a higher risk category than their actual cancer
risk, compared to siblings of probands. This is actually consistent with the notion that
children of cancer patients have a higher “increased risk” to develop cancer than siblings

of probands.

On the other hand, FDRs of probands with early-onset cancer often classify
themselves at a lower risk category than their actual cancer risk. The opposite holds true
for FDRs of probands with typical-onset cancer, where perceived risk is generally higher

than their actual risk category.

When comparisons take into consideration both the relationship with the proband
and the proband’s age of cancer diagnosis, findings show that siblings of probands of
both early-onset and typical-onset cancer tend to have a perceived risk that is lower than
their actual CRC risk. A lower perceived risk also emerged among offspring of proband
with early-onset cancer. However, offspring of proband with typical-onset cancer tend to
have a higher perceived risk than their actual risk. If the subgroups will be ranked based
on tendencies to have a higher perceived risk than actual risk, offspring of proband with
typical-onset cancer will come first, followed by offspring of proband with early-onset
cancer, then by siblings of proband with early-onset cancer, and last will be siblings of

proband with typical-onset cancer.

198

Limitations of the Study

One of the possible limitations of this research is its study setting. Lack of local
ethnic variation among participants is possible since one of the inclusion criteria states

that the participant should reside or is in Metro Manila at the time of the interview.

Perspectives of FDRs of probands with early-onset and typical-onset cancers may
also have not been fully explored due to recruitment and sample size limitations. Hence, a

similar study with a larger sample size is suggested.

The chosen study design (i.e., qualitative descriptive research) also does not allow

for generalizations.

199

CHAPTER VI
CONCLUSION & RECOMMENDATIONS

Summary

The process of developing one’s personal sense of vulnerability does not follow a
linear pattern, as demonstrated by the revised conceptual framework, shown in Figure
6.1. Individuals arrive at their perception of personal risk through continuous evaluation

of new events and experiences (Rubinstein et al, 2011; Walter et al, 2004).

Salience is determined by the acknowledgement of the individual that a familial
risk exist (Walter et al 2004). Based on the study findings, this recognition of familial
risk is influenced by the individuals’ understanding of their family history and the belief
that their family history increases personal cancer risk. The former is affected by one’s
personal constructs of who are included in the family and when is an individual
considered to have a positive family history of cancer. Figure 6.1 reflects how the

discussed constructs influence salience of family history.

Silberberg and colleagues (1998) stated that a positive family history can either be
a “prompt or a blockade to behaviour change”. However, this only happens when the
individual recognizes their familial risk based on the presence of family history of disease
(Walter et al, 2004; Hunt et al, 2001). The findings of the study show that Filipino first-
degree relatives of colorectal cancer patients may fail to recognize their familial risk due

to having a definition of a positive family history that is different from the standard.

200

ules Bucs

|

wstwiydo

alAsayiy AuIe3H

WIM saouaaylp jeunojeyag

yyeay poob parlanieg |]

yasuo Ja9Ued ye aby 7

(jewajed / jeusajew) abeoury

xUV WM AjluinBuesuOd jo aa16aq

daque) Jo adAL

Payaye saanejau Jo saqunNNn

asned jeunjeusadns |

sasned |ed1ISAUd

Sasned |e2|60j0yDASq

30U8UNIIO DIpesods +4

Sasned jeyUuaWuoJIAUR

sasne. 1B001SAUg 9g 21aUaD

$911089}20-qNs 2p Sa1J0Za}v0 poB1awo UO paseq Jopoul [emdaouod pasiacdy [°9 MNBIy

(gAjjwey uy UI UNY Jae
SBOP UAaYM) SuadUeD |eI|IWeJ
/Aseypasay uo suogdasied

payyayu! ave saseasip Moy UO
SMAIA Wg ,,LURWEL, JO UO) UYAQ

DY SAGs JO Sasned panjadied

sasned jeuno;eyag / ajAysay |

AANe|AJ paypaye duo ysea| Je BuIAeH

sangejas adainw
Bunpaye ‘Ajiwey aug ul sum 4aue>

snjeys Bu

uo paseg |,

aseasip jo aouasaid uo paseg |]

ssauaso}? [2120s
/ Nueljwey Jo aas6ap uo paseg

48029 JO A10\SIY
Ajjusey e Buraey,, JO
uoluyap jeuossag

AluinBuesuo jo aai6ap uo paseg H

[Auojsiy Ajimey ay) ul
uoisny: oy siseg]
uonisodwos Ajiwe4

SaTuoS4LVv9-ans

SOAne ja
JO SYSU JaDUeD Sasea.ouU! aAnela
papaye ue Gujrey 3euy Jalleg

a

sunojaeyaq
6upjaas-Ln|eaH

suis|ueyaW
Budop

suopey Gunebaiw
Sty JO BQUasald

suoye4
YSTy JO BDUaSaLd

Paywayul S| YD
SCs Jeu Ja1lea

BOUE AYU]
‘@Seas|q UO SUORON

uogesne) aseasig
uo suondariag

Dud 7g 489UeD
jnoge sjaijea

SU Ja2ued
Jeuosiad saseasou! Au0}s1Y
Ajjwiey e Bulaey yeu} Ja119g

eee

Jaques yo Auoysiy Ajiwuey Jo
aouasaid Jo Juawabpa|moupy

s3aTwod3alyo

6upspe ue jo
quawabpajmounpy

a

(JoQUOD pur suidop)
LNANADVNVW ASS

Aaixuy penuguod

uogeinBey 4sta

SSdo0uUd
ONIZITVWNOSUdd

da Loddiv

S3W3HL

201

Having a family history may not be considered as a risk factor that increases their
personal risk for CRC due to reasons such as refusal to think of this possibility, belief that
developing cancer is an uncertain occurrence that cannot be predicted, and the notion that

CRC development is mainly due to lifestyle or behavioural factors.

Individuals with a family history of disease continuously evaluate factors that
make them more or less at risk of developing cancer (Walter et al, 2004). This happens
during the personalizing process. The individual’s personal models of health and illness,
disease causation and inheritance play an important role in the interpretation of the salient
features of the family history (NCI, 2012; Walter & Emery, 2005). In this study, beliefs
on colorectal cancer (CRC), models of disease causation and perceptions on disease
inheritance were explored. We found that development of colorectal cancer of
participants’ relatives is often associated with multiple factors perceived to have caused
the disease, such as lifestyle or behavioural, genetic or physiologic, environmental,
psychological, physical, sporadic, and/or supernatural causes. Lifestyle or behavioural
factors and genetic/physiologic causes have been identified as the top probable causes of
their relatives’ CRC. And unlike other genetic disorders, such as those on birth defects,
supernatural explanations behind development of the disease hardly emerged from the
interviews. Though misconceptions on the causes of CRC have been demonstrated, such
as the notion that childbirth and excessive intake of green, leafy vegetables cause
colorectal cancer; Filipino FDRs, in general, believe in the medical model of disease

causation for cancer.

202

The way people regulate their risk (risk regulation), which can involve counting
and discounting familial events, comparing similarities and differences with affected
relative(s) and finding patterns within family history, affect their perception of personal
tisk to develop cancer. This is apparent in the findings of the study. Presence of risk
mitigating factors and risk factors are often provided as rationale for the perceived risk
reported by the participants. For instance, behavioural differences with proband is
believed to decrease CRC risk while physical likeness and unhealthy habits are thought to
increase the likelihood of cancer. Furthermore, the presence or absence of features
believed to refer to cancer being inherited or running in the family was often evaluated by
Filipino FDRs to identify existence of familial risk or increased risk to develop the
disease. The concept of risk regulation is also supported by the finding of perceived risk
generally being lower than the individual’s actual risk. Optimistic bias, wherein
individuals tend to “underestimate the likelihood of experiencing adverse events” (Moss,
2016), such as developing cancer, is also demonstrated when participants discounted the
presence and/or effects of familial risk, and when they reported no risk or 0% chance of
them developing CRC. The latter is also considered as a coping style of recruited FDRs,

and is more apparent among siblings of probands based on the interviews.

The concept of Risk Management is evaluated based on the reported coping
mechanisms and health-seeking behaviours of recruited FDRs. Anxiety due to the
uncertainty of having inherited the disease or of other family members developing the
disease emerged among first-degree relatives of cancer patients. Ignoring their risk or not
thinking about the possibility of developing the disease, as well as praying, are often used

as coping mechanisms to address this anxiety.

203

Health-seeking behaviours, such as plans to do lifestyle changes, screening and

doing consultations with specialists were also reported.

A person who acknowledged his or her susceptibility to cancer may adopt health-
seeking behaviours, utilize screening services or gain a stronger intention to undergo
future screening (Rubinstein, 2011). However, among recruited Filipino FDRs, intention
to do CRC screening is rarely mentioned. Most of the participants were unaware of the
availability of these kinds of services. Of the two who mentioned CRC screening, both
have only been made aware of the procedure by their relatives’ physicians after cancer
diagnosis. This means that prior to that, the recruited FDRs are generally not familiar

with colorectal cancer screening.

Individuals with a family history of disease such as cancer may hold different
beliefs about the means to control their risk. Perception of control is an important aspect
that influences not just the coping behaviour of the individual but also affects the
continuing interpretation of salience of cancer family history (Walter & Emery, 2005).
For the recruited FDRs, control of risk is often through lifestyle or behavioural
modification. However, knowledge of colorectal cancer screening and risk assessments

can increase more their perception of control, and encourage better coping behaviours.

204

Conclusion

The findings of this study confirm the concepts of the Model of Familial Risk
Perception (Walter et al, 2004). Perceived familial and personal risks are significantly
influenced by the individual’s understanding of their family history of disease, disease

inheritance, perceived control and other concepts discussed in the study.

The use of the term “family history”, in its untranslated form, raises two differing
definitions among Filipino first-degree relatives, which affects how they recognize and
classify their familial risk of developing the disease. The variations in meanings and
understanding of disease inheritance and perceived causes of colorectal cancer not just
influenced risk perception, but also how individuals cope and seek to control their

personal sense of vulnerability.

The study highlights potential differences between the way Filipino FDRs and
clinicians determine and understand familial risk of cancer. The findings in this study can
be used by health providers, such as genetic counselors, in providing a more effective and

personalized way of communicating risks.

205

Recommendations for Future Practice

People’s interpretation of their family history of disease impinges on their
perception of vulnerability, which consequently determines adoption of preventive
behaviours (Yoon et al, 2002; Sivell et al, 2008). This study demonstrated how the
differing definitions of positive family history of recruited Filipino first-degree relatives
affect their perception of familial risk, and even personal risk. The meanings of family
history of disease, emerged from the interviews, differs from how clinicians define the
term. This implies potentials for misunderstandings between the individual and the health

providers, especially when it comes to risk communication.

In the Philippines, the term “family history” is often used untranslated by
clinicians and other providers (including those in the health education aspect) to
communicate and discuss about cancer, even when using the local vernacular (as shown
in news clippings, government sites, health blogs, etc). And it has become a familiar term
to lay people as well. Filipino first-degree relatives of CRC patients may equate having a
“family history” (with the term family history in its untranslated form) of cancer with
having a strong family history of the disease, which means having a pedigree that
illustrates presence of a potential hereditary or familial cancer type. As such, Filipino
FDRs may be inclined to report no family history of the disease because of this variance
in meaning, and risk communication focused on pointing out the significance of family

history may fail due to this.

206

Clinicians should be aware of these differences in the perceived meaning of
having a family history to improve risk assessments and communications. It is also
recommended that communication materials, mentioning family history of disease,
should translate the term in the local vernacular or provide a definition of family history

in the actual material.

Exploring the individual and family’s understanding and underlying beliefs on
concepts, such as those discussed above, can make risk communication more patient-
centered and effective. Knowing how individuals came up with their perceived risk and
their plans to control this risk can also help clinicians identify the factors that impede

and/or encourage behaviour change.

Genetic counselors should also be clear in their use of terminologies. One of the
constructs that emerged in the description of “namana” in the context of disease
inheritance is about disease traits being inherited “through blood” (“namana sa dugo” or
“namana ang dugo”). The latter is a common concept associated with disease inheritance
among Filipinos. However, it should be pointed out that diseases or traits, in particular,
are not inherited “through blood”; it is the genes (or copy/copies of gene mutations) from
the parent/s which are inherited by their children, and then expressed into a phenotype (or
observable characteristics). Though use of local phrases, such as “namana sa dugo” can
make disease inheritance easier to understand among lay people, genetic counselors and
other healthcare providers should still ensure that correct and appropriate terms are used

in order to prevent miscommunications and reduce misconceptions.

207

The study findings also demonstrated lack of awareness among Filipinos about
colorectal cancer and CRC screening. Part of the healthcare services for the patient is to
provide information on colorectal cancer and prevention (including screening programs)
to their family members, who are at increased risk due to their family history. Thus,
development of a CRC awareness program, especially aimed for families of patients
diagnosed with colorectal cancer, is recommended. Access or referral to genetic
counseling services is another recommendation, especially for families presenting with
potential familial or hereditary cancer based on their pedigrees or those who have

probands diagnosed with early-onset cancer.

208

Recommendations for Future Research

Qualitative studies allowed for exploration of lay people’s understanding on
topics or concepts that are relevant to successful or effective risk communication. The use
of data grids or comparative grids in Qualitative Content Analysis and Comparative
Constant Analysis is recommended, especially for manual analysis of qualitative data, as
it allows for easier exploration and identification of similarities and variations between

groups of data.

In this study, the qualitative approach allowed the investigators to gain an
understanding of how Filipino FDRs come to terms with familial and personal risk, and

to identify variations in perceptions between the subgroups.

The study findings have also brought up concepts that will be interesting to

pursue. The following are some of the recommended areas for future research:

= A mixed-method study exploring the study concepts in the general population

= A review of cancer genetic counseling in the Philippines

= A quantitative or genetic study on anticipation in hereditary CRC among Filipinos

= An awareness study on colorectal cancer screening

= A comparative quantitative study on perceived VS actual risks and a factor
analysis study on what influences perceived risks

= Creation of a family history assessment tool or a family history scorecard for

Filipinos

209

REFERENCES

Abad, P., Tan, M., Baluyot, M., Villa, A., Talapian, G., Reyes, M., Suarez, R., Sur, A.,
Aldemita, V., Padilla, C., & Laurino, M. (2014). Cultural beliefs on disease
causation in the Philippines: challenge and implications in genetic counseling. J

Community Genet, 5(4), 399-407.

Afable-Munsuz, A., Pasick, R., Nguyen, K & Perez-Stable, E. (2011). Understanding
Filipina women’s health orientation and the implications for colorectal cancer

screening. Diversity in Health and Care, 8, 135-45.

Backett K.C., Davison C. Lifecourse and lifestyle: The social and cultural location of

health behaviours. Social Science and Medicine. 1995;40(5):629-638.

Ballinger, A., & Anggiansah, C. (2007). Colorectal cancer. BMJ, 335(7622), 715-718.

Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2001051/.

Bennett, R. (2010). The practical guide to the genetic family history (2nd ed.). Hoboken,

NJ: Wiley-Blackwell.

Bennett, R. L., French, K. S., Resta, R. G., & Doyle, D. L. (2008). Standardized human
pedigree nomenclature: Update and assessment of the recommendations of the
national society of genetic counselors. Journal of Genetic Counsel, 17, 424-433. doi:

10.1007/s10897-008-9169-9.

210

Birt, L., Emery, J., Prevost, A., Sutton, S., & Walter, F. (2014). Psychological impact of
family history risk assessment in primary care: a mixed methods study. Family

Practice, 1-10.

Brod, M., Tesler, L. E., & Christiansen, T. L. (2009). Qualitative research and content
validity: Developing best practices based on science and experience. Quality of Life

Research, 18(9), 1263-1278.

Burns, M. & Edwards, K. (2009). When Family Means More (or Less) than Genetics:

The Intersection of Culture, Family and Genomics. J Transcult Nurs, 20(3), 270-77.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2014). Genomics: Family Health

History. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/genomics/famhistory/.

Church, J. & Casey, G. (2004). Molecular Genetics of Colorectal Neoplasia: A Primer

for the Clinician. 2" Ed. Springer International Publising, New York.

Department of Health (DOH). (2012). Leading Causes of Mortality and Morbidity.

Retrieved from http://www.doh.gov.ph/node/198.html.

Dines, A. (1994). A review of lay beliefs research: insights for nursing practice in health

promotion. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 3, 329-338.

Eisenbruch, M., Yeo, S., Meiser, B., Goldstein, D., Tucker, K., & Barlow-Stewart, K.
(2004). Optimising clinical practice in cancer genetics with cultural competence:
lessons to be learned from ethnographic research with Chinese-Australians. Soc Sci

Med, 59(2), 235-48.

211

Emeott, A., Raffert, A., Duquette, D., Fussman, C., Lyon-Callo, S., Bach, J. & Hager, P.
(2005). Family History of Colorectal Cancer: Risk Perception and Risk Reduction
Behaviours — Michigan Behavioural Risk Factor Survey. Retrieved from

http://www.cdc.gov.

Finkler, K. (2005). Family, kinship, memory and temporality in the age of the new

genetics. Social Science & Medicine, 61, 1059-1071.

Fusch, G. E. & Ness, L.R. (2015). Are we there yet? Data Saturation in Qualitative
Research. The Qualitative Report, 20(9), 1408-1416. Retrieved from

http://nsuworks.nova.edu/tqr/vol20/iss9/3/.

Green, R. S., Cowley, J. A., & Wogalter, M. S. (2006). Acquiring health information:
Interpreting terminology and reported search sources. Proceedings of the Human

Factors and Ergonomics Society 50th Annual Meeting, 50, 984-988.

Guest, G., Bunce, A., & Johnson, L. (2006). How many interviews are enough? An

experiment with data saturation and variability. Field Methods, 18(1), 59-82.

Helman, C. (2002). The culture of general practice. Br Gen Pract, 52, 619-620.

Hunt, K., Emslie, C., & Watt, G. (2001). Lay constructions of a family history of heart
disease: potential for misunderstandings in the clinical encounter. The Lancet, 357,

1168-71.

212

Kaw, L. Jr, Punzalan, C., Crisostomo, A., Bowyer M., & Wherry, D. (2002). Surgical
pathology of colorectal cancer in Filipinos: Implications for clinical practice. J Am

Coll Surg, 195(2), 188-95.

Kottak, C. (2007). Window on humanity: A concise introduction to anthropology. 2nd ed.

McGraw-Hill Higher Education, Boston.

Mason, M. (2010). Sample size and saturation in PhD studies using qualitative
interviews. Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / Forum: Qualitative Social

Research, 11(3), Art. 8, http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:01 14-fqs100387.

Moss, S. (2016, June 20). Optimism Bias. Retrieved April 29, 2017, from Sicostests:

http://www.sicotests.com/psyarticle.asp?id=238

National Comprehensive Cancer Network. (2014). NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines.
Retrieved from NCCN.Org:

http://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/f_guidelines.asp

National Cancer Institute (NCI). (2012). PDQ Cancer Genetics Risk Assessment and
Counseling. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Retrieved from
http://cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/genetics/risk-assessment-

andcounseling/HealthProfessional.

National Cancer Institute (NCI). (2013). Cancer Information Summaries: Genetics.
Retrieved from National Cancer Institute at the National Institutes of Health:

http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/genetics

213

National Cancer Institute (US). (2017, March 30). Genetics of Colorectal Cancer
(PDQ®)-Health Professional Version. Retrieved April 29, 2017, from

https://www.cancer.gov/types/colorectal/hp/colorectal-genetics-pdq

National Library of Medicine (US). (2017, April 18). What do geneticists mean by
anticipation? (T. Library, Producer, & Bethesda (MD)) Retrieved April 24, 2017,
from Genetics Home Reference [ Internet]:

https://ghr.nim.nih.gov/primer/inheritance/anticipation

Newman, B., & Newman, P. (2012). Development through Life: A Psychosocial

Approach (11th ed.). Belmont, CA, USA: Wadsworth, Cengage Learning.

National Institutes of Health. (2012). Family History: Definition. Retrieved from

http://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/glossary=familyhistory.

Ngelangel, C., & Wang, E. (2002). Cancer and the Philippine Cancer Control Program.

Jpn J Clin Oncol, 52-61.

O’Reilly, M., & Parker, N. (2012, May). Unsatisfactory saturation: A critical exploration
of the notion of saturated sample sizes in qualitative research. Qualitative Research

Journal, 1-8.

Ponder, M., Lee, J., Green, J., & Richards, M. (1996). Family history and perceived
vulnerability to some common diseases: a study of young people and their parents.

Journal of Medical Genetics, 22, 485-92.

214

Raby, B., Kohlmann, W., & Venne, V. (2011). Genetic Counseling and Testing.
Retrieved from UptoDate:http://cursoenarm.ne/UPTODATE/contents/

mobipreview.htm?27/52/2848 | ?source=see_link&anchor=H4#H 10.

Redaniel, M., Laudico, A., Mirasol-Lumague, M., Gondos, A., Uy, G., & Brenner, H.
(2010). Inter-country and ethnic variation in colorectal cancer survival: comparisons
between a Philippine population, Filipino-Americans and Caucasians. BMC Cancer,

10, 100. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-100.

Rubinstein, W., O'neill, S., Rothrock, N., Starzyk, E., Beaumont, J., Acheson, L., .
Ruffin, M. (2011). Components of family history associated with women's disease
perceptions for cancer: A report from the Family Healthware™ Impact Trial.

Genetics in Medicine, 13, 52-62. doi:10.1097/GIM.0b013e3 181 fbe485

Sabili, J. (2012). Cancer Management in the Philippines. JMAJ, 55(6), 524-27.

Scheuner M., Wang S., Raffel L., Larabell S. & Rotter J. (1997) Family history: a
comprehensive genetic risk assessment method for the chronic conditions of

adulthood. Am J Med Genet, 71, 315-24.

Silberberg, J., Wlodarczyk, J., Fryer, J., Robertson, R. & Hensley, M. (1998). Risk
associated with various definitions of family history of coronary artery disease. The

Newcastle Family History Study II. Am J Epidemiol, 147(12), 1133-1139.

Sivell S, Elwyn G, Gaff CL, Clarke AJ, Iredale R, Shaw C, et al. How risk is perceived,
constructed and interpreted by clients in clinical genetics, and the effects on decision

making: Systemic review. The Journal of Genetic Counseling, 17(1), 30-63.

215

Stewart, M. (2001). Towards a global definition of patient-centered care. BMJ, 322, 444-

45.

Teddlie, C. & Yu, F. (2007). Mixed Methods Sampling. Journal of Mixed Methods

Research, 1(1), 77-100.

University of Utah. (2009). Qualitative Research Network. Retrieved from

http://nursing.utah.edu/research/quality-research-network.php.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2004). HHS launches new family
health history initiative. Retrieved November 8, 2004, from

http://www. hhs.gov/news/press/2004pres/20041 108a.html.

USS. Preventive Services Task Force. (2008). Screening for Colorectal Cancer: U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality, Rockville, MD: AHRQ Publication 08-05124-EF-3. Retrieved

from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Vaismoradi, M., Turunen, H., & Bondas, T. (2013). Content analysis and thematic
analysis: Implications for conducting a qualitative descriptive study. Nursing and

Health Sciences, 15, 398-405.

Valdez, R., Yoon, P., Qureshi, N., Green, R., & Khoury, M. (2010). Family history in
public health practice: a genomic tool for disease prevention and health promotion.

Annu Rev Public Health, 31, 69-87.

216

Walker, J. L. (2012). The use of saturation in qualitative research. Canadian Journal of

Cardiovascular Nursing, 22(2), 37-46. Retrieved from http://www.cccn.ca

Walter, F., & Emery, J. (2005). Coming down the line - patients' understanding of their

family history of common chronic disease. Ann Fam Med, 3, 405-414.

Wang, C., O'Neill, S., Rothrock, N., & Gramling, R. (2009). Comparison of risk

perceptions and beliefs across common chronic diseases. Prev Med, 48(2), 197-202.

Watson, M., Duvivier, V., Wade-Walsh, M., Ashley, S., Davidson, J., Papaikonomou,
M., Murday, V., Sacks, N. & Eeles, R. (1998) Family history of breast cancer: what

do women understand and recall about their genetic risk. J Med Genet, 35, 731-738.

Wattendorf, D., & Hadley, D. (2005). Family History: The Three-Generation Pedigree.

Am Fam Physician. 72(3), 441-448.

Waxinan, S., Medin, D. & Ross, N. (2007). Folkbiological reasoning from a cross-
cultural developmental perspective: Early essentialist notions are shaped by cultural

beliefs. Developmental Psychology, 43, 294-308.

Wernli, K., Wang, Y., Zheng, Y., Potter, J., & Newcomb, P. (2009, July). The
Relationship between Gravidity and Parity and Colorectal Cancer Risk. J Womens

Health (Larchmt), 18(7), 995-1001. doi:10.1089/jwh.2008. 1068

Yoon, P., Scheuner, M., & Peterson-Oehlke, K. (2002). Can family history be used as a

tool for public health and preventive medicine? Genet Med, 4, 304-10.

217

Yoon, P., Scheuner, M., Jorgensen, C., & Khoury, M. (2009). Developing Family
Healthware, a family history screening tool to prevent common chronic diseases.

Prev Chronic Dis, 6(1), A33.

218

APPENDICES

Appendix 1. Tools for data collection

Interview Schedule

Introduction

= Rapport building

" Reiterate the objectives of the study.

= Ensure that the participant read, understood and signed two copies of
the informed consent form (one for the participant).

* Inform the participant that he or she may withdraw from the study at
any given time.

= Reassure the participant that the data gathered is confidential and his
or her anonymity will be preserved.

Socio-
demographic
Questionnaire

" Orient the participant about the self-administered questionnaire.

* The investigator/RSA will fill up the participant number with the code
assigned to the participant.

= After the participant finished answering, the investigator/RSA should
check it for completion and inconsistencies.

Interview
Proper

= Orient the participant that the interview may take awhile
(approximately 1 hour).

* Inform the participant that there is no right or wrong answer to the
interview questions.

= Inform the participant that he or she can terminate the audio recording
at anytime and that he or she may ask to erase excerpts or statements
without prejudice.

* Before starting the audio recording of the interview, the interviewee
should first mention the participant number for the said participant.
The participant number should be the same as that found in the
participant’s profile.

Pedigree
Construction

= Paper pedigree to ascertain ages at diagnosis and death, as well as
relationships (for cancer risk assessment).

Conclusions

= The investigator will give a brief summary of what they have
discussed.

= Answer participant questions during the interview.

= Genetic counseling

= Thank the participant for their participation.

219


Appendix 1.1 Self-administered questionnaire (English)

Participant Number

PARTICIPANT’S PROFILE (ENGLISH)
Directions: Fill in the blanks with the appropriate answers. Please write in PRINT.
For items with choices, put a check mark (/ ) on the box before your answer. All data
inputted will be treated with confidentiality.

Age (in years): Sex:

O Male O Female
Civil Status: 1 Single Married Widowed Separated
Religion: O Roman Catholic O Christian C Iglesia ni Cristo O None

Jehovah’s Witnesses 0 Muslim O Others (please specify):

Educational Background:
Highest educational degree attained (please specify):
Ethnic Group: (example: Tagalog, Ilocano, Cebuano,
Hiligaynon-
Ilonggo, Waray, etc)
Work or Source of Livelihood :
(please specify):
Note: Other information will be derived from the participant’s pedigree.

220

Appendix 1.2 Self-administered questionnaire (Tagalog)

Participant Number
PARTICIPANT’S PROFILE (TAGALOG)
Direksyon/Tagubilin: Sagutan ang blanko ng hinihinging impormasyon. Sa mga
tanong na may pagpipilian, lagyan ng tsek (/ ) ang napiling sagot.

Edad (sa taon): Kasarian:

O Lalaki O Babae
Katayuang Sibil: Single O Married 0 Widowed Separated
Relihiyon: 0 Roman Catholic Christian Iglesia ni Cristo None

Jehovah’s Witnesses 0 Muslim OC Iba pa:
Edukasyon (Tinapos sa Pag-aaral):
Pinakamataas na tinapos sa pag-aaral:
Pangkat Etniko: (halimbawa: Tagalog, Ilocano, Cebuano,
Hiligaynon-Ilonggo, Waray, etc)
Trabaho o Pinagkukunan ng Kabuhayan :
Ang ibang impormasyon ay kukunin sa instrumentong participant’s pedigree.

221


Appendix 1.3. Semi-structured interview guide (English)

General Questions

What does “family history of cancer” mean to you? How do you
understand this term?

Do you think cancer runs in your family?

How does having a family history of cancer relate to your
perceptions of risk of developing the disease?

How do you deal with your family history of cancer?

Specific questions may include the following:

Constructs of
Family History of
Cancer &
Perceived Disease
Cause

Perceived Risk
(Familial &
Personal)

How do you understand the term “family history of cancer”?

What are the beliefs of your family or community about cancer (its
causes and management)?

What do you think is the cause of cancer?

What do you understand about inheritance (in relation to health
conditions or diseases)?

Can cancer be inherited? Do you think it runs in families? Why or
why not?

Does having a family member with cancer affect the chance of other
family members to develop the disease?

When do you say that cancer runs in the family?

Do you think cancer runs in your family? Why or why not?
What do you feel about your personal risk of developing cancer?

Does having a first-degree relative with cancer affect your chance of
developing the disease?

222

Risk Management
(Coping &
Control)

What do you think makes you vulnerable to or protected from your
relative’s illness?

Does having a family history of cancer matter to you? How do you
cope with it?

What are the things you do or plan to do to control your risk of
developing cancer?

223

General
Questions

Appendix 1.4 Semi-structured interview guide (Tagalog)

Ano po ang pagkakaintindi nyo sa terminong “family history of
cancer”?

Ang kanser po ba ay karaniwan sa inyong pamilya (o nasa lahi ng iyong
pamilya)?

Ano po sa tingin nyo ang relasyon ng pagkakaroon ng “family history”
(o pagkakaroon ng miyembro ng pamilya na may cancer) sa inyong
tyansa na magkaroon ng nasabing kondisyon?

Paano nyo po hinaharap ang pagkakaroon ng “family history of
cancer”?

Specific questions may include the following:

Constructs of
Family
History of
Cancer &
Perceived
Disease Cause

Ano po ang pagkakaintindi nyo kapag sinabing mayroong “family history of
cancer” (kasaysayan ng kanser sa pamilya/history ng kanser ang pamilya ng
isang tao) ang isang tao?

Anu-ano po ang mga paniniwala ng inyong pamilya o komunidad tungkol
sa kanser?

Ano po ang iyong personal na paniniwala sa sanhi ng kanser? (Ano po sa
iyong tingin ang dahilan kung bakit nagkakaroon ng kanser ang isang tao?)

Ano po ang inyong naiisip kapag sinabing namamana 0 namana ang isang
kondisyon o sakit?

Sa tingin nyo po, namamana ba ang sakit na kanser? Bakit nyo po naisip na
namamana ang kanser? (Bakit sa tingin nyo po ay di ito namamana?)

Para sa iyo, may epekto o wala po bang epekto ang pagkakaroon ng kanser
ng miyembro ng pamilya sa tyansa ng ibang miyembro ng pamilya na
magka-kanser?

Ano po ang mga katangian o aspeto (sa kasaysayang pangkalusugan ng
pamilya) na sa tingin mo ay nagpapataas ng tyansa na ang kanser ay
namamana o nasa lahi ng pamilya? (Paano mo po masasabi na ang
pagkakaroon ng kanser ay karaniwan o namamana sa isang pamilya? /

224

Perceived Risk
(Familial &
Personal)

Risk
Management
(Coping &
Control)

Kailan mo po masasabing nasa lahi ng pamilya ang kanser?)

Sa tingin nyo po, ang kanser ba ay pangkaraniwan o namamana sa iyong
pamilya (nasa lahi)? Bakit o bakit hindi? (Sa tingin nyo po, nasa lahi ba ng
iyong pamilya ang kanser? Bakit o bakit wala?)

Ano po sa pakiramdam nyo ang iyong personal na tyansa na magkaroon ng
kanser? (Mataas, mababa o katamtaman)

Sa tingin nyo, ang pagkakaroon po ba ng kapamilyang may kanser ay may
epekto sa iyong personal na tyansa na magkaroon ng nasabing kondisyon?

May mga katangian o aspeto po ba na sa tingin nyo ay nagpapataas o
nagpababa ng tyansa nyo na magkaroon ng nasabing kondisyon? Anu-ano
po ang mga ito? (Ano po sa tingin nyo ang nagpapataas o nagpapababa ng
tyansa nyong magkaroon ng nasabing kondisyon? Anu-ano po ang mga
ito?)

May pangamba o pag-aalala po ba kayong nararamdaman na may
kinalaman sa pagkakaroon ng family history ng kanser? Ano po ang

ginagawa nyo (0 ano ang tumutulong sa iyo) para makayanan ito?

Sa ngayon, ano po ang iyong ginagawa o naiisip gawin upang maiwasan
ang magkakanser?

225

Appendix 1.5 Pedigree / family health history

A three-generation pedigree (starting from the proband) will be taken per participant (or
consultand), and will follow the standardized human pedigree nomenclature of the
National Society of Genetic Counselors (Bennet, et al, 2008).

RESEARCH: Family History of Cancer: Filipino Cultural Perspective on Disease and Inherited Gene
Risks
Data Collection Tool 3: PEDIGREE
Participant
Number
Paternal Ancestry (Ethnic Origin) Maternal Ancestry (Ethnic Origin)

Historian: Disease:

Date Taken: Legend:

Consanguinity:

226


APPENDIX 2. SCRIPTS FOR RECRUITMENT

Appendix 2.1 Script for recruitment of referees (English)

[For cancer patients or for relatives accompanying the patient who will refer the FDRs]

Family History of Cancer: Filipino First-Degree Relatives’

Perspectives on Disease and Inherited Gene Risks

Investigator: Amoranto, Abegail Jayne

Organization: University of the Philippines Manila — College of Medicine
Funding Agency: DOST-ASTHRDP (Department of Science and Technology)

Hello! I am Abegail Jayne Amoranto, a graduate student of the University of the
Philippines Manila-College of Medicine taking up MS Genetic Counseling. I am doing a
study, as part of the requirements for my masters’ degree, about the understanding of
first-degree relatives of patients who had colorectal cancer regarding their cancer family
history and their perceived risk due to having a family member with cancer. This study is
funded by the Department of Science and Technology.

Since the participants of my study are “first-degree relatives” (i.e., your sibling or child),
I would like to invite you to refer your first degree relatives — an adult child or a sibling,
or both, who will become interview participants for this research.

Before you decide, please let me introduce what this study is about.

Family history is an independent risk factor for cancer and a person’s understanding of
family history is known to influence perception of risks and control, which affects health
behaviour and screening practices. However, studies suggest differences between the way
lay people and health professionals understand family history, hindering effective use of
family history in cancer risk communication and promotion of health behaviours. This
study can hopefully address the gap so that health providers can be more effective in
providing recommendations and promoting healthy behaviour to prevent cancer among
patients and families.

Your participation is voluntary. If you wish or do not wish to refer your family members
for this study, your decision will be fully respected without any repercussions. There’s
minimal risk for participating in this activity. There’s also no direct benefit for you if you
decided to agree and refer your sibling and/or child. Taking part in this activity by
referring a first-degree relative is your agreement to participate.

227

If you decided to agree, you will be asked to provide information to help us contact your
sibling and/or child who (1) is a Filipino citizen, aged 18 to 59 years old, (2) lives or is in
Manila at the time of interview, (3) have no severe mental condition or life-threatening
disease, (4) is able to read and speak Tagalog or English. Specifically, you will be asked
to provide your sibling’s and/or child’s name and contact information (i.e., telephone or
cellphone number). Please be reassured that referring your first-degree relative will not
mean that they are automatically participants of the study. The first-degree relative you
will refer (if you decided to) will be oriented about the study and will make their own
decision to participate or not participate in this research. Any information I receive from
you and your family members will be treated with confidentiality and will be
anonymized.

You do not have to decide now if you will refer or not refer your first-degree relative(s).
Before you decide, you can talk to anyone you feel comfortable with about this.

If you have other questions or things you want to further clarify, don’t hesitate to contact
me at [63] 9162346762 or email me at ajamoranto@post.upm.edu.ph.

This proposal has been reviewed and approved by the UP Manila Research Ethics Board
(UPM REB), a committee whose task is to make sure that research participants are
protected from harm. If you wish to contact the UPM REB regarding questions on rights
of study participants, which may include grievances and complaints, the committee may
reached through the following contact information: To: Dr. Jacinto Blas Mantaring;
Address: 2/f Paz Mendoza 547 Pedro Gil St Ermita 1000 Manila; Email:
upmreb@post.upm.edu.ph; Tel: +63 2 5222684; Mobile: +639273264910 or
+639153080212.

228

Appendix 2.2 Script for recruitment of referees (Tagalog)

[For cancer patients or for adult relatives accompanying the patient who will refer the
FDRs]

Family History of Cancer: Filipino First-Degree Relatives’
Perspectives on Disease and Inherited Gene Risks

Tagapagsaliksik: Amoranto, Abegail Jayne

Organisasyon: Unibersidad ng Pilipinas Maynila — Kolehiyo ng Medisina

Ahensyang Nagpondo (Funding Agency): DOST-ASTHRDP (Kagawaran ng Agham at
Teknolohiya)

Magandang umaga/hapon po. Ako po si Abegail Jayne Amoranto, isang mag-aaral ng
MS Genetic Counseling sa Unibersidad ng Pilipinas Maynila-Kolehiyo ng Medisina. Ako
po ay gumagawa ng isang pag-aaral tungkol sa pag-unawa ng mga Pilipino sa family
history of cancer o sa kasaysayan ng kanser sa pamilya. Ang pag-aaral po na ito ay parte
o isang rekisito (requirement) ng aking kurso at suportado/pinondohan ng Kagawaran ng
Agham at Teknolohiya.

Sa pag-aaral na ito, gusto ko pong malaman ang perspektibo o pag-unawa ng mga anak at
kapatid (first-degree relatives) ng mga Pilipinong nagkaroon ng kanser sa kolon ukol sa
nasabing kondisyon. Gusto ko pong hingin ang iyong tulong sa pangangalap ng mga
kalahok sa aking pag-aaral. Kung inyong mamarapatin, maaari po ba kayong mag-“refer”
or magbigay ng pangalan ng iyong anak at/o kapatid na sa tingin nyo po ay maaaring
sumali sa pag-aaral na ito?

Bago po kayo magdesisyon, hayaan nyo po akong ipaliwanag pa ang pag-aaral na ito.

Base sa mga pagsasaliksik, ang pagkakaroon ng kapamilya na may kanser (family history
of cancer) ay isang “risk factor” o isang salik na nagpapataas ng tyansa ng tao na
magkaroon din ng nasabing kondisyon. Ngunit, ang pag-unawa ng karaniwang
mamamayan tungkol sa tyansa nila na magka-kanser dahil sa family history ay kaiba sa
pag-unawa ng mga propesyonal sa larangan ng medisina. Ang pagkakaibang ito ay
maaaring maging dahilan ng mababang motibasyon ng karaniwang tao na sumunod sa
mga rekomandasyon para maiwasan ang kanser.

Ang pag-aaral na ito ay maaaring makatugon sa nasabing isyu at makatulong na mas
mapayuhan ng wasto ang mga pamilya na may kasaysayan ng kanser upang maiwasan
ang pagkakaroon ng nasabing sakit.

229

Gusto ko pong ipaalam na ang iyong desisyon na lumahok sa pangangalap ng mga kasali
sa pag-aaral ay boluntaryo. Ang inyong desisyon, mag-“refer” o hindi man, ay akin pong
irerespeto. Walang inaasahang panganib ang magaganap sa paglahok o di paglahok sa
pag-aaral na ito. Wala po kayong makukuha na direktang benepisyo sa pag-“refer” ng
iyong kapamilya. Ang desisyon nyo pong mag-“refer” ng iyong anak at/o kapatid ay
nagpapatunay ng iyong pagsang-ayon na lumahok sa pag-aaral.

Kung kayo po ay papayag na mag-“refer”, kayo ay hihingan ng pangalan ng ire-“refer”
na anak at/o kapatid, at contact details o impormasyon upang makausap ang nasabing
tao. Ang kalahok sa pag-aaral (kapatid o anak) na aming hinahanap ay dapat (1) 18-59 na
anyos, (2) naninirahan o nandito sa Maynila sa araw ng interbyu, (3) walang malalang
karamdamam, pisikal o mental, at (4) nakakabasa at nakakasalita ng Tagalog o Ingles.
Ang mga anak o kapatid na inyo pong nabanggit ay aming kakausapin bago sila
magdesisyon kung sasali 0 hindi sasali sa pag-aaral na ito. Ibig sabihin po, ang inyong
pag-“refer” sa kanila ay hindi nangangahulugan na sila ay awtomatikong kasama na sa
pag-aaral. Tinitiyak ko din po na ang mga impormasyong makukuha mula sa inyo at sa
inyong kapamilya ay ituturing na kompidensyal at ang inyong pagkatao ay
pangangalagaan.

Meron ba kayong mga katanungan? Kung kayo ay may mga karagdagang katanungan
ukol sa pag-aaral na ito, maaaring tawagan at tanungin si Abegail Jayne P. Amoranto, sa
numerong 09162346762 (email: ajamoranto@post.upm.edu.ph), Lunes hanggang
Biyernes ika-8 ng umaga hanggang ika-5 ng hapon.

Ang proposal na ito ay dumaan sa pagsisiyasat at pagsusuri ng UP Manila Research
Ethics Board (UPM REB) at ito ay inaprubahan. Ang UPM REB ay isang komite na
responsable sa pagsisiguradong ang mga makikilahok sa mga pananaliksik ay nalilalayo
sa panganib. Kung nais niyong magsumite ukol sa karapatan ng mga kalahok sa pag-
aaral, maaari kayong magpunta o tumawag sa UPM REB: Pangalan: Dr. Jacinto Blas
Mantaring; Address: 2/f Paz Mendoza 547 Pedro Gil St Ermita 1000 Manila; Email:
upmreb@post.upm.edu.ph; Tel: +63 2 5222684; Mobile: +639273264910 or
+639153080212.

230

APPENDIX 3. INFORMED CONSENT FORMS
Appendix 3.1 Informed consent form (English)

INFORMED CONSENT
[For adult first-degree relatives (i.e., siblings or children) of Filipinos with colorectal
cancer]

Family History of Cancer: Filipino First-Degree Relatives’
Perspectives on Disease and Inherited Gene Risks

Investigator: Amoranto, Abegail Jayne
Organization: University of the Philippines Manila — College of Medicine
Funding Agency: DOST-ASTHRDP

INTRODUCTION: I am Abegail Jayne Amoranto, a graduate student taking up MS
Genetic Counseling at the University of the Philippines Manila — College of Medicine. I
am doing a study, as part of the requirements for my masters’ degree, about the
understanding of first-degree relatives of patients who had colorectal cancer regarding
their cancer family history and their perceived risk due to having a family member with
cancer. This study is funded by the Department of Science and Technology. I am inviting
you to participate in this study.

You do not have to decide today if you will participate in the research. Before you
decide, you can talk to anyone you feel comfortable with about the research.

This consent form may contain words that you do not understand. You can ask questions
as we go through the informaticn and I will take time to explain.

The information in this document applies to you as a participant in this study. Your
signature at the end signifies that you agree to participate.

Family history is an independent risk factor for cancer and a person’s understanding of
family history is known to influence perception of risks and control, which affects health
behaviour and screening practices. However, studies suggest differences between the way
lay people and health professionals understand family history, hindering effective use of
family history in cancer risk communication and promotion of health behaviours.

PURPOSE: The purpose of the study is to explore and describe the perceptions of
Filipinos, aged 18 to 59 with at least one first-degree relative affected with cancer,
regarding their risk of developing cancer due to family history.

PARTICIPANTS: At least twenty-four first-degree relatives of patients with cancer will
be invited to participate in this study. You are being invited to take part in this research
because we want to know your understanding of cancer and cancer risks as a parent or
sibling of an individual who has colorectal cancer. Your experience and perspectives as a
first-degree relative of a cancer patient will provide us with knowledge on how lay people
with family member(s) diagnosed with cancer make sense of their family history of the

231

said disease. This knowledge can help in the provision of healthcare services such as
counseling, health education and promotion of cancer preventive behaviours.

LENGTH OF PARTICIPATION IN THE STUDY: If you agree to take part in this
study, your involvement will last for about 45 to 60 minutes. You will be interviewed by
me. The study duration is estimated to be 6 to 12 months, with 3 to 4 months of data
collection.

PROCEDURES: You will have an interview with me. In cases where a sibling and a
child of the same patient are to be interviewed, they will be interviewed separately. The
questions will be about what you understand about having a family history of cancer and
your perceived risk due to family history, as well as how you cope or deal with the
situation. Before the interview, you will be asked to fill out a respondent’s profile form.
A code number will be designated to you to keep your name confidential. Face-to-face
interview will immediately follow. If you do not wish to answer any of the questions
during the interview, you may say so and the interviewer will move on to the next
question. The entire interview will be audio-recorded, but you will not be identified by
name on the audio. After the interview, I will draw your pedigree or family health
history. All information will be kept confidential.

RISK: There are no risks in participating in this study. However, some of the interview
questions may cause you stress or anxiety, or a need to know more about cancer and
cancer risks. If such a situation arises, a referral for psychosocial counseling services will
be available to you after the interview, since I am only acting as an investigator and not
the genetic counselor. You also have the option to request for referral to a professional
psychologist, And, if you wish to seek consultation with a medical oncologist, we can
provide you with a referral letter and a schedule of cancer clinics at UP-PGH.

BENEFITS: There are no direct benefits to you from participating in this study. But
Filipinos, especially cancer patients and their families, can benefit from the results of this
study as the information can lead to better and more personalized cancer risk assesment
and counseling services (especially in cases where cancer seems to run in the family),
which can help in increasing compliance with screening recommendations and adoption
of healthy lifestyles.

COST: No payment for participation in this research will be made. A modest amount of
Php 500 will be provided as reimbursement for travel expenses and wages lost during the
day of the interview.

CONFIDENTIALITY: All participants will be assigned a unique code number which
will be encoded in place of your name. Information regarding clinical and research data
will be maintained in a database containing the socio-demographic information and code
numbers of all participants in the study. This information will be kept secure by protected
password and access to personal identifiers limited to people who work on this project. A
record of your participation in this research will be maintained, but the record will be
kept confidential through the use of code numbers and locked files.

232

SHARING OF RESULTS: Nothing that you tell me will be shared with anybody
outside the research team, and nothing will be attributed to you by name. Research
findings will be summarized and may be shared through publications or conferences.

VOLUNTARY PARTICIPATION: Your participation is voluntary. No penalty or loss
of benefits to which you are entitled will occur if you decide not to participate. You may
discontinue participation at any time without penalty or loss of benefits.

QUESTIONS: Questions about this research can be answered by Abegail Jayne
Amoranto at cell phone number 09162346762.

This proposal has been reviewed and approved by the UP Manila Research Ethics Board
(UPM REB), a committee whose task is to make sure that research participants are
protected from harm. If you wish to contact the UPM REB regarding questions on rights
of study participants, which may include grievances and complaints, the committee may
reached through the following contact information: To: Dr. Jacinto Blas Mantaring;
Address: 2/f Paz Mendoza 547 Pedro Gil St Ermita 1000 Manila; Email:
upmreb@post.upm.edu.ph; Tel: +63 2 5222684; Mobile: +639273264910 or
+639153080212.

PARTICIPANT’S CONSENT
I give my consent and conformity to participate in this research and acknowledge that I
am fully aware of the objectives, extent, risks, benefits and obligations in this research as

contained herein since these were all explained to me in a dialect that I fully understand.

Name of Participant: Signature:

Address: Date:

INVESTIGATOR’S STATEMENT

I have discussed the above points with participant, using a translator when necessary. It
is my opinion that the subject understands the risks, benefits and obligations involved in
participation in this project.

Investigator/Research Assistant Date

233

Appendix 3.4 Informed consent form (Tagalog)

PAHINTULOT SA PAKIKILAHOK
(Para sa mga kapatid o anak ng mga Pilipinong may colorectal cancer)
Family History of Cancer: Filipino First-Degree Relatives’
Perspectives on Disease and Inherited Gene Risks

Tagapagsaliksik: Amoranto, Abegail Jayne
Organisasyon: Unibersidad ng Pilipinas Maynila — Kolehiyo ng Medisina
Ahensyang Nagpondo: DOST-ASTHRDP (Kagawaran ng Agham at Teknolohiya

PANIMULA: Ako po si Abegail Jayne Amoranto, isang mag-aaral ng MS Genetic
Counseling sa Unibersidad ng Pilipinas Maynila-Kolehiyo ng Medisina. Ako po ay
gumagawa ng isang pag-aaral tungkol sa pag-unawa ng mga Pilipino sa family history of
cancer o sa kasaysayan ng kanser sa pamilya. Ang pag-aaral po na ito ay parte o isang
rekisito (requirement) ng aking kurso at suportado/pinondohan ng Kagawaran ng Agham
at Teknolohiya. Kayo po ay aking inaanyayahang sumali sa pag-aaral na ito.

Hindi ko kailangan na agaran makuha ang inyong desisyon. Maaari ninyong kausapin
ang inyong kamag-anak o kaibigan upang makakuha ng payo, bago kayo magdesisyon.

Kung kayo ay may nga katanungan o nais linawin, maaari ninyo akong sabihan na
huminto upang maipaliwanag ko sa inyo ng mabuti.

Ang mga impormasyon na nakapaloob sa pahintulot na ito ay para sa iyo, bilang isang
kalahok. Ang iyong paglagda ay nagpapatunay na nabasa ninyo o kaya ay naipaliwanag
sa inyo ang lahat ng impormasyon tungkol sa pag-aaral na ito at nagkaroon ka ng
pagkakataon na magtanong para maintindihan ang kailangang niyong gawin. Sumasang-
ayon kayo na makilahok at nasabihan kayo na maaari kayong umatras kung magbago ang
inyong isip.

Ang pagkakaroon ng kapamilya na may kanser (family history of cancer) ay isang “risk
factor” o isang salik na nagpapataas ng tyansa ng tao na magkaroon din ng kanser. Base
sa mga pag-aaral, ang pag-unawa ng karaniwang mamamayan tungkol sa tyansa nila na
magka-kanser dahil sa family history ay kaiba sa pag-unawa ng mga propesyonal sa
larangan ng medisina (halimbawa, doktor o nars). Ang pagkakaibang ito ay maaaring
maging dahilan ng mababang motibasyon ng karaniwang tao na sumunod sa mga gawi 0
rekomandasyon para maiwasan o maagap na masuri ang kanser.

LAYUNIN: Ang pangunahing layunin ng pag-aaral na ito ay masiyasat at mailarawan
ang pag-unawa ng mga anak o kapatid (first-degree relatives) ng isang tao na may kanser
tungkol sa kanilang tyansa na magkaroon ng kanser base sa family history o kasaysayan
ng pagkakaroon ng kanser sa pamilya.

234

MGA KALAHOK: Mga 24 na mga anak at kapatid ng mga Pilipinong nagkakanser ang
iimbitahin sa pag-aaral na ito. Ang mga kalahok ay iinterbyuhin gamit ang ilang mga
katanungan. Ang inyong karanasan bilang anak o kapatid na may kapamilyang may
kanser ay makakatulong upang lubos na maunawaan ang tingin ninyo sa family history at
kanser.

TAGAL NG PARTISIPASYON SA PAG-AARAL: Kung kayo ay papayag na
lumahok sa pag-aaral na ito, ang interbyu sa inyo ay magtatagal ng 45-60 minuto. Ang
buong pag-aaral ay tatagal ng 6-12 na buwan, 3 hanggang 4 na buwan dito ay nakalaan sa
pagkolekta ng datos o pag-interbyu ng mga kalahok sa pag-aaral.

MGA MAGAGANAP SA PARTISIPASYON: Kung ikaw at isa pang kamag-anak ay
parehas na iinterbyuhin, ikaw at ang iyong kamag-anak ay iinterbyuhin ko ng hiwalay.
Ang mga tanong sa interbyu ay may kinalaman sa inyong pag-unawa ukol sa family
history, naiisip na epekto ng family history sa tyansa na magkakanser at ang inyong
nararamdaman o ginagawa ukol dito. Bago ang interbyu, sasagutan mo ang isang survey
ukol sa iyong personal na profile. Pagkatapos ng interbyu, kukunin ko ang inyong family
history, kung saan ikukwento mo ang estado ng kalusugan ng iyong malapit na kapamilya
(i.e., kadugo).

MGA POTENSYAL NA PANGANIB: Walang inaasahang panganib ang magaganap sa
inyong paglahok sa pag-aaral. Maaaring may mga katanungan sa interbyu na magdudulot
ng pagkabahala o stress sa inyo o pagnanais na mas malaman pa ang mga bagay-bagay
ukol sa kanser. Kung inyong nanaisin, maaari ko kayong bigyan ng referral sa isang
“genetic counselor” upang mabigyan kayo ng kaukulang counseling ukol sa kanser.
Maaari ko din kayong bigyan ng mga referral at clinic schedules kung gusto nyong
makipag-usap sa isang sikolohista o psychologist, at sa espesyalista sa kanser 0 medical
oncologist.

BENEPISYONG MAKUKUHA SA PAKIKILAHOK: Wala kayong makukuha na
direktang benepisyo sa paglahok sa pag-aaral na ito. Ngunit, ang inyong partisipasyon ay
mahalaga upang mas maunawaan ang mga isyu na pinagdadaanan ng mga anak at kapatid
ng Pilipinong nagkakanser. Sa pamamagitan ng impormasyon na makukuha sa pag-aaral
na ito, mas mapapayuhan ng wasto ang mga pamilya na may kasaysayan ng kanser upang
maiwasan ang pagkakaroon ng kanser.

KABAYARAN SA PAKIKILAHOK: Walang kabayaran ang paglahok sa pag-aaral na
ito. Kayo ay makakatanggap ng halagang P500 bilang pagsauli sa inyong gastos sa
pamasahe at nawalang kita sa araw ng interbyu.

.““CONFIDENTIALITY”: Lahat ng kalahok sa pag-aaral na ito ay magkakaroon ng
isang code number imbes na inyong pangalan upang maprotektahan ang inyong pagkatao.
Ang inyong mga demograpikong impormasyon at iba pang datos ng pag-aaral at ilalagay
sa isang database at ito ay protektado ng password. Ako at ang mga tao na may
kinalaman sa pag-aaral na ito ang makakaalam ng lahat ng impormasyon na iyong
ibibigay.

235

PAMAMAHAGI NG RESULTA: Ang mga resulta ng pag-aaral na ito ay maaaring
ibahagi sa pamamagitan ng mga publikasyon at conference. Ang mga resulta ay hindi
lalagyan ng iyong pangalan.

KARAPATAN SA PAKIKILAHOK AT SA PAG-ALIS SA PAG-AARAL: Ang
desisyon na lumahok sa pag-aaral na ito ay boluntaryo. Maaaring bawiin ang
partisipasyon anumang oras, sa anumang kadahilanan, habang nagaganap o kahit natapos
na ang interbyu.

MGA KATANUNGAN: Kung kayo ay may mga karagdagang katanungan ukol sa pag-
aaral na ito, maaaring tawagan at tanungin si Abegail Jayne P. Amoranto, sa numerong
09162346762, Lunes hanggang Biyernes ika-8 ng umaga hanggang ika-5 ng hapon.

Ang proposal na ito ay dumaan sa pagsisiyasat at pagsusuri ng UP Manila Research
Ethics Board (UPM REB) at ito ay inaprubahan. Ang UPM REB ay isang komite na
responsable sa pagsisiguradong ang mga makikilahok sa mga pananaliksik ay nalilalayo
sa panganib. Kung nais niyong magsumite uko! sa karapatan ng mga kalahok sa pag-
aaral, maaari kayong magpunta o tumawag sa UPM REB: Pangalan: Dr. Jacinto Blas
Mantaring; Address: 2/f Paz Mendoza 547 Pedro Gil St Ermita 1000 Manila; Email:
upmreb@post.upm.edu.ph; Tel: +63 2 5222684; Mobile: +639273264910 or
+639153080212.

Ang iyong paglagda ay nagpapatunay na nabasa ninyo o kaya ay naipaliwanag sa inyo
ang lahat ng impormasyon tungkol sa pag-aaral na Family History of Cancer: Filipino
First-Degree Relatives’ Perspectives on Disease and Inherited Gene Risks at nagkaroon
ka ng pagkakataon na magtanong para maintindihan ang kailangang niyong gawin.
Sumasang-ayon kayo na makilahok at nasabihan kayo na maaari kayong umatras kung
magbago ang inyong isip.

LAGDA AT PAGKILALA NG KALAHOK

Ako ay pumapayag na sumali sa pag-aaral na ito. Naipaliwanag sa akin, at naiintindihan
ko ang mga dapat gawin at maaaring mangyari sa pag-aaral na ito sa isang lengwaheng
aking nauunawaan.
Pangalan ng kalahok:
Lagda: Petsa: ___
Tirahan:

PAHAYAG NG MANANALIKSIK O NG TAONG KUMUHA NG PAHINTULOT

Naipaliwanag ko ng mabuti sa mga nais sumali, ang mga dapat gawin at maaaring
mangyari sa kanilang pagsali sa pag-aaral na ito. At sa aking palagay, kanilang
nauunawaan ang mga ito.

Mananaliksik Petsa

236

APPENDIX 4. CODING BOOK

CODE CODE (MEA! CATEGORY
MG Multiple generations affected Having a specific Personal
MR | Multiple relatives affected in one disease affecting definition of

| generation multiple family "having" a
Inh Disease is inherited members family history
OS _ | Affects one side of the family demonstrates of cancer
Chr Mention of a chronic disease (not cancer) Positive family 5 have
considered to be running in the family _| history of disease | positive
: family history
CoD Often the cause of death of multiple of disease?)
relatives
Ane | Disease comes from an ancestor (great
grandparent - TDR; great great
grandparent - FoDR
OR Having one relative with the disease in Having one relative
question affected with the
disease in question
is sufficient to be
considered as
“having a fhx of
disease"
FDR | First-degree relative (parent, offspring, Based on degree of | Family
sibling) consanguinity Composition:
SDR_ | Second-degree relative (grandparent, (blood relationship) | Basis for
grandchild, uncles/aunts, half-siblings, inclusion in
nephew/nieces) the family
TDR | Third-degree relative (first cousins, great (Who are
grandparents, great grandchildren) included in
XDR_ | Fourth-degree relative and up one’s family
DFR | Relatives closely-associated with the Based on degree of history?)
consultand (i.e., consultand is familiar familiarity/associati
with the health status of the relative) on
SDP-R | Relatives with the same disease as Based on presence
proband of the disease in
SSP-R | Relatives from the same side of the question
family of the proband (usually applicable
when the proband is the parent of the
2 consultand/participant)
LR Only living relatives Based on living
status (whether the
person is alive or
dead)
XC Mention of relatives that the consultand Exclusion criteria
thinks should not be included in the (who are not
family history included in the
family history?)
a¢ Yes, having at least one relative with Personal Acknowledge
cancer is enough to say one has a family | understanding of ment of
history of cancer one's fhx: Do you familial risk
N No, only one or a few relatives have have a family

developed cancer

history of cancer?

Salience
of family
history of
disease

237


CATEGORY

THEME

CODE CODE (MEANING)

SUB-CATEGORY

Yr Yes Perception of risk:
Nr No Does a positive
Mr Maybe family history
affect relatives’
cancer risk?
Dd Deadly / Fatal disease First word/s that Beliefs about | Personaliz
Frs__| Fearsome / Frightening disease come to mind when | cancer ing
Ady | Advanced / serious disease you hear the word Process
Anx | Anxiety-inducing cancer
Dy Having cancer means the person Community /
is"dying" or "closed to death" family beliefs about
Cur | Cancer can be cured colorectal cancer
Xcur | Cancer has no cure
Aff | CRC is a disease of the affluent
Met | Cancer can recur, develop in other parts
of the body and metastasize to different
organs
FE CRC mainly affects women
M CRC mainly affects men
Ves CRC is a result of vices, e.g., alcohol Community /
intake family beliefs about
Old Cancer is due to old age colorectal cancer:
C-Inh | Cancer in the family may have been Perceived cause/s
inherited from one's ancestors
PEH | CRC is due to poor eating habits (binge
eating, not eating on time, excessive
intake of specific foods)
ICF CRC is due to intake of foods associated
with cancer development: spicy, oily,
(vegetables), meat, foods not easy to
digest
DMgt | CRC is due to delayed removal of the
tumor / delayed management
vip CRC is not a familiar disease Community /
Fam | CRC isa familiar disease family beliefs about
colorectal cancer:
CRC awareness
PEH-B | Poor eating habits (binge eating, not Lifestyle / Personal
eating on time, excessive intake of Behavioural causes | perception of
specific foods) disease
ICF-B | Intake of foods associated with cancer causation /
development: spicy, oily, (vegetables), Perceived
meat, foods not easy to digest, high in causes of
chemicals, MSG, grilled/burnt colorectal
TW-B | Insufficient water intake cancer
Ves-B | Vices (alcohol intake, cigarette smoking,
drugs, etc)
TH-B_ | Improper hygiene / poor self care
PI-B | Physical inactivity (sitting for too long,
not exercising, etc) L

238


(MEANING) ~

DMegt- | Poor / delayed management of an
B existing health condition (ignoring a
condition, such as hemorrhoid or
constipation)
Pol-E | Exposure to pollution, chemicals, etc Environmental
Oce-E | Occupation causes (exposure to
factors such as air
| pollution, etc)
Psy-P | Psychological stress (depression, Psychological
overthinking, thinking negatively) causes
Ftg-P | Overfatigue Physical causes
Trau-P | Repeated trauma / falls on buttocks
CB-P_ | Childbirth
Inh-G | CRC is inherited Genetic and
PSB-G | Presence of something in the body (e.g., physiologic causes
cancer cells, genes, etc) that increase
likelihood to develop cancer
OA-G | Developed due to old age
Hem-G | Having hemorthoid/s
Imm-G | Weak immunity
Spor-S | Occurs by chance Sporadic cause
God-S_ | God's will Supernatural causes
Suse | Being predisposed / having increased Understanding of Perception on
susceptibility to develop the inherited “namamana" or disease
disease inherited/hereditary | inheritance
TnhP | Having inherited/received the disease diseases
from a parent ("Namamana”
Fhx Having a positive family history of that means ...)
disease / the disease presents in many
| generations of the family
Ssex | Passing of disease traits from parent to
offspring of the same sex
Bld Receiving disease traits through blood
Tanc Inheriting the disease from an ancestor
(vertical transmission)
Gene | Having the genes for cancer
TBld | Transmission through blood Perspectives on
Comb | Combined disease traits from how diseases are
grandparents and parents are passed to inherited
the offspring
VT Vertical transmission: Parent -> children
-> grandchildren
VTx | Vertical transmission (sex-linked): Father
to son; mother to daughter
HT Horizontal transmission not possible
(e.g., Sibling to sibling, aunt/uncle to
nephew/niece)
GW | Inheriting the disease trait/gene is based
on God's will
Catch | Passing of disease traits through eating

the same types of foods / using the same

239


CODE (MEANING)

things (nahahawa)
Skip | Can skip one generation (i.e.,
Grandparent -> grandchildren)
Antic | Anticipation: disease evolves or become
more severe in succeeding generations
Achr | Basis: Fhx of another chronic disease
Yh Yes Views on hereditary
Nh No cancer: Can
Mh Maybe colorectal cancer be
inherited?
Yph | Yes Perception of
Nph No cancer inheritance:
Mph | Maybe Is the proband's
CRC hereditary?
Num | A number of relatives are affected by Perception of
cancer cancer inheritance:
SCT | Same cancer type When does cancer
RCT | Regardless of cancer type run in the family?
SSF Affected relatives are from the same side
of the family
ASF | Affected relatives from any side of the
family
ACR | Affected relatives are FDRs/SDRs
Young | Disease presents at a young age (8-
19y.0.)
3Gen | At least one affected relative in three
succeeding generations
PtoC | Two FDRs affected (parent AND child)
Run | Cancer seems to run in my family Perception of
xRun | Cancer does not run in my family cancer inheritance:
uRun | I'm uncertain if cancer runs in my family Do you think
cancer runs in your
family?
2Aff | More than 2 relatives (FDR/SDR) were Perception of
affected by cancer cancer inheritance:
FamT | Family thinks that cancer runs in the Why do you think it
family now with proband as the first case} Tuns in the family?
Reldse | Other family members have developed
tumors / masses and/or related diseases
(e.g., colon problems)
TR-Hx | Having an affected relative increases my | Perceived effect of | Risk Perceived
risk of developing CRC having a relative Regulation Personal
NR-Hx | Having an affected relative does not with CRC to one's Risk
increase my risk of developing CRC personal risk
TR-Inh | Cancer can be inherited / hereditary Perceived effect of
IR- | I'ma first-degree relative of the proband | having a relative
FDR with CRC to one's
TR-O | Offspring of probands have a higher personal risk:
chance of developing the same cancer Increased risk
because ...

than siblings

240

NT

CODE (MEANING)
I don't want to think about it

SUB.

CATEGORY

GORY

THEM

Diff | Ihave a different having a relative
lifestyle/behaviour/mental state than the | with CRC to one's
roband personal risk: No
xS/Sx_| I have no S/Sx of cancer effect on risk
Une | Developing cancer is an uncertain thing/ | because ...
occurs by chance
xInh | I did not inherit the disease trait
H High risk Perceived personal
M__| Moderate risk risk of developing
A Average risk cancer: degree of
N__ [| Norisk WE
BDP | Behavioural differences with proband Rationale for
PGH | Perceived good health perceived personal
UDC | Uncertainty of developing cancer risk
HL Healthy lifestyle
wHx | With family history / affected FDR with
cancer
R-GW | God's will
UHL | Unhealthy lifestyle
PEHC | Presence of an existing health condition
(e.g., Tumor, etc)
BD Behavioural differences with proband Perceived risk
Veg | Eating vegetables (vegetarians) mitigating factors
Faith | Having faith in God (protective factors)
AvF | Avoiding foods that can cause cancer
Pos Thinking positively
Herb | Taking herbal concotions
Cinh | Cancer is inherited Enabling factors
Old-E | Old age (factors that
Ssex-E | Having the same sex as proband AnCTeaSe CADCET,
PSC | Poor self-care risk)
Like | Physical likeness with proband
Env | Dirty / polluted environment
Lift Lifting heavy objects
UHL-E | Unhealthy lifestyle
Cbirth | Childbirth
Wimm | Weak immunity
PEH-E | Poor eating habits (binge eating, not
eating on time, excessive intake of
specific foods)
SB Sex bias (being male / female)
Unp | Uncertainty/unpredictability of family Causes Continued Risk
members developing cancer anxiety Managem
Pinh | Possibility that proband's cancer was ent
inherited / is hereditary (Coping &
Simbeh | Having similar behaviour/lifestyle with Control)
roband
xthink | Not thinking about the problem Ways to cope with [Coping

241

CODE (MEANING)

perceived risk to

C-up | Plans to go for check-up once S/Sx
appears develop cancer / Health-
Pray | Continued faith / praying continued anxiety seeking
LC | Lifestyle changes behaviours

SUB-CATEGORY

THEME

CATEGORY
mechanisms /

242

APPENDIX 5. SAMPLE TRANSCRIPTS, MEANING UNITS & CODES

CONDENSED
TRANSCRIPT MEANING UNIT MEANING CODE(S)
UNIT
[Pag sinabing family history of | (Pag sinabing family involves the MG | Multiple
disease,] may kinalaman sa history of disease,] transfer of generations
salinlahi. Salinlahi, [ibig may kinalaman sa disease between affected
sabihin] yung mga lahi-lahing | salinlahi (i.e., generations
sakit na namamana ng mga “generations” OR
anak o kapatid. [P/, 48/M, CU] | "transfer of racial
genes"; salin - to pass,
lahi - lineage/race).
[Ito] yung mga /ahi- disease affects MR | Multiple relatives
Jahi ng sakit na multiple family affected in one
namamana ng mga members generation
anak o kapatid.
..famamana ng mga disease is Inh | Disease is
anak o kapatid inherited inherited
Yung sa papa ko, yung side nila | ...sa papa ko, yung side | disease affects OS | Affects one side
may diabetes. Dun sa mama ko | nila may diabetes. Dun | members of one of the family
naman, mataas ang blood sa mama ko naman, side of the
pressure. Yun ang kanilang mataas ang blood family (paternal
family history [of disease]. pressure. Yun ang / maternal)
[P0310020, 47/F, Se. CU; P: kanilang family
76/M, St. IV) history.
...$a papa ko, yung side | use of a chronic Chr | Mention ofa
nila may diabetes. Dun | disease chronic disease
sa mama ko naman, considered to (not cancer)
mataas ang blood Tun in the family considered to be
pressure. to define family running in the
history family
Kapag merong family history, Kapag merong family disease affects COD | Multiple relatives
parang nakakahawa yung sakit | history, parang multiple family affected in one
kasi maraming naapektuhan, nakakahawa yung sakit | members generation
parang nasa lahi. [P0609020, kasi maraming
24/F, V; P: 59/F, St. II] naapektuhan...
...parang nasa lahi. disease is Ane | Disease is
inherited inherited
Ang family history of cancer ay | Ang family history of | cancer in the OR | Disease comes
first galing sa ninuno, like cancer ay first galing sa | family is passed from an ancestor
nanay ng nanay ng nanay. ninuno, like nanay ng down by an (great
Tapos every generation, nag- nanay ng nanay... early ancestor, grandparent -
eevolve yung sakit sa families. €.g., great TDR; great great
[P0714020, 41/M, M, CU; P: grandmother of grandparent -
78/F, St. III] consultand FoDR

243


TRANSCRIPT -

Pag sinabing may family
history, parang sa pamilya ko
may family history kami ng
diabetes. Yun kasi yung halos

kinamatay ng mga tiyuhin,
tiyahin, lolo at lola ko; halos

ING UNIT _

Pag sinabing may
family history, parang
sa pamilya ko may
family history kami ng
diabetes.

CONDENSED
MEANING
“UNIT
use of a chronic
disease
considered to
tun in the family
to define family
history

FDR

CODE(S)

Mention of a
chronic disease
(not cancer)
considered to be
running in the
family

syempre yung mga kalapit na
kapamilya... Yung mga "first
relatives" - kapatid, anak at

magulang. Yung mga pinsan-

history, syempre yung
mga kalapit na
kapamilya... Yung mga
“first relatives" -

FDRs

lahat yun ang naging cause of ..Yun kasi yung halos} a disease SDR | Often the cause
death. Namatay dahil sa kinamatay ng mga considered to be of death of
komplikasyon ng sakit. tiyuhin, tiyahin, lolo at | in the "family multiple relatives
[P0714020, 41/M, M, CU; P: | iota ko; halos lahat yun | history" is often
T8/F, St. III] ang naging cause of the cause of
death. death of
Telatives
Pag sinabing may family ..Meron na bang having a family OR | Having one
history, ito yung parang "meron | nagkasakit sa inyo member relative with the
na bang nagkasakit sa inyo [pamilya] ng ganung affected with disease in
[pamilya] ng ganung karamdaman? the disease in question
karamdaman?" [P115020, question
27IF, S, CG; P: 48/M, St. IV)
[Sa kwento ng aking family [Sa kwento ng aking family includes FDR | First-degree
history] kasama ang buong family history] kasama | FDRs relative (parent,
mag-anak... ang aking mga ang buong mag-anak... offspring, sibling)
magulang at kapatid, tapos mga | ang aking mga
tiyo at tiya, at mga pinsan. [P1, | magulang at kapatid
48/M, CU] P1, 48/M, CU]
kasama ang... mga tiyo | family includes SDR | Second-degree
at tiya... [P1, 48/M, SDRs relative
CU] (grandparent,
grandchild,
uncles/aunts,
half-siblings,
nephew/nieces)
|
kasama ang... mga family includes TDR | Third-degree
pinsan. [P1, 48/M, CU] | TDRs relative (first
cousins, great
grandparents,
great
grandchildren)
Kasama ang mga magulang at Kasama ang mga family includes FDR | First-degree
mga anak, si lolana may ganun | magulang at mga anak | FDRs relative (parent,
din na kondisyon (i.e., cancer) offspring, sibling)
at iba pang kamag-anak na
meron ding ganung sakit. si lola na may ganun includes LR | Relatives with the
[P115020, 27/F, S, CG; P: din na kondisyon (i.e., | relatives with same disease as
48/M, St. IV) cancer) at iba pang the same disease proband
kamag-anak na meron | as proband
ding ganung sakit.
Yung kasama sa family history, | Yung kasama sa family | family includes XC | First-degree

relative (parent,
offspring, sibling)

244


TRANSCRIPT

MEANING UNIT

CONDENSED
MEANING
UNIT

CODE(S)

pinsan sinasama... kung meron
sa kanila ng may ganung sakit.
Yung "first relatives" talaga ang
importante. [P031101S, 48/F,
Sc, HS; P: 41/M, St. IV]

kapatid, anak at
magulang.

Yung mga pinsan- family includes TDR | Third-degree
pinsan sinasama... cousins (third- relative (first
degree relatives) cousins, great
grandparents,
great
grandchildren)
kung meron sa kanila includes SDP- | Relatives with the

ng may ganung sakit. relatives with R same disease as
the same disease proband
as proband
Yung mga anak ng pinsan Yung mga anak ng cousins (TDRs) XC | Mention of
namin di ko na sinasama kasi pinsan namin di ko na should not be relatives that the
iba na yun, may ibang lahi na sinasama kasi iba na included in the consultand thinks
sila. Yung percent ng lahi yun, may ibang lahina | fhx because of should not be
namin mababa na, kasi may sila. an additional included in the
nadagdag na na ibang lahi - lineage of their family history
yung lahi nung napangasawa other parent
nila. [P031101S, 48/F, Sc, HS;
P: 41/M, St. IV]
[Yung cancer] nakamamatay. [Yung cancer] Cancer is deadly | Dd | Deadly / Fatal
Nakakatakot din dahil pag- nakamamatay. disease
cancer alam na nakamamatay. Nakakatakot din dahil
Nakaka-stress din, maiistress sa | pag-cancer alam na
kakaisip yun tao at yun pamilya | nakamamatay.
dahil nagkakanser ka nga.”
Nung una kong narinig na Nung una kong narinig | Cancer is Frs | Fearsome /
cancer, natakot ako. na cancer, natakot ako. | fearsome. Frightening
Nakakatakot yung diagnosis na_| Nakakatakot yung disease
cancer. Nakakatakot kasi baka | diagnosis na cancer.
bigla syang mawala. Tas iniisip
din naming yung pangtustos sa
| gamot.
Eh ang pagkakaintindi ko dyan | kanser ay malalang Cancer is a Ady | Advanced /
sa kanser ay malalang sakit. sakit serious disease. serious disease
Nakakakaba dahil kanser ang Nakakakaba dahil Cancer causes Anx | Anxiety-inducing |
diagnosis. Nakakatakot kasi kanser ang diagnosis. anxiety.
kanser nga.
Parang di pa namin mawari ang | Parang di pa namin Having cancer Dy | Having cancer
kanser. Ang pagkakaalam ko mawari ang kanser. is like being means the person
parang malapit na mamatay, Ang pagkakaalam ko closed to death. is"dying" or
ganun. Yung parang kalat na parang malapit na "closed to death"
kalat na sa buong katawan, mamatay, ganun.
yang kanser nga na tinatawag.
Parang ganun. Kalat na, parang
wala nang pag-asa (na
| gumaling). jenaist

245


TRANSCRIPT

MEANING UNIT

CONDENSED
MEANING
UNIT

CODE(S)

katandaan may lumalabas na

may lumalabas na

tumour develops

Nung una talaga nung nalaman | nalaman naming na Can can be Cur | Cancer can be
ko na kanser, ang hirap may mga paraan pala cured. cured
tanggapin na ganun yng para gumaling yung
diagnosis. Pero nung medyo kanser.
nalilinawan na kami, nalaman
naming na may mga paraan
pala para gumaling yung
kanser.
Sa’kin po ang kanser ay ang kanser ay Can can be Cur | Cancer can be
nagagamot. Sa mga nakikitako | nagagamot. Sa mga cured. cured
sa palabas, meron pong nakikita ko sa palabas,
gumagaling sa kanser. meron pong
Napapagaling po sila. | gumagaling sa kanser.
Sa lahat ng nadidinig natin, pag | pag cancer wala na daw | No hope for Xeur | Cancer has no
cancer wala na daw pag-asa pag-asa gumaling. cure cure
gumaling. May pag-asa man
pero baka | yr o 2 years na lang
ang buhay, depende kung
kakayanin pa yung gamot.
Sa amin (komunidad) pag Sabi “Naku sakit ng Cancer is a Aff | CRC is a disease
sinabi na sakit ay kanser, para mayaman yan. disease of the of the affluent
daw mamatay na daw. Sabi rich people.
“Naku sakit ng mayaman yan.
Malapit na yan (mamatay)”.
Parang sa mga artista, di ba
meron ano...colon cancer si
Cory.
Parang di pa namin mawari ang | Yung parang kalat na Cancer is when Met | Cancer can recur,
kanser. Ang pagkakaalam ko kalat na sa buong the disease develop in other
parang malapit na mamatay, katawan, yang kanser already becomes parts of the body
ganun. Yung parang kalat na nga na tinatawag. widespread in and metastasize
kalat na sa buong katawan, the body to different
yang kanser nga na tinatawag. (affecting a lot organs
Parang ganun. Kalat na, parang of organs)
wala nang pag-asa (na

| gumaling).
Kasi ang pagkakasabi ng kapag tumatanda daw for women, they Bi CRC mainly
doctor, kapag tumatanda daw ang babae, usually usually get affects women
ang babae usually colon cancer | colon cancer daw colon cancer
daw talaga yung madalas na talaga yung madalas na } when they get
sakit na lumapit sa babae. Baka | sakit na lumapit sa old.
may naranasan sila noon kaya babae.
nagkabukol nung tumanda. Sa
lalaki prostate naman talaga.
Dun natin nakukuha yun eh, sa_| Dun natin nakukuha Cigarette Ves | CRC isa result of
mga di magaganda na yun eh, sa mga di smoking may vices, e.g.,
napapasok natin sa katawan magaganda na cause CRC alcohol intake
natin. Katulad ng bisyo. napapasok natin sa
Paninigarilyo... yang mga katawan natin. Katulad
nakakaapekto talaga sa ng...paninigarilyo...
kalusugan ng tao.
Sa Iloilo ang sabi dahil daw sa dahil daw sa katandaan | due to old age, Old | Cancer is due to

old age

246


kanser o bukol.

kumain ng marami sa isang
kain. Lagi siyang busog kaya
nahihirapan na siyang dumumi.
[Dahil dito] parang nagsusugat
na talaga ang loob ng puwet
nya. Parang nagagasgas.

marami sa isang kain.
Lagi siyang busog kaya
nahihirapan na siyang
dumumi.

cause CRC

kanser o bukol.

Narinig ko din na pwede din Narinig ko din na eating grilled or | ICF | CRC is due to

daw makuha ang colon cancer pwede din daw makuha | burned foods intake of foods

sa pagkain ng ihaw o mga ang colon cancer sa can cause associated with

sunog na pagkain. pagkain ng ihaw o mga | cancer cancer

sunog na pagkain. development:

spicy, oily,
(vegetables),
meat, foods not
easy to digest

Taga Ilo-Ilo kami talaga, Pero sa colorectal | CRC is nota Unfa | CRC is nota

nagpunta lang kami dito kasi cancer, wala naman. familiar disease m familiar disease

nasabihan kami na ipapalaser Kaya nga di namin unlike the other

daw yung bukol. Dun sa alam yun! Wala cancer types

komunidad namin, may mga kaming alam.

breast cancer. Sa barangay, may

ginagawa din na awareness

program sa breast cancer, sa

cervical cancer, meron din free

clinic (kung saan) pwede ka

magpapapap-smear. Pero sa

colorectal cancer, wala naman.

Kaya nga di namin alam yun!

Wala kaming alam. Kasi dati

akala nya almoranas kaya

binabaliwala nya kasi

almoranas daw. Tapos maka-

ilang buwan, kumikirot na daw

kaya magpapatingin na sya.

Ayun nga, nakita na bukol pala,

hindi almoranas

Yung sanhi ng kanser ni Mama, | Dahil matakaw kasi habit of eating a | PEH- | Poor eating habits

siguro dahil matakaw kasi talaga si Mama. lot of foods in B (binge eating, not

talaga si Mama. Madalas Madalas kumain ng one sitting can eating on time,

excessive intake
of specific foods)

247

- TRANSCRIPT

MEANING UNIT

CONDENSED
MEANING
UNIT

CODE(S)

magkaroon ng kanser.

development

Narinig ko din na pwede din Narinig ko din na eating grilled or | ICF- | Intake of foods
daw makuha ang colon cancer | pwede din daw makuha | burned foods B associated with
sa pagkain ng ihaw o mga ang colon cancer sa can cause cancer
sunog na pagkain. pagkain ng ihaw o mga | cancer development:
sunog na pagkain. spicy, oily,
(vegetables),
meat, foods not
easy to digest,
high in
chemicals, MSG,
grilled/burnt
Yung kapatid ko kasi (referring | Yung kapatid ko kasi insufficient IW-B | Insufficient water
to her sister diagnosed with (referring to her sister | water intake intake
colon cancer) di mahilig diagnosed with colon results to colon
uminom ng tubig. Kaya siguro cancer) di mahilig not being
di nalilinis yung bituka. uininom ng tubig. Kaya | cleansed well,
siguro di nalilinis yung | which can lead
bituka. to CRC
Yung colon cancer, sa kinakain | Katulad ng pagiinom, j| Vices canresult | Ves- | Vices (alcohol
din siguro tsaka sa tinatake / drugs, alak, to colon cancer. B intake, cigarette
ginagawa sa katawan. Katulad | paningarilyo. smoking, drugs,
ng pag iinom, drugs, alak, etc)
|_paningarilyo.
Sinabihan ko din sya na “Ayan, | baka dahil sa kakaupo | prolonged PI-B | Physical
baka dahil sa kakaupo mo kaya _ | mo kaya ka nagkabukol | sitting may have inactivity (sitting
ka nagkabukol sa puwet”. Puro | sa puwet caused tumour for too long, not
upo kasi sya, walang exercise. to develop exercising, etc)
Kasi yung kay tatay, di naman Kasi 7 years ago, sabi A simple DMgt | Poor / delayed |
inasahan na kanser ng una. Kasi | nya parang may isang | disease that was -B_ | management of
7 years ago, sabi nya parang butlig lang na nakapa ignored can an existing health
may isang butlig lang na nakapa | sa may pwetan tas di worsen and condition
sa may pwetan tas di nya nya pinansin. Ininuman | become cancer (ignoring a
pinansin. Ininuman lang ng lang ng gamot. Tas last condition, such as
gamot. Tas last year, nahirapan | year, nahirapan na sya hemorrhoid or
na sya dumumi. Akala naming | dumumi. Akala naming constipation)
almoranas lang. tas biglang almoranas lang. tas
sakit na, tas nakita bukol na biglang sakit na, tas
tapos kanser na. nakita bukol na tapos
kanser na.
Kasi sabi nila nakakahawa yung | parang nalalanghap ang | inhalation of Pol-E | Exposure to
eh, parang nalalanghap ang mga | mga gamot na iniinom | chemo- pollution,
gamot na iniinom [referring to [referring to therapeutic chemicals, etc
chemotherapy drugs] tapos chemotherapy drugs] drugs can cause
pwede magkaroon ng kanser. tapos pwede cancer

248


TRANSCRIPT

- MEANING UNIT

CONDENSED
MEANING
UNIT

CODE(S)

Iniisip ko din kung saan galing
yung sigmoid cancer, kasi wala
naman sa lahi naming. Baka
psychological ang dahilan.
Psychological stress ba. Kasi
dati nung may trabaho yan,
masayahin yan. Pero nung
nawalan ng trabaho, parang
nadepress. Nag-isip ng kung
anu-ano. Hindi na sya
lumalabas... nawalan ng social
life. Parang depressed nga.

niisip ko din kung saan
galing yung sigmoid
cancer, kasi wala
naman sa lahi naming.
Baka psychological
ang dahilan.

Psychological stress ba.

Psychological
stress can lead
to cancer.

Psy-P

Psychological
stress
(depression,
overthinking,
thinking
negatively)

Si papa kasi masipag po yun eh.
Siya po yung gumagawa sa
bahay naming. Sya po yung
namamasada (tricycle driver).
All around po. Sa tingin ko
dahil sa overfatigue kaya
nagkakanser si papa. Tas dati
po kasi, habang tinutulungan si
mama, yung bangkito po kasi,
bumagsak po sya tas tumama
yung pwet nya nung December.
Tapos nung bumabagyo po,
nadulas sya dun sa gate naming,
tumama ulit yung pwet nya
nung October. Baka po dahil
laging nababagsak din kaya
nagkabukol.

Sa tingin ko dahil sa
overfatigue kaya
nagkakanser si papa.

overfatigue
causes cancer

Ftg-P

Overfatigue

Tas dati po kasi, habang
tinutulungan si mama, yung
bangkito po kasi, bumagsak po
sya tas tumama yung pwet nya
nung December. Tapos nung
bumabagyo po, nadulas sya dun
sa gate naming, tumama ulit
yung pwet nya nung October.
Baka po dahil laging
nababagsak din kaya
nagkabukol.

Baka po dahil laging
nababagsak din kaya
nagkabukol.

repeated falling
may have
caused the
tumour

Trau-
Is

Repeated trauma
/ falls on buttocks

Ang colon cancer ay dahil daw
sa panganganak. Kasi prone
daw ang mga babae na
nanganak na na magkaroon ng
colon cancer. Kasi daw sa pag-
iri daw pwede magcause ng
colon ca. kaya parang ako, ito
na pinapaniniwalaan.

al

Ang colon cancer ay
dahil daw sa
panganganak.

Colon cancer is
due to
childbirth.

CB-P | Childbirth

249


Yung cells nga daw na di

Lahat naman tayo may

cancer cells in

Presence of

normal. Lahat naman tayo may | ganyan (cancer) cells the body got G something in the
ganyan (cancer) cells sa sa katawan. Pag triggered, body (e.g., cancer
katawan. Pag nagkataon na mas | nagkataon na mas multiplied and cells, genes, etc)
dumami yun, yun ang nagca- dumami yun, yun ang caused CRC that increase
cause ng cancer. Nadadaig nya _ | nagca-cause ng cancer. likelihood to
yung mga normal na cells natin. develop cancer
mukhang mas maraming mas maraming, more older OA- | Developed due to
matanda ang naapektuhan. matanda ang people are G old age
naapektuhan affected
Para sa akin, dahil yan (ang Para syang “simpleng Rectal cancer is | Hem- | Having
rectal cancer) sa pagkain ng almoranas na lumala” a simple G hemorthoid/s
maanghang. Para syang hemorrhoid that
“simpleng almoranas na worsened or got
lumala”...parang ganun. Di infected
napansin agad, so yun
(almoranas) nainfect tapos
lumaki.
Kasi kung mahina resitensya, kung mahina weak immunity | Imm- | Weak immunity
kapitin ka talaga ng sakit. Eh resitensya, kapitin ka can cause G
pasalamat ako na di naman ako | talaga ng sakit. people to
naoospital. develop diseases
Yung kanser, biglana lang yan | Yung kanser, biglana | Cancer is Spor- | Occurs by chance
lumalabas. Di mo alam kung lang yan lumalabas. something that Ss
bakit. Bigla na lang nangyayari. just suddenly
develops.

Baka daw paraan ng Diyos yan | paraan ng Diyos yan Developing God- | God's will
para maalala yun faith nya. para maalala yun faith | cancer is the s
Parang wake-up call daw. Kasi | nya. Parang wake-up will of a higher
parang nakakalimot eh. Pero call being
talaga naman pag-nagkasakit
ka, makakapag-dasal ka talaga
Tbig sabihin [ng namana] pwede | Ibig sabihin [ng the individual is | Suse | Being
ka din magkaroon [ng ganung namana] pwede ka din | likely to predisposed /
sakit] dahil namamana. Namana | magkaroon [ng ganung | develop the having increased
sa dugo. Basta kapamilya sakit] disease susceptibility to
pwede mamana yung sakit.” develop the

inherited disease
So yung kanser parang high yung kanser...pwede Parents passed InhP | Having
blood, pwede maipasa ng maipasa ng magulang their disease inherited/received
magulang sa anak. At pwede sa anak. traits to their the disease from
mamana offspring a parent
Namamana ay parang nasa Namamana ay parang “namana" Phx | Having a positive
family history. Namamana ibig | nasa family history. means having a family history of
sabihin inheritance o nasa lahi. family history that disease / the

|

disease presents
in many
generations of the
family

250


CONDENSED

~. TRANSCRIPT MEANING UNIT MEANING CODE(S)
UNIT
Kunwari yung tatay may sakit, | Kunwari yung tatay sons get their Ssex | Passing of
yun anak na lalaki may sakit, yun anak na | fathers’ disease, disease traits
magkakaroon din ng ganoong, lalaki magkakaroon din | while daughters from parent to
sakit. Kung yun nanay naman ng ganoong sakit. get their offspring of the
ang may ganoong sakit, Kung yun nanay naman | mothers' same sex
possible yun anak na babae ang may ganoong sakit,
magkakaroon din. possible yun anak na
babae magkakaroon
din. |
Ibig sabihin pwede ka din Namana sa dugo. Inheriting Bld | Receiving disease
magkaroon dahil namamana. disease traits traits through
Namana sa dugo. Basta through blood blood
kapamilya pwede mamana yung
sakit.”
Para sakin, ibig sabihin yung sa | Parang napasa sa dugo | disease traits are | TBld | Transmission
dugo. Parang napasa sa dugo transmitted through blood
galing sa magulang papunta sa through blood
anak. Pwede din galing sa
ninuno o lolo papunta sa apo.
Kasi si lolo may diabetes tas sa
apo lumabas din. Pero saming
mga anak di naman. Ang
pagpasa sa sakit, magulang to
anak talaga.
Namamana ibig sabihin napapasa ng magulang | combined Comb | Combined
napapasa ng magulang sa anak. | sa anak. Pwede din disease traits of disease traits
Pwede din mapasa ng lolo o mapasa ng lolo o lola parents and from
lola sa magulang tapos sa anak. | sa magulang tapos sa grandparents are grandparents and
anak. passed to the parents are
offspring passed to the
offspring
Para sakin, ibig sabihin yung sa | Parang napasa sa dugo | disease traits are | VI | Vertical
dugo. Parang napasa sa dugo galing sa magulang transferred from transmission:
galing sa magulang papunta sa__| papunta sa anak. parent to child Parent -> children
anak. Pwede din galing sa -> grandchildren
ninuno o lolo papunta sa apo.
Kasi si lolo may diabetes tas sa
apo lumabas din. Pero saming
mga anak di naman. Ang
pagpasa sa sakit, magulang to
anak talaga.
Pero sa nakikita ko, minsan pag | minsan pag tatay ang sons develop the | VIX | Vertical
tatay ang nagkaroon, anak na nagkaroon, anak na same disease as transmission
lalake yun nagkakaroon ng lalake yun their father (sex-linked):
parehas na sakit. Ito yung nagkakaroon ng Father to son;
nakikita ko sa mga kakilala, parehas na sakit. mother to
yung mga nakilala namin dito daughter

sa ospital. Katulad nung isa,
tatay nya nagkaroon ng cyst,
tapos sya nagkabukol din.

251


TRANSCRIPT

MEANING UNIT

CONDENSED.
” MEANING
UNIT

CODE(S)

increased cancer
risk

Yung namamana, pag kapatid Yung namamana, pag sibling to Horizontal
to kapatid, di yun pwede. Pag kapatid to kapatid, di sibling transfer transmission not
namana talaga galing sa ninuno | yun pwede. of disease traits possible (e.g.,
0 sa magulang. is not possible Sibling to sibling,
aunt/uncle to
nephew/niece)
Siguro namamana sa same na Nahahawa kapag Eating the same | Catch | Passing of
kinakain siguro, o kaya sa parang parehas ng types of food disease traits
gamit kasi magkakasama kayo | kinakain kaya pwedeng | may have through eating
eh. Nahahawa kapag parang parehas na sakit ang caused the the same types of
parehas ng kinakain kaya makuha. individual to foods / using the
pwedeng parehas na sakit ang inherit the same things
makuha. proband's (nahahawa)
disease
Para sakin, ang term na ng termnanamamana_ | An inherited Skip | Can skip one
namamana ang sakit, ibig ang sakit, ibig disease can skip generation (i.e.,
sabihin... parang halimbawa, sabihin... parang one or two Grandparent ->
ang lola ko yung may sakit, halimbawa, ang lola ko | generation grandchildren)
nanay ko wala, tas napunta sa yung may sakit, nanay | before
apo. Parang ganun, kung wala ko wala, tas napunta sa _ | presenting again
sa mother, maaaring lumabas sa | apo. Parang ganun,
apo. Laging lumalabas. kung wala sa mother,
Pwedeng magskip ng isang maaaring lumabas sa
generation tas sa apo lumabas. apo. Laging lumalabas.
Pwedeng magskip ng
isang generation tas sa
apo lumabas.
Sa tingin ko, habang tumatagal | habang tumatagal o relatives Antic | Anticipation:
o dumadami yung generation, dumadami yung become affected disease evolves
mas bumabata yung generation [na at younger ages or become more
nagkakasakit. apektado], mas as the disease is severe in
bumabata yung passed from one succeeding
nagkakasakit. generation to generations
another
siguro kapag umiinom ng mga__| kapag umiinom ng mga | taking herbal Herb | Taking herbal
herbal na gamotm pwede herbal na gamotm medications can concotions
bumababa ang tyansa pwede bumababa ang decrease cancer
magkaroon ng kanser. pero di tyansa magkaroon ng risk
ko alam kung anong herbal kanser.
| pwede magpababa
Kapag namana, mas mataas ang | Kapag namana, mas inheriting the Cinh | Cancer is
tyansa magkaroon ng CRC. mataas ang tyansa disease puts the inherited
magkaroon ng CRC. individual at

Pag di malinis sa katawan,
pwedeng mas mabilis
magkaroon ng kanser.

Pag di malinis sa
katawan, pwedeng mas
mabilis magkaroon ng
kanser.

poor hygiene
can cause
cancer
development

es
PSC

Poor self-care

252


TRANSCRIPT

ANING UNIT

CONDENSED
MEANING

Kapag may hawig daw, mas
madali mahawa. Pag may
hawig daw kasi, ang sabi-sabi,
madali daw pasukan (ng ganun
ding sakit)”

Kapag may hawig daw,

mas madali mahawa.

UNIT
When there's
physical
likeness, it's
easier to get the
same disease as
the one you look
similar with

CODE(S)

Physical likeness
with proband

nagpapataas ng tyansa ay kapag
madumi 0 maalikabok yung
environment.

kapag madumi o
maalikabok yung
environment.

increased risk
for developing
cancer if
exposed to dirty
environment

Eny | Dirty / polluted
environment

253


APPENDIX 6. PERMITS TO CONDUCT RESEARCH

Appendix 6.1 UP Manila Research Ethics Board approval form

CERTIFICATION

This certifies that the University of the Philippines Manila Research Ethics Board
(UPMREB) Review Panel 1is constituted and established, and functions in accordance with
the requirements set by the University of the Philippines Manila, the Philippine Health
Research Ethics Board (PHREB); and in compliance with the WHO Standards and

Operational Guidance for Ethics Review of Health-related Research with Human
Participants (2011), the International Conference on Harmonisation of Technica!
Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (1996), and the National

Ethical Guidelines for Health Research (2011)

The current members of the UPMREB Review Panel 1 are in the attached document
UPMREB Review Panel 1 actions and recommendations are facilitated through consensus.
The study protocol of Ms. Abegail Jayne Amoranto entitled, “Family History of Cancer:
Filipino First-Degree Relatives’ Perspectives on Disease and Inheritance (UPMREB
2015-348-01)”, was granted a decision of MINOR MODIFICATIONS on 24 August 2015
through Expedited Review

Final APPROVAL twas processed through EXPEDITED REVIEW, and issued on 21 October 2015.

, UPMREB
Date: 21 October 2015

254

Appendix 6.2 PGH Expanded Hospital Research Office —

Permit to conduct research

— —
EXPANDED HOSPITAL PERMIT TO CONDUCT eae akin
RESEARCH OFFICE Sar Version 2
Philippine General Hospital
Effective Date: July 2012 Page tof I
02 November 2015
TO: JORGE G. IGNACIO, MD
Chair
UNIT/AREA: Cancer Institute
UPMREB Registration No.: 2015-348-01

Title: Family history of Cancer: Filipino First-Degree Relatives’ Perspectives on
Disease and Inheritance

Department: Pediatrics

Principal Investigator Ms. Abegail Jayne Amoranto

Please allow Principal Investigator and his representative/s to conduct research in
your area/unit.

Validity: 02 December 2016

For continuing study:
Date study started. :;
Amendment to protocol/ Informed Consent from last approval: 0 Yes G No
If yes, provide: 1. Date of amendment
2. Amended document

PAULO MARIA N. PAGWATIPUNAN, MD
[Coordinator for Research

Noted:

hae

BENJAMIN P. SABLAN JR., MD
Deputy Director for Health Operations

255

CURRICULUM VITAE OF PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR

Name: Abegail Jayne Amoranto, RN
College/Institution: College of Medicine
University of the Philippines Manila
Contact Number: (63) 9162346762
Email: apamoranto@up.edu.ph or
abeamoranto@gmail.com

Educational/Professional Attainment:

= Masters of Science in Genetic Counseling (2013-present)
University of the Philippines Manila — College of Medicine
= Bachelor of Science in Nursing (2006-2010)
University of the Philippines Manila — College of Nursing
= Registered Nurse (NLE: July 2010)

Current Post: Project Officer II, Hearing for Life Project (HeLe)
National Institutes of Health, University of the Philippines Manila

Student, MSc Genetic Counseling, UP Manila

Relevant Experiences/Trainings and Conferences (related to cancer and
counseling):

Sept 9-10, 2015 | Good Clinical Practice Workshop
Philippine General Hospital
(please see attached certificate)

July 2015 Conference: National Academy of Science and Technology (NAST)
37" Annual Scientific Meeting: “The Challenges of Non-
Communicable Diseases (NCDs): Responding through Multisectoral
Action”

2013-present Cancer Genetic Counseling training at University of the Philippines-
Philippine General Hospital (UP-PGH) Cancer Institute (Multi-
Disciplinary Cancer Clinic) and Adult Charity Wards

2013-present Genetic counseling (general/pedia) training at UP-PGH Genetics
Clinic

256

