LCAEDIE (C8

mm serlogictes }

RELYER PAMPLONA GNA VELLA

MAY

DOST-STII LIBRARY

ADO 0 0
ST1-21-0222 |


Ld

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS

Doctor of Philosophy in Genetics
NEILYN PAMPLONA ONA VILLA.

GENETIC POLYMORPHISM OF x-CASEIN (CSN3) AND B-LACTOGLOBULIN
(BLG) GENES AND ASSOCIATION OF THEIR VARIANT ALLELES AND
THEIR COMBINATIONS WITH MILK YIELD AND QUALITY IN
HOLSTEIN X JERSEY MILKING COWS (Bos taurus L.) IN A
COMMERCIAL DAIRY FARM IN
BATANGAS, PHILIPPINES

RITA P. LAUDE, Ph.D.
Adviser

Date: _19 April 2022

This dissertation can be made available to the general public. YES

This dissertation can be accessed only after consultation with the -
author and thesis adviser.

This dissertation can be accessed only by those bound by :
confidentiality agreement.

mr:

RITA P. LAUDE, Ph.D.

NEILYN tii ONA VILLA

GENETIC POLYMORPHISM OF x-CASEIN (CSN3) AND 8B-LACTOGLOBULIN
(BLG) GENES AND ASSOCIATION OF THEIR VARIANT ALLELES AND
THEIR COMBINATIONS WITH MILK YIELD AND QUALITY IN
HOLSTEIN X JERSEY MILKING COWS (Bos taurus L.) IN A
COMMERCIAL DAIRY FARM IN
BATANGAS, PHILIPPINES

NEILYN PAMPLONA ONA VILLA

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF THE GRADUATE SCHOOL
UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE
REQUIREMENTS FOR
THE DEGREE OF

DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY
(Genetics)

May 2022

This dissertation attached hereto, entitled “GENETIC POLYMORPHISM OF «-
CASEIN (CSN3) AND 8-LACTOGLOBULIN (BLG) GENES AND ASSOCIATION
OF THEIR VARIANT ALLELES AND THEIR COMBINATIONS WITH MILK
YIELD AND QUALITY IN HOLSTEIN X JERSEY MILKING COWS (Bos taurus L.)
IN A COMMERCIAL DAIRY FARM IN BATANGAS, PHILIPPINES”, prepared and
submitted by NEILYN ONA VILLA in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree
of DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY (GENETICS), is hereby accepted.

\n i
ce Os advona
MA. cual bento, DIAZ MERLYN S. MENDIORO
Member, Advisory Committee Member, Advisory Committee
19 April 2022 19 April 2022
Date Signed Date Signed

AGAPASA J. SALCES
Co-Chair, Advisory Committee
49 April 2022
Date Signed

RITA P. LAUDE
Chair, Advisory Committee

19 April 2022
Date Signed

Accepted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY (GENETICS)

Director, Instit[te of Biological Sciences
19 April 2022
Date Signed

JOMAR f. RABAJANTE

Dean, Graduate School

21 April 2022
Date Signed--

iii

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

The author was bom on April 24, 1975 in Los Bafios, Laguna. She is the third of the
four children of Benjamin D. Ona and Silveria P. Ona. She is happily married to Dr.
Joselito E. Villa and is blessed with three wonderful children, Mary Jasmine, John

Lorenzo and Hana Nielle.

She graduated summa cum laude with a BS Biology (major in Genetics) degree from
UPLB in 1996. In the same year, she received the BPI Science Award, Phi Sigma
Biological Honor Society Outstanding Student Award, CAS Faculty Medal for Academic
Excellence, and the 1996 Ten Outstanding Students of the Philippines. She obtained her
MS degree in Genetics (Minor in Biochemistry) also in UPLB. During her doctoral

studies, she is a DOST-ASTHRDP scholar and a DOST-PCAARRD Dissertation Grantee.

She is currently an assistant professor at the Genetics and Molecular Biology
Division, Institute of Biological Sciences, College of Arts and Sciences, UP Los Bafios.
In her 24 years of service as a faculty member, she has been recognized with awards
including the 2013 UPLB Outstanding Teacher Award in the Biological Sciences, 2019-
2021 One U.P, Faculty Grant Award for Outstanding Teaching and Research and four IBS

Outstanding Teacher Awards.

NEILYN P. ONA-VILLA

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

Finishing this dissertation during the COVID-19 pandemic could have been the darkest
tunnel if not for the ray of light from so many people.

I wish to express my deepest gratitude to: Dr. Rita P. Laude, my major adviser, for her
gracious guidance and sincere support while granting me enough independence in this
research; Dr. Agapita J. Salces, my co-adviser, for her kindness and generous efforts so
that we can come up with a worthwhile dissertation despite the pandemic restrictions; Dr.
Merlyn S. Mendioro and Dr. Ma. Genaleen Q. Diaz, my committee members, for their
encouragement, invaluable feedback and appreciation of my efforts in this endeavor; the
reliable and efficient Mr. Kaito Furusho, for sharing his excellent skills in handling the
enormous farm and genotype data; Ms. Ana Clarissa Ambagan, for providing the
necessary information on PCR-RFLP genotyping; Ms. Joy Banayo, for our discussions
about dairy research; the Institute of Animal Science, for the use of the Animal
Biotechnology Lab for genotyping, ACDI Farm for giving us access to their farm
records; Prof. Christian Umali, for being a very patient and truly remarkable consultant
for the statistics aspect of this work; Dr. Barry Hall of the University of Rochester and
Bellingham Research Institute, whom I have only known through email, yet generously
shared his expertise in bioinformatics and even sent me a copy of his very own book; Dr.
Victor Jun Ulat and Prof. Emmanuel Galang for answering my questions about 3D
visualization, DOST-ASTHRDP and DOST-PCAARRD for the financial assistance; Dr.
Cecilia Almontero and Prof. Mylene Nieves, for all the favors, thesis-related or not, and
the friendship we nurtured during our PhD journey; Ma’am Cel, Ma’am Mina, Chessed,
Mimi, Joy, Vanj, Ria, Yel and DR, for your prayers and friendly advice; my dear
colleagues and friends at the Institute of Biological Sciences; my very supportive
Genetics and Molecular Biology Division family for the love and respect; my beloved
family, Inay, the ever-dependable Lola Vering to my kids, Ate Bensy, Kuya Don, Dana,
Alex, Kenji, Bea, Kuya Erwin, Ate Koni, Eiji, Dexter, Rizzla, Alie, Tiya Sonia, Leah,
Nanay and Tatay for always offering their time, help, prayers and love; my precious
children, Jasmine, Lance and Nielle, my inspiration in everything that I do, I would have
never gone this far without your warm hugs and contagious smiles; my Mahal, Joey, for
always attentively listening to my ideas, giving me the most practical advice, for calming
me down, and just being here for me, and Mama Mary for all her intercessions every
time “my jar gets empty”.

Above all, I thank GOD, the source of all light. To Him be all glory and honor.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

IPR Page

Title Page

Approval Page
Biographical Sketch
Acknowledgement
Table of Contents

List of Tables

List of Figures

List of Appendix Tables
Abstract

Chapter I. INTRODUCTION
Chapter II. REVIEW OF LITERATURE

Trends in Dairy Cattle Breeding
Holstein and Jersey Dairy Cattle Breeds
Crossbreeding in Dairy Cattle
SNP Genotyping and Candidate Gene Approach
Milk Composition and Biosynthesis
Milk Proteins
Milk Fat
Lactose
«-Casein
8-Lactoglobulin
Molecular Phylogenetic Analysis
Phylogenetic Tree Construction
Selection Analysis
Motif Discovery

vi

12
14
17
20
23
25
28
30
34
34
35
40

Chapter II]. POLYMORPHISM OF x-CASEIN AND B-
LACTOGLOBULIN GENES IN HOLSTEIN X
JERSEY MILKING COWS IN A COMMERCIAL
DAIRY FARM IN BATANGAS, PHILIPPINES

Abstract
Introduction
Materials and Methods
Ethical Statement
PCR-RFLP Genotyping
DNA Isolation from Hair Follicles
PCR-RFLP
Statistical Analyses
Results and Discussion
PCR-RFLP Genotyping for CSN3 and BLG Genes
Genotype and Alllele Frequencies for CSN3 and BLG Genes
Summary and Conclusion
Literature Cited

Chapter IV. INDIVIDUAL AND JOINT EFFECTS OF CSN3 AND
BLG GENETIC VARIANTS ON MILK YIELD AND
QUALITY OF HOLSTEIN X JERSEY MILKING
cows

Abstract
Introduction
Materials and Methods
Ethical Statement
Phenotype Data Collection
PCR-RFLP Genotyping
Statistical Analyses
Results and Discussion
Descriptive Statistics
Association of CSN3 Genotypes with Milk Yield and Milk
Quality Traits
Association of BLG Genotypes with Milk Yield and Milk
Quality Traits
Combined Genotype Effects of CSN3 and BLG on Milk Traits
Multiple Regression Analyses

42
43

46

46
47
49

50
55
60
61

65
66

69
69
7
73

75
79

85

88
93

Peak Milk Yield

Average Daily Milk Yield

Fat Content

Fat Yield

Protein Content

Protein Yield

Lactose Content

Lactose Yield

Protein-to-Fat Ratio
Summary and Conclusion
Literature Cited

Chapter V. MOLECULAR PHYLOGENETIC ANALYSES OF
THE COMPLETE CODING SEQUENCE AND
PROMOTER REGION OF THE 8-LACTOGLOBULIN
GENE

Abstract
Introduction
Materials and Methods
Sequence Retrieval
Phylogenetic Tree Construction
Positive and Negative Selection Analyses of the Complete
Coding Sequence of BLG
Motif Finding Analysis on the Promoter Region of BLG
Results and Discussion
Phylogenetic Relationships Based on BLG Coding Sequences
Positive and Negative Selection Analyses of the BLG Coding
Sequence
Phylogenetic and Motif Analysis of the Promoter Region of BLG
Summary and Conclusion
Literature Cited

GENERAL SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
RECOMMENDATIONS

LITERATURE CITED

APPENDICES

96
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
110

117
118

121
123
125

126

127
135

140
149
152

158
163
165
185

TABLE

21

22

2.3

ad

3.2

3.3

41

42

LIST OF TABLES

Composition of milk from different breeds of cattle (Bos
taurus L.) (Geary et al. 2010; Zambrano-Burbano et al.,
2012).

Previous studies associating the x-casein (CSN3) A and B
variants with enhanced milk yield and quality traits.

Previous studies associating the B-lactoglobulin (BLG) A
and B variants with enhanced milk yield and quality traits.

PCR components for amplification of x-casein (CSN3) and
B-lactoglobulin (BLG) genes in dairy cattle (Bos taurus L.)

Genotype and allele frequencies and 7? test results for
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for x-casein (CSN3) and B-
lactoglobulin (BLG) genes in a Holstein x Jersey crossbred
cattle (Bos taurus L.) population in a commercial dairy
farm in Batangas, Philippines.

Population genetic indices for x-casein (CSN3) and B-
lactoglobulin (BLG) genes in a Holstein x Jersey crossbred
cattle population in a commercial dairy farm in Batangas,
Philippines.

Descriptive statistics of milk yield and milk quality traits
of Holstein x Jersey crossbred cattle (Bos taurus L.) in a
commercial dairy farm in Batangas, Philippines.

Eta (n) and Eta square (n?) coefficients between milk traits
and x-casein (CSN3) and B-lactoglobulin (BLG) genotypes.

PAGE

31

33

48

56

59

76

80

TABLE

43

44

45

46

47

5.1

5.2

5.3

54

Effect of x-casein (CSN3) and B-lactoglobulin (BLG)
genotypes on milk traits in Holstein x Jersey crossbred
cows (Least Squares Means + standard errors).

Effect of substituting the A allele with the B allele for x-
casein (CSN3) and B-lactoglobulin (BLG) genes on nine
bovine milk traits based on linear regression coefficient
estimates.

Genotype combinations for the x-casein (CSN3) and B-
lactoglobulin (BLG) genes and their frequencies of
occurrence in a Holstein x Jersey crossbred cattle (Bos
taurus L.) population in Batangas, Philippines.

Effects of genotype combinations for the x-casein (CSN3)
and B-lactoglobulin (BLG) genes on milk traits in a
Holstein x Jersey crossbred population in Batangas,
Philippines.

Regression coefficients (8) of each predictor and adjusted
R? of the multiple regression models for nine milk traits of
Holstein x Jersey crossbred cattle (Bos taurus L.).

Coding sequence accession numbers of selected
mammalian taxa used for phylogenetic analysis of the B-
lactoglobulin gene.

Estimates of evolutionary divergence over sequence pairs
between mammalian taxa based on 8-lactoglobulin (BLG)
coding sequences.

Fat, protein and lactose content of milk from some
mammalian species.

Summary of MEME, TOMTOM and GOMo results for the
promoter region of the B-lactoglobulin (BLG) gene.

PAGE

82

83

89

90

95

122

129

133

145

FIGURE

21

3.1

3.2

33

41

4.2

5.1

5.2

LIST OF FIGURES

(a) The Holstein-Friesian and (b) Jersey breeds of cattle
(Bos taurus L.).

Screenshot of sample BLASTn results showing successful
alignment and identification of the sequenced PCR
products for the (a) x-casein (CSN3) and (b) B-
lactoglobulin (BLG) genes.

Banding patterns of fragments generated upon (a) Hinf1-
restriction of x-casein (CSN3) amplicon and (b) Bsnl-
restriction of B-lactoglobulin (BLG) amplicon, run on 3%
agarose gel, for genotyping a Philippine population of
Holstein x Jersey dairy cattle (Bos taurus L.).

Sequencing chromatograms of representative PCR
products from Bos taurus L. having different x-casein
(CSN3) and 8-lactoglobulin (BLG) genotypes.

A Holstein x Jersey crossbred milking cow (Bos taurus
L,) in a commercial farm in Batangas, Philippines.

Effect of genotype combinations for the x-casein (CSN3)
and B-lactoglobulin (BLG) genes on peak milk yield of a
Holstein x Jersey crossbred cattle (Bos taurus L.)
population in Batangas, Philippines.

A phylogenetic tree generated by Bayesian Inference
analysis of B-lactoglobulin coding sequences of selected
mammalian species.

Primary sequence of the bovine BLG protein showing
amino acid sites that are positively and negatively
selected, based on Selecton codon selection analysis using
the MEC model.

xi

51

52

53

70

91

128

136

FIGURE

5.3

5.4

5.5

5.6

5.7

5.8

Three-dimensional representation of the B-lactoglobulin
protein with emphasis on the (a) 5 positively selected sites
and (b) 31 negatively selected sites detected by Selecton.

3D and linear representations of the B-lactoglobulin
protein, with emphasis on the positively selected sites
detected by Selecton and Datamonkey (MEME, FEL and
FUBAR), drawn on 3NPO using iCn3D.

3D and linear representations of the -lactoglobulin
protein, with emphasis on the negatively selected sites
detected by Datamonkey (FEL and FUBAR), drawn on
3NPO using iCn3D.

‘A maximum likelihood phylogram based on the promoter
region of the 8-lactoglobulin gene of selected mammalian
species.

Block diagrams showing the relative positions of
candidate motifs in the B-lactoglobulin promoter region of
nine mammalian species, detected by MEME (Multiple
EM for Motif Elicitation) tool, and the corresponding 8-
lactoglobulin contents of different mammalian species
(Roy et al., 2020).

ZN331 binding sites detected by TOMTOM in motifs 2
and 6 of the B-lactoglobulin (BLG) promoter region.

xii

PAGE

137

139

141

142

144

148

APPENDIX
TABLE

41

42

43

44

45
46
47

48

49

4.10

412

5.1

5.2

5.3

54

LIST OF APPENDIX TABLES

Correlation coefficients between breed composition (J>H coded
as 1; J=H coded as 0), calving number and age at start of calving
with each of the nine milk traits.

Spearman and Pearson correlation coefficients between age at
start of calving and calving number.

Correlation coefficients of the nine milk traits in HxJ crossbred
cattle.

Regression model for peak milk yield (adjusted R? = 0.111).
Regression model for average daily milk yield (adjusted R? =

0.046).
Regression model for milk fat content (adjusted R’

0.087),
Regression model for milk fat yield (adjusted R? = 0.055).

Regression model for milk protein content (adjusted R? =
0.342).

Regression model for milk protein yield (adjusted R? = 0.025).
Regression model for lactose content (adjusted R? = 0.022).
Regression model for milk lactose yield (adjusted R? = 0.038).

Regression model for milk protein-to-fat ratio (adjusted R? =
0.255).

KaKs ratios for each amino acid site in BLG, as calculated by
Selecton.

MEME (Mixed Effects Model of Evolution) results, by
Datamonkey.

FEL (Fixed Effects Likelihood) results, by Datamonkey.

FUBAR (Fast Unconstrained Bayesian Approximation) results,
by Datamonkey.

xiii

PAGE

185

185

185

186

186
186
187

187

187
188
188
188

189

192

196
198

ABSTRACT

VILLA, NEILYN PAMPLONA ONA. University of the Philippines Los Bafios.
May 2022. Genetic Polymorphism of x-Casein (CSN3) and 8-Lactoglobulin (BLG)
Genes and Association of Their Variant Alleles and Their Combinations with Milk
Yield and Quality in Holstein x Jersey Milking Cows (Bos taurus L.) in a Commercial

Dairy Farm in Batangas, Philippines

Adviser: Dr. Rita P. Laude
Co-Adviser: Dr. Agapita J. Salces

Genetic polymorphism in two candidate genes for milk yield and quality, CSN3 (K-
casein) and BLG (B-lactoglobulin) genes, were evaluated. PCR-RFLP genotyping of a
Philippine population of Holstein x Jersey crossbreds showed that CSN3 A and B alleles,
as well as BLG A and B alleles, were almost equal in frequencies. Both loci had genotypic
frequencies that showed no significant departure from the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium.
Univariate and multiple regression analyses demonstrated that CSN3 A allele was
significantly associated with higher ADMY (average daily milk yield), FC (fat content),
FY (fat yield), and LC (lactose content) while CSN3 B was associated with higher PC
(protein content) and PFR (protein-to-fat ratio). On the other hand, BLG B was found to
significantly associated with ADMY and FY. The interaction of the two loci had some
effect on PMY (peak milk yield). Cows with CSN3-BLG genotype combination of
ABBB were observed to have a significant increase in PMY. Moreover, phylogenetic
analysis of the complete coding sequence and promoter region of BLG grouped the taxa in
agreement with the current taxonomy of the 13 selected eutherian taxa. However, there
was no clear separation of the taxa according to milk protein, fat and lactose composition.
Further evolutionary analysis identified codon sites under positive and negative selection,
supporting the proposed transport function of BLG. Lastly, two out of 10 conserved motifs
identified in the promoter region of the BLG were shown to be putative transcription
factor binding sites which may regulate gene expression that may consequently affect milk
production.

CHAPTERI
INTRODUCTION

With a growing population of roughly 112 million in 2022, the Philippines is a
large and expanding market for milk and dairy products. However, the National Dairy
Authority reported in 2020 that the local milk production by cooperatives, government-
owned farms, private commercial farms and individual farms only reached 26,710 metric
tons. We had to import 2800 million metric tons of milk mostly from New Zealand, USA
and Australia, in the form of processed milk, butter, cheese and curd (Philippine Statistics
Authority, 2021). Philippine dairy industry produces only 1% of the country’s total dairy

needs.

In its effort to improve food security and reduce the incidence of malnutrition
particularly among children, the Philippine government recognizes the need for massive
genetic improvement and herd build-up. Cow’s milk constituted about 65% of total milk
produced while the remaining 31% and 4% came from carabao and goat milk,
respectively (Ang, 2020). Breeding for cows with high milk yield has been the focus of
dairy research worldwide for the past decades and has allowed farmers to produce more
milk without increasing the herd size. The Holstein Friesian (HF) has always been the
highest milk yielding breed (Dawes, 2008). However, it is most adapted to cold
European climates and has reduced performance and survival when imported into
tropical environments such as that of the Philippines. Thus, crossbreeding of HFs with

the more heat-tolerant breeds such as the Jersey and some local breeds has been widely

practiced. The Philippines relies heavily on importing such crossbreds to ameliorate the

country’s milking herd.

Owing to changes in the dietary preference of consumers, the focus of dairy
breeding has shifted from not just increasing milk production but also in improving milk
quality (Van Raden, 2004). Aside from the nutritional value that good quality milk
possesses, fat and protein contents principally mark the cheese yield and quality potential
of milk (Verdier-Metz et al., 2001). It also affects storage properties of other milk
products such as yoghurt, sour cream and cream cheese. Selection for milk with higher
nutritional quality such as the presence of health-promoting fatty acids and bioactive

peptides has also been under way (Givens and Shingfield, 2003; Kiplagat et al., 2012)

According to Dekkers (2012), dairy cattle breeding requires the selection of bulls
and cows that, when mated, are expected to produce progeny that perform better than the
average of the current generation. However, for traits that are sex-limited such as milk
yield and quality, bull performance is only evaluated through progeny testing wherein the
milk production of 60 to 100 daughters of each bull is measured. The high cost of
progeny testing limits the number of bulls that are tested every year. But with marker-
aided selection, bull calves that have a higher chance of producing high performing
individuals can be identified faster even during early stages of life. Thus, molecular
genotyping of animals would enable us to efficiently select superior animals, thereby
decreasing the generation interval. It is also useful for traits that require the animals to be

sacrificed to score the phenotype, such as disease susceptibility.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are DNA sequence variations that occur
when a single nucleotide in the genome sequence is altered. They are inherited
codominantly and are a constant characteristic of the body. They are considered the best
genetic variation resource for population studies and genome mapping. In the traditional
candidate gene (CG) approach such as the use of PCR-restriction fragment length
polymorphism (RFLP), SNP genotyping can be done based on SNP markers within the
gene of interest. PCR-RFLP analysis has been able to provide cost-effective SNP
genotyping and mutation detection in various livestock species such as pigs (Gonzales et
al., 2018; Vega et al., 2018), sheep (Jawasreh et al., 2019), goats (Yue et al., 2013), and

chickens (Cao et al., 2007).

Various researchers have identified candidate genes that are believed to be
associated with important milk traits. The present study deals with two of them, namely
the BLG and CSN3 genes. These genes code for proteins that belong to the two major
groups of proteins that constitute bovine milk. BLG codes for B-lactoglobulin, a major
whey protein in milk while CSN3 codes for x-casein that belongs to the family of proteins
(caseins) that dominate the protein micelles in milk. These proteins are uniquely found in
milk. Genetic variants exist for these two loci, each resulting in protein variants that
differ from each other only by a few amino acids. The most common variants for the
BLG locus are the BLG A and BLG B, having a SNP at exon 4 where a T to C transition
results in a valine to alanine substitution, respectively (Zaglool et al., 2016). Meanwhile,
for the x-casein gene, CSN3 A and CSN3 B are the most frequent variants with an A to C
transversion leading to an aspartic acid to alanine amino acid substitution (Anggraeni et

al., 2017).

The association of a genetic variant with a particular desirable economic trait
seems to be specific to the breed and the location of the herd. No such studies have been
done yet on Holstein x Jersey (HxJ) crossbreds in the Philippines. Knowledge on which
genetic variant is most strongly associated with high milk yield, fat, protein and lactose

contents will be useful information in a breeding program.

To gain a better understanding of these candidate genes, it is also important to
explore their genetic diversity and evolutionary relationships among milk-producing
species of animals. Nucleotide and protein sequences of these genes can be freely
accessed and retrieved from online databases. Jn silico analysis through multiple
sequence alignment, phylogenetic tree construction and phylogenetic fingerprinting can
be performed on these sequences to give valuable information on the evolution of these
sequences among various taxa and may reveal some attendant effects of such diversity on

the functionality of these genes.

To date, there are no studies yet that tested the associations of the BLG and CSN3
genes with milk quality, protein, fat and lactose contents in HxJ crossbred cattle. There is
also a need to describe the degree of polymorphisms for these loci in crossbred cows in
the Philippines. The results of this study can be used in the establishment of a marker-
aided selection protocol for use in the genetic improvement of cattle population to
increase milk production in the Philippines. The general objectives were to genotypically
evaluate the Holstein x Jersey cattle in a commercial dairy farm in the Philippines based
on single nucleotide polymorphisms in two selected candidate genes (CSN3 and BLG) for

milk yield and quality, and investigate in silico the evolutionary relationships of selected

milk-producing livestock species based on BLG and CSN3 coding sequences. The

specific objectives were to

1. determine the genotypes of Holstein x Jersey crossbred milking cows from a
commercial farm in the Philippines based on the D148A SNP in the x-casein
(CSN3) gene and the VII8A SNP in the 8-lactoglobulin (BLG) gene using

PCR-RFLP;

2. describe the HxJ crossbred milking cow population using genetic parameters
(ie. genotype and allele frequencies, observed and expected homozygosity,

and effective allele number);

3. determine if the population is under HW equilibrium with respect to the CSN3

and BLG loci;

4. detect associations between SNP markers in the selected candidate genes and
their interactions with milk traits, namely milk yield (MY), fat content (FC),
fat yield (FY), protein content (PC), protein yield (PY), lactose content (LC),
lactose yield (LY) and protein-to-fat ratio (PFR) in Holstein x Jersey

crossbred cattle; and

5. perform in silico analyses on BLG and CSN3 coding regions of selected milk-
producing animals through multiple sequence alignment, phylogenetic tree

construction, selection analysis and motif discovery.

This study was conducted at the Animal Biotechnology Laboratory of the
Institute of Animal Sciences, College of Agriculture and Food Science, and the
Molecular Biology and Biotechnology Laboratory of the Institute of Biological
Sciences, College of Arts and Sciences, University of the Philippines Los Bafios,

College, Laguna from January 2020 to June 2022.

CHAPTER II

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

Trends in Dairy Cattle Breeding

Because the dairy cow has been a valuable producer of food for humans and
animals, it has been subject to genetic improvement for thousands of years. Although
there are many ways to feed and manage dairy cows to enhance their milk production, a
more sustained solution can be made possible by concentrating desirable genes (and
eliminating the undesirable ones) in the farmer's stock through breeding. Genetic
selection for important traits has helped transform and advance the dairy cattle industry.
‘As Dekkers (2012) pointed out, most of these economically important traits such as milk
yield, fat content, protein content, and longevity, are controlled by many genes that may
reach to more than a hundred. A breeding program should have a clear breeding goal

that specifies the traits to be improved to give direction for the genetic improvement.

Miglior et al. (2012) recounted how the economic value of traits has historically
been the driver for genetic selection. From the 1930s to the 1970s, the focus of selection
was solely on increasing milk production. To achieve a systematic strategy for selection,
farms started organizing their records of milk production. Eventually, they also included
conformation or body shape as this also contributes to milk productivity. Powerful multi-
trait analyses were then conducted in the advent of advances in genetic theory and

statistics and technological innovations in computing. This allowed the inclusion of more

sophisticated analytical techniques that resulted in rapid increase in production. As a
result, milk yield per cow had more than doubled in the previous 50 years and many cows

produce more than 20,000 kg of milk per lactation (Oltenacu and Broom, 2010).

Since the 1970s, as reviewed by Wiggans and Gengler (2011), interest in
improving milk quality by enhancing milk composition has been increasing as payment
systems based on milk components rather than milk volume arise. Until now, milk fat and
protein yields have been the major determinants of income particularly in dairy producers
that supply milk for the production of cheese, milk powder, butter milk, and caseins. The
protein content of milk, which depends on the expression and secretion of individual
proteins, is one of the major determinants of milk price (Bailey et al., 2005).
Likewise, milk with high fat content is generally preferred in dairy processing plants
due its effect on the quality of milk products. Furthermore, lactose content is gaining
economic interest at the international level due to the growing demand for lactose
powder. Therefore, milk component yields and percentages have been part of the regular

milk recording and genetic improvement in dairy farms.

According to Oldenbroek and Van der Waiij (2014), in breeding dairy cattle,
artificial insemination (AI) is most commonly performed. Usually, cows tend to be
owned by farmers and the breeding bulls by a breeding company. In dairy cattle breeding,
selection is usually done on the milking cow and additionally on three more levels,
namely the bull, the son of the bull and the heifers. First, the best-performing bull, the
one that has been tried and tested to produce the best-milking calves, can be selected and

used as source of semen in AI. Second, the sons of the bulls are also retained as selection

candidates to becoming the breeding bull. Third and the most part is the heifers. These
young cows are an important part of herd dynamics, since they represent replacements for
older cows. In the dairy industry, they are desired since they will eventually produce
milk. Thus, in short, the very best cows are mated to the very best of bulls to produce

new replacement bulls and cows.

Holstein and Jersey Dairy Cattle Breeds

In the dairy industry, there are around 15 to 20 breeds that are used exclusively
for milk production. In the U.S., the seven major breeds include Ayrshire, Brown Swiss,
Guemsey, Holstein, Jersey, Milking Shorthorn and Red and White Holstein. In the
Philippines, the most common dairy breeds are Holstein Friesian, Jersey, and the Brown

Swiss (National Dairy Authority, 2014).

The Holstein, also known as Holstein-Friesian or Friesian, is the highest milk
producing breed and is widely distributed in most countries of the world, It originated in
Holland, particularly in the provinces of North Holland and West Friesland. Under
tropical conditions, it may not perform well, since it is the least heat tolerant. Holstein-
Friesian is a strong and heavy animal, with very good dairy and beef characteristics. It
has a broad nose, dished forehead, strong jaws, and well-developed body. The color is
typically black and white, all four legs and the lower part of the legs being white. The
cows are quiet and docile, but bulls may be vicious. The animals are large in size and
weight of male ranges from 800-900 kg and in female 500-600 kg. It is almost five feet

tall at the shoulder. Pure breeds yield 6000 to 7000 liter of milk per lactation and the

height milk yield in one lactation was recorded 19000 liters in one lactation. The average

milk fat is 3.6% with a range from 2.6 to 4.3% (Dawes, 2008) (Fig. 2.1).

On the other hand, the Jersey is the smallest of the dairy breeds, weighing in at
350 to 550 kg, while the average cow weighs about 700 kg. It has low maintenance
intake due to its small size and is thus considered the most efficient dairy cattle breed. It
is very hardy and adapts well to nearly all kinds of climatic conditions, particularly to
high temperatures. This breed was developed on the Island of Jersey in the British
channel. The origin of this breed is not established, but it is thought to have been
developed by the introduction of black cattle of Britain and France before 1100 AD. The
color varies from fawn with or without marking and generally black around the eyes. The
cows have straight top lines, level rumps, and sharp withers. The breed is characterized
by large bright eyes and broad forehead. The head is clean-cut and proportionate to the
body. Jersey breed is easily chosen for their docile nature, easy calving, well-shaped
udders and strong attachment of udders with body. Although the milk yield is not high,
the breed is popular all over the world. It is known for producing milk with higher
percentages of protein and butterfat, which makes its milk perfect for making dairy foods
like cheese and ice cream. Early maturity of heifers produces calf between 26-30 months
and has a regular calving interval. A good herd produces an average of about 4500 liters

of milk in 300 days lactation period (Dawes, 2008).

i

Figure 2.1. (a) The Holstein-Friesian and (b) Jersey breeds of cattle (Bos taurus L.)
(https://www. thevetexpert.com/ top-10-world-class-most-popular-dairy-
cattle-breeds/).

Crossbreeding in Dairy Cattle

Breeding Holstein heifers and cows to Jersey bulls has been a popular method of
crossbreeding in most Western countries like the US and Australia, Crossbreeding is the
mating of individuals from different lines, breeds, or populations. Dairy producers have
become increasingly interested in crossbreeding in recent years for various reasons.
According to Weigel and Barlass (2003), one reason is the economic benefit of herds that
produce milk with high fat and protein percentages due to the current changes in milk
pricing. This enables other breeds and crossbreds to economically compete with the
dominant Holstein breed. Kelleher et al. (2015) noted that Holstein x Jersey Fi cows gave
€472 additional profit over their lifetime compared to the average of their purebred

contemporaries.

The second reason given by Weigel and Barlass (2003) is that some dairy
producers are beginning to consider crossbreeding as a solution to problems in purebred
Holsteins. Due to intense selection and inbreeding of Holsteins, there has been
substantial deterioration in female fertility, calving ease, health and survival among the
purebreds. Holstein x Jersey cows were reported to calve younger as heifers and have
shorter calving interval (Coffey et al. 2016). Thus, crossbreeding may be an effective
alternative to reduce the impact of inbreeding depression that is progressively observed in

the major dairy breeds.

Another reason cited by Cassell and McAllister (2009) is the use of crossbreeding.

as an intermediate step in creating a new synthetic breed which has genetic merits in

different traits. It can introduce new variation to numerically small breeds or a favorable
characteristic of a single gene to an existing breed. This effectively enhances the overall
efficiency of the production system. For instance, dual purpose breeds are produced by
inseminating dairy cows with semen from beef cattle. Similarly, Holstein with high milk
production are crossbred with breeds with good fertility and health such as Scandinavian
Red, Normande or Montbeliarde. First generation crosses of pure Holstein with leading
European and North American dairy breeds, as well as tropical have been known to
exceed Holstein in terms of lifetime net profit, particularly in milk markets with adequate
premiums for fat and protein content. In tropical ecozones, crossbred animals or synthetic
breeds have been viable alternatives to overcome the various challenges of pasture-based
dairy production systems. Girolando (a cross between Gir (Bos indicus) from India and
Holstein (Bos taurus) and Australian Friesian Sahiwal (a cross between Sahiwal (Bos
indicus) from Pakistan and Holstein) have been selected as suitable breeds for dairy
farms due to its high adaptability, milk production, and reproductive efficiency in tropical

systems (Tiemey and Reason, 1986; da Cruz et al., 2021).

Sorensen et al. (2008) explained that the total genetic makeup of crossbreds can
include additive effects, dominance, matemal effects, maternal heterosis and
recombination effects. Primarily, crossbreeding produces genetically improved because
it brings about new combinations of additive genetic components between breeds. It
heavily relies on heterosis or hybrid vigor in which the offspring exhibits characteristics

that are more superior compared with the average of both purebred parental breeds.

Heterosis results from non-additive gene effect, dominance and epitasis along with

differences in the frequencies of the different alleles at each locus.

SNP Genotyping and Candidate Gene Approach

Application of molecular genetics for genetic improvement relies on the ability to
genotype individuals for specific genetic loci. SNP (single nucleotide polymorphism) is
a PCR-based marker that involves the substitution of one nucleotide for another (Beuzen
et al., 2000). SNPs include more than 90% of all differences between the individuals.
SNPs occur approximately every 700 bp in Bos taurus and every 300 bp in Bos indicus
cattle. Thus, there are approximately 4 million SNPs in the B. taurus genome (Seidel,
2010). Genomic selection using the SNP markers is a powerful new tool for genetic
selection. According to Beuzen et al. (2000), advantages of SNP markers include (1)
most of the SNP markers are located in coding area of DNA; therefore, they affect
protein function directly; (2) SNPs are more suitable than microsatellites for high
throughput genetic analysis; (3) they are inherited codominantly and stably compared to
other DNA markers, making them more suited as long term selection markers; (4) they
are prevalent and provide more potential markers near the locus of interest than other

types of polymorphism.

SNP genotyping is performed using two main methods, the traditional candidate
gene approach and the high throughput methods (Koopaei and Koshkoiyeh 2014). The
traditional gel-based approach uses standard molecular techniques, such as amplification

refractory mutation system (ARMS), restriction digests and various forms of gel

electrophoresis (e.g. PCR-RFLP), denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) and
single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP). Many high throughput methods are
available for SNP genotyping that offer a unique combination of scale, accuracy,
throughput, and cost. According to Seidel (2010), the current approach is the genome-
wide association (GWA) using a SNP chip. The most common SNP chip used for cattle is
from the company, Illumina (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). This SNP chip has

approximately 50 000 SNPs and is thus called a 50K SNP chip.

SNP genotyping using traditional candidate gene (CG) association study and
GWAS enjoy a combination of benefits and drawbacks. CG approach proposes that a
significant proportion of quantitative genetic variation of a given trait is contributed by
segregation of functional alleles of one or more of the candidate genes for the trait,
Candidate genes are genes that play a role in the development or physiology of a trait of
economic importance. At the DNA level, a candidate gene comprises a contiguous tract
of DNA, including introns, exons, and upstream and downstream regulatory regions
concemed with biosynthesis of a single protein or via alternative processing to produce
related proteins. Allelic variation at a candidate gene sequence can cause a change in
protein production or efficiency in a metabolic process that will influence a specific trait.
The candidate gene approach can be very powerful and can detect loci even with small
effect, provided that the candidate gene represents a true causative gene (Kiplagat et al.
2012). Broadly, CG studies tend to have rather high statistical power but are incapable
of discovering new genes or gene combinations, while GWA studies can pinpoint genes

regardless of whether their function was known before but have low power owing to the

number of independent tests performed. Raschia et al, (2018) pointed out that in a context
where economic resources are scarce, it is more cost-effective to genotype a few SNPs
on candidate genes than to perform large-scale genotyping, In such cases, the CG

approach would be still applicable.

Candidate gene detection has been carried out in large farm animals using a
combination of different pieces of evidence supporting the functionality of identified
genomic regions in relation to multigenic traits such as milk yield and quality. These
studies include knock-out and transgenic experiments, QTL analysis, association studies,
expression studies, miRNA expression and epigenetic factors. Ogoreve et al. (2009)
compiled 934 cattle candidate genes that have been associated to mammary gland
development, milk production traits and resistance or susceptibility to mastitis. These
include ABCG2 (ATP-binding cassette, subfamily G), CSN/S/ (casein alpha $1), CSN3
(casein kappa), DGAT/ (diacylglycerol O-acyltransferase 1), GHR (growth hormone
receptor), LEP (leptin), BLG (B-lactoglobulin), PRL (prolactin), STATSA (signal
transducer and activator), BoLA-DRB3 (major histocompatibility complex class Il,
DRB3), CCL2 (chemokine C-C motif ligand 20) and LTF (lactoferrin). Fifty SNP
Positions were located in these genes. Meanwhile, ABCG2, CSNISI, CSN3, and LEP are
the genes that were consistently associated with milk traits considering both association

and expression studies.

Milk Composition and Biosynthesis

Milk is liquid food that is secreted by the mammary gland of the females of
mammalian species, that supplies nutrition and immunological protection to the neonate
of the species. For humans, milk from dairy animals such as cows, carabao and goats
serves as an important raw material for human food preparations. Milk and milk products
provide about 13% of our protein requirements (Reinhardt et al., 2012). Bovine milk is
made up mostly of water (87%) while the remaining 13% is composed of the total solids
that are either dissolved or suspended in the water phase. These total solids include fats
(4%), proteins (3.4%), lactose (4.8%), and minerals such as calcium, potassium and
phosphorus (0.8%). Milk is primarily water with dissolved lactose, organic and inorganic
salts, and vitamins and other small molecules. This aqueous solution is further made
complex by proteins that are suspended either at the molecular level as with the whey
proteins, or as large colloidal aggregates or micelles as with the caseins. On the other

hand, the larger lipids are stably dispersed as emulsified globules (Fox et al., 2015).

The principal constituents (lactose, lipids and most proteins) of milk are
synthesized in the mammary gland specifically in the mammary epithelial cells (MECs)
that line each of the millions of alveoli, the milk-producing units of the udder (Nickerson
and Akers, 2011). While a few milk proteins (y-casein, blood serum albumin and
immunoglobulins) are absorbed as pre-formed proteins from the blood, most milk
proteins like -lactoglobulin and x-casein are synthesized within the MECs. Caseins
produced in the rough endoplasmic reticulum are transported to the Golgi apparatus,

where they are concentrated, phosphorylated and bound with calcium. The modified

caseins are then transported in secretory vesicles that fuse with the plasma membrane,
thereby discharging all the contents into the alveolar lumen (Gorewit 1988). Lactose,
which was also synthesized in the GA from glucose that was absorbed from blood, is
transported out of the MEC together with minerals such as potassium, chlorine and
sodium also by means of these secretory vesicles. On the other hand, using fatty acids
absorbed from the blood and glycerol-3-phosphate from glycolysis, milk fats are
produced in the cytoplasm near the rER. They begin as small droplets that coalesce to
form larger droplets that are pinched off together with a portion of the cell membrane and
released into the alveolar lumen (Nickerson and Akers, 2011). With lactose and NaCl
acting as the main osmotic regulator between the blood and the alveolar lumen, water
enters the lumen primarily through diffusion and disperses all the other milk components
that are released into the lumen (Costa et al., 2019). Milk is then stored there and passes

through the ducts and out of the teats during milking.

Since the relative rates of synthesis and secretion of such milk components in the
mammary gland differ, variation in milk composition is expected. The composition can
vary substantially depending on the individual animal, breed, stage of lactation, age,
health status, herd management practices and environmental conditions (Walstra et al.
1999). Table 2.1 shows a comparison of the percentages of these milk components
between Holstein-Friesian, Jersey and other main dairy breeds of cows (Geary et al.

2010; Zambrano-Burbano et al., 2012).

Table 2.1. Composition of milk from different breeds of cattle (Bos taurus L.) (Geary et
al. 2010; Zambrano-Burbano et al., 2012).

BREED FAT PROTEIN LACTOSE = ASH TOTAL SOLIDS
(%) (%) (%) (%) (%)
Holstein 3.54 3.29 4.68 0.72 12.16
Brown Swiss 3.99 3.64 4.94 0.74 13.08
Ayrshire 3.95 3.48 4.60 0.72 12.77
Guernsey 4.72 3.15 471 0.76 14.04

Jersey 5.13 3.98 4.83 0.77 14.42

20

Gorewit (1988) pointed out that the processes for the production of the fat,
proteins and lactose, despite being independent from each other, are all influenced by
common factors such as species, breed, lactation number, age, pathological conditions,
and environmental factors such as diet, climate and the milking system. Thus, it can be
generalized that genetics and environment are the major factors influencing milk

composition.

Milk Proteins

Although there are hormones, enzymes, immunoglobulins and other proteins
present in small amounts in milk, a huge fraction of proteins is specific to milk and can
be classified into two major groups based on their chemical composition and physical

Properties. These are the caseins and the whey proteins.

According to Fox et al. (2015), the casein family is the dominant class of proteins
in milk, constituting approximately 80% (29.5 g/L) of the milk. They can be easily
separated from milk since they easily coagulate at pH 4.6 or upon addition of rennet, as
compared to the whey proteins which are retained in the liquid. There are four main
subgroups of bovine caseins, namely a-sl, a-s2, B- and x-casein., which represent 37%,
10%, 35% and 12% of total caseins, respectively (Goff, et al., 2021). Although each
subgroup has its characteristic amino acid composition, genetic variations, and functional
properties, all members of the casein family are described to have a relatively random,
open structure due to their high proline content, allowing easy digestion by the neonate

(Thom et al., 2015). Caseins are good emulsifiers since they have polar and non-polar

21

residues that are not uniformly distributed, resulting in hydrophobic and hydrophilic
regions. Caseins contain sticky PQ (proline and glutamine) sequences which is one
reason why they readily associate with themselves and each other via hydrophobic
interaction. Moreover, caseins are phosphoproteins. Their phosphate centers allow them
to sequester amorphous calcium, forming calcium phosphate salts. This characteristic of
caseins enables milk to contain much more calcium than would be possible if all the
calcium were dissolved in solution. Hence casein proteins provide a good source of

calcium for milk consumers (Bhat et al., 2016).

Caseins are dispersed in milk in the form of micelles that scatter light in all
directions thereby giving milk its white appearance. Each micelle consists of calcium-
sensitive caseins (a-sl, a-s2 and B-caseins) held together by calcium phosphate bridges
on the inside. x-Casein which does not interact with calcium are mostly concentrated on
the micelle’s exterior. The carboxyl end of each k-casein chain has a hydrophilic portion
known as the glycomacropeptide that protrudes on the surface of the micelle forming a
hairy hydrophilic layer and contributes to the stability of the micelle. They also confer a
negative charge to the surface of the micelle causing the micelles to repel each other and
prevent them from aggregating. Addition of rennet or chymosin to milk will hydrolyze
x-casein causing the micelles to coagulate and the milk to curdle. This is basically the

goal in cheese making (Goff et al., 2015).

In contrast with casein, the other major group of milk proteins is the whey or
serum proteins that account for approximately 20% (6.3 g/L) of total milk proteins.

Unlike caseins, whey proteins do not contain phosphorus and remain in solution at pH 4.6

22

(Fox et al., 2015). The presence of numerous sulfur-containing amino acids that form
disulfide bonds allows the whey proteins to fold into a compact globular shape. They
have a high level of a-helices and even quaternary structures (Davoodi et al., 2016). Such
compact structure is lost when the disulfide bonds are broken during denaturation,
allowing the binding of more water molecules to the protein. Incidentally, this principle is
applied in improving the texture of yoghurt (Irani et al., 2012) and in the use of whey

proteins in meat and sausage products (Jenness and Patton, 2018).

The predominant whey proteins are a-lactalbumin and B-lactoglobulin. a-
lactalbumin is present in all milk from all mammals and is needed in lactose synthesis as
a subunit of the enzyme lactose synthase. On the other hand, B-lactoglobulin is the major

whey protein in cow’s milk (Costa et al., 2019).

The protein content in milk is affected by nutritional and genetic factors. The
latter is more important since genes code for these milk proteins, thereby giving the
animal the ability to produce milk of a particular quality, in an environment that provides

the conditions for the expression of these genes (Zambrano-Burbano et al., 2012).

Keeping in mind that cheese is basically a protein network formed by the
precipitation of casein micelle, protein content is economically important since it
naturally affects the clotting property of milk in cheese making (Scott, 1998; El-Gawad et
al, 2011). The formation of complexes between whey proteins (especially 8-
lactoglobulin) and casein micelles heavily influences the firmness of cheese (Gupta and
Reuter, 1993). Milk that is richer in proteins especially casein yields more cheese (El-

Gawad et al., 2011). Auldist et al. (2004) observed that Jersey milk yielded 10% more

23

cheese per kilogram than HF milk due to the fact that the former has more proteins
(4.06%), specifically caseins than the latter (3.34%). Aside from cheese yield, the casein
portion of milk greatly affects cheese quality, curd firmness, syneresis rate and moisture
retention. Syneresis is the process wherein liquid (whey) is expelled from a rennet-
induced gel as the curd contracts. It is undesirable in the storage of milk products such as
yoghurt, sour cream, and cream cheese but is essential in cheese-making (Rani et al.,
2012). Also, as caseins and whey proteins get proteolyzed during the ripening process,
the amino acids and peptides produced improves the flavor of cheese (Fox et al., 2015).
For these reasons, protein content has been used as one of the indicators of milk quality

and consequently the cost of raw milk sold by producers.

According to Gaunt (1980), genetic selection would increase protein percentage
by 0.075 percentage units but decrease milk yield by 231 pounds. He further
recommended the joint selection for milk yield, protein and fat if the goal is increased
yield of protein and fat. He estimated that it would take about 11 generations for milk
protein percentages to equal milk fat percentages if protein yield with no change in fat

percentage were used as the selection criterion.

Milk Fat

Fat exists in milk as floating globules that range from 107 to 10? mm in diameter.
Leaving unhomogenized raw milk to stand for more than 30 minutes will result in a thin
top layer of cream as fat globules, being less dense than water, rise to the surface. Each

globule is surrounded by a thin membrane (the milk fat globule membrane or MFGM)

24

which acts as the emulsifying agent. Mechanical action such as shaking and churning can
break the emulsion and cause these globules to coalesce into butter grains. Milk fat
mainly consists of triacylglycerols, with much smaller amounts of free fatty acids, mono-
and diacylglycerols, phospholipids and sterols. It can also contain waxes and even

pigments such as carotene which gives butter a yellow tint (Jennes and Patton, 2018).

As mentioned by Fox et al. (2015), milk fat has long been a principal influence on
the economics of milk and dairy products. Until recently, the cost of milk was based
largely, if not solely on the milk fat content. Dairy processing plants prefer milk with
high fat content. Milk fat, like other fats, provides a rich source of energy (around 9 kcal
per gram). It also acts as solvent for the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E and K. They supply
significant amounts of the essential fatty acids such as linoleic, linolenic and arachidonic
acid. They provide positive nutritional factors, including butyric acid and rumenic acid
which are known to be anti-carcinogenic, and saturated mid- to short-length fatty acids
which are anti-hypertensive (Goff et al., 2021). But aside from their nutritive value,
Jennes and Patton (2018) pointed out that the most distinct role of milk fats in dairy
products is the flavor and physical properties that they impart on dairy products and other
food products. There are also flavorful compounds such as methyl ketones and lactones
that are derived from milk fatty acids after processing. According to Bylund (2015), the
flavor, texture, mouth feel and consistency of cheese is considerably affected by the fat
content of milk. Cheese made from milk with low fat content is harder and less
smooth due to the enhanced crosslinking between the curd whereas cheese with high fat

content is elastic and less firm.

35

In this connection, some dairy farmers have selectively bred dairy cattle to
increase fat content and therefore decrease the PFR (protein-to-fat ratio). The acceptable
range of PFR of cheese milk has been set to 0.8 to | to achieve a balance between getting
high cheese yield and maintaining the good quality of cheese (Guinee et al., 2007). For
this reason, HFs have been crossed with Jerseys since Jersey milk has been reported to
have higher fat content (5.2%) than HF (3.6%) (Hill and Ferrer, 2021). Jerseys have been
reported to have the highest heritability for milk fat percentage (0.71), whereas other
breeds exhibited a range of 0.51 to 0.57. Gaunt (1980) showed that fat percentage and
milk yield are negatively correlated (-0.3), suggesting that it is difficult to improve milk
yield and fat content simultaneously. That is, selection for higher milk yield is expected
to decrease fat content. He then recommended that the most effective method to enhance

fat percentage and milk yield is through selection for fat yield, instead of fat percentage.

Lactose

While glucose, galactose and other sugars are present in trace amounts, lactose is
the only carbohydrate found in significant quantities in milk. It is a sugar unique to
mammalian milk, except for some marine mammals which do not have neither lactose
nor a-lactalbumin, one of the two components of the enzyme for lactose synthesis,
lactose synthetase. Being a disaccharide of glucose and galactose, lactose contributes to

the energy value of milk (Jenness and Patton, 2018).

Lactose content tends to decrease steadily all throughout lactation. This is in

contrast to the trend observed for protein and fats wherein there is a decrease in fat and

26

protein contents during early lactation followed by a rapid rise in the second half of
lactation (Fox et al., 2015). This inverse relationship between the concentrations of
lactose and fats and proteins can be explained by the fact that lactose synthesis draws
water into the milk epithelial cells, thereby diluting the concentrations of fats and
proteins. This emphasizes the role of lactose as a major determinant of osmotic pressure
in milk, and thus determines the amount of absorbed water and consequently the volume
of milk produced (Jenness and Holt, 1987). It has also been reported that the amount of
lactose in milk is a good indicator of mammary gland health (Jennes and Patton, 2018).
Milk from cows infected with mastitis generally have higher somatic cell counts (SCC)
than milk from uninfected cows, as neutrophils rush to the site of infection. Milk with
high SCC levels also have low lactose content due to the leakage in the blood-milk

barrier and reduced biosynthetic potential of the MECs.

Lactose in milk has been frequently implicated in gastric problems as a result of
lactose intolerance. However, there is some evidence that lactose has other physiological
roles such as in the synthesis of vitamins in the intestines of certain species, calcium
utilization in the form of calcium lactate which is readily assimilated by the intestine, its
tendency to discourage fat deposition, and the synthesis for cerebrosides in the brain and
medullary sheaths of nerves in the young (Jenness and Patton, 2018). Also, it has shown
great potential as health indicator of cows as it was observed that generally healthier

cows produce milk with higher lactose content (Costa et al., 2019).

Lactose has been regarded as milk component of low economic value in the past.

In cheese-making, more than 90% of the lactose ends up in whey (Prazeres et al., 2012),

27

which is simply discarded as byproduct and dumped or fed to animals. However, in the
advent of technologies that efficiently extract lactose from whey, lactose has become an
important ingredient for food and pharmaceutical industries. It is the major component of
dried milk products wherein protein, fat and air are dispersed in a continuous phase of
amorphous solid lactose. These products include whole milk powder (which contains
30% lactose), skim milk powder (50%) and whey powder (70%). The distinct color and
flavor of highly heated caramelized dairy products can be also attributed to lactose.
Moreover, lactose has been used as a diluent for the tableting of drugs and as the base for
plastics. Although lactose is 20% less sweet than other sugars, properly crystallized
lactose is popularly used in icings, candies, and chocolates due to its low hygroscopicity.
Last but not the least, lactose is an essential component in the production of fermented

dairy products such as cultured milk and cheese and in the manufacture of lactic acid.

As lactose gains economic importance in the recent years, interest in lactose
content (LC) and yield (LY) has also started to elevate. The average LC of the most
common dairy species have been reported to be 4.1% for goats, 4.7% for cows, 4.8 for
buffalo, and 4.9% for sheep (Fox et al., 2015). Costa et al. (2019) reported that milk
from first-calving cows has higher LC than milk from cows in later lactations. LC usually
shows higher heritability than milk yield (Haile-Mariam and Pryce, 2017). Holstein-
Friesian cattle generally exhibits a heritability of 0.40 for LC and 0.1 to 0.2 for LY (Costa
et al., 2019). While milk yield has shown weak genetic correlation with LC, it has been
strongly associated with LY with estimates close to 1 (Haile-Mariam and Pryce, 2017).

Although some genetic studies involving LC and LY exist in literature, further studies are

28

needed to improve our understanding of the genetic aspects of this trait as LC is now

starting to be included in milk payment systems and possibly in breeding programs.

-Casein

x-casein (k-CN) is a small protein consisting of a single chain polypeptide with
169 amino acids. It is the only casein type that has sulfur-containing amino acids
methionine and cysteine (Farrell et al., 2004). It is phosphorylated by only one phosphate
group via serine, causing limited interactions with calcium ions. On the other hand, the
other caseins (a-sl casein, a-s2 casein and 8-casein) are calcium-sensitive. Another
unusual feature of x-CN is the presence of a net positive charge zone between amino
acids 20 and 115, making it possible for negatively charged carbohydrates (usually
trisaccharides and tetrasaccharides) to interact with casein molecules via threonine.
Thus, x-CN has a distinctly different structure from the other caseins. Nonetheless, it is
similar to B-CN in having predominantly hydrophilic and hydropohobic areas that are

clearly marked and separated (Zambrano-Burbano et al., 2012).

Located predominantly on the micelle surface, x-CN is critical to lactation
because of its primary role in micelle formation, internal structure stabilization,
prevention of aggregation prior to ingestion, and the timely aggregation of the micelles in
the stomach (Manguy and Sheilds, 2019). It is the specific substrate of chymosin which
cleaves it into the insoluble para-K-CN (PKC; amino acid | to 105) and the soluble

glycomacropeptide (GMP; amino acid 106-171). Economically, such cleavage is very

29

crucial in cheese making. Physiologically, the generated GMP is important in increasing

digestion efficiency and antimicrobial activity (Caroli, et al., 2009).

«-CN is encoded by the CSN3 gene, which is found in a 250-kb region of
chromosome 6 of the bovine genome (BTA 6q31). It is part of a gene cluster, also
known as the casein locus, that is composed of the four casein genes in a successive
sequence of CSNISI (for a-s1 casein), CSN2 (for B-CN), CSNIS2 (for a-s2 casein) and
CSN3 (Anggraeni et al., 2017). The first three casein genes are closely linked while the
CSN3 gene is at least 70 kb away from the others (Ferretti et al., 1990). CSN3 is a 13-kb
DNA sequence consisting of 5 exons, with exon 4 carrying most of the coding sequences
for the mature protein (Gurses et al., 2016). The gene is almost 16 times longer than the
corresponding mature mRNA. As described by Alexander et al. (1993), exon | codes for
65 nucleotides of the 5’ untranslated region while exon 2 contains the remaining 5
nucleotides of the S°UTR and codes for 19 of the 21 amino acids of the signal peptide.
Exon 3 has only 33 nucleotides whereas exon 4 codes for the remainder of the mature
protein, as well as 37 nucleotides of the 3°UTR. The remaining 173 nucleotides of the
3°UTR comprise exon 5. Introns | to 4 are 2.5 kb, 5.8 kb, 2.0 kb and 1.8 kb long,
respectively. The 5° flanking sequence contains a slightly non-canonical TATA box

from -30 to -25 bp, and a CAAT box at -80 bp (Kapelinskaia et al., 1989).

This gene has at least 14 alleles (A, Al, B, B2, C, D, E, Fl, F2, Gl, G2, H, I and
J) (Albarella et al., 2020). A and B are the most common alleles and are found in all
cattle breeds. CSN3 allele A has threonine (ACC) and aspartic acid (GAT) at amino acid

positions 136 and 148, respectively while allele B has isoleucine (ATC) substituting for

30

threonine, and alanine (GCT) for aspartic acid (Patel et al., 2007). These CSN3 variants
have been reported to affect milk production traits, cheese processing properties, and the
nutritive value of milk. They have also been used in breed characterization, diversity and
evolutionary studies (Caroli et al., 2009). As summarized in Table 2.2, the results of
association studies that have been conducted on various dairy cattle breeds for the CSN3
A and B alleles are not always concurrent and sometimes are even contradictory. This
justifies the necessity of continuing the research on the utilization of genetic markers in

the improvement of milk performance of dairy cattle.
B-Lactoglobulin

‘As mentioned by Kontopidis et al. (2004) in their review paper, B-lactoglobulin
(BLG, LGB or BLAC) is a small protein composed of only 162 amino acids, after
removal of the 16 amino acid signal peptide. It is found in milk from most mammals
(cattle, sheep, dogs and pigs) but is notably absent in that from humans, rodents and
lagomorphs (Folch et al., 1993). It folds up into an eight-stranded, antiparallel 8-barrel
with a three-turn a-helix on the outer surface and a ninth §-strand flanking the first
strand. This strand allows the bovine BLG to dimerize. The barrel has a central cavity
called the calyx, which provides a ligand-binding site. The presence of such barrel/calyx
is characteristic of the family to which BLG belongs, the lipocalins. Thus, it is speculated
that, like what some other lipocalins do, BLG functions in the binding and transport of
certain molecules such as retinol, vitamin D, cholesterol and palmitic acid. However,

other scientists believe that BLG has more important physiological functions that may

31

“Apmis ayy Aq paurwusaiop 10u sem uoHeIoosse ay. — 1190 UeIE ‘en 5] PaoueyUD YUIM pareloosse st g{ IWEIIEA ~ g
“yen yyrur at yy were souptou uaamuag YOReIDosse OU St 919] — YN. ‘ren tur paouequa quia pareroosse st y wee, — y
a TiquiojoD WT WIOHION —-Zrog "Te > oueqNG-OURIquIEZ

a a v WN v 299915 U URISIOH, soo

YN YN YN YN ‘oyuny, ur uesaug WISH, 02:
a a a nyay-Pue-yEETE VEST oz0z"

a YN YN vN a Temes 00 “edo pue uefeyoey

v lunoxg weave] ong vel] 29 BySAOHDd
a a YN vN vu ‘UISIOH
YN uous veywewoy
a nN
a a YN YN YN ay2otg 42029,
YN a vN ‘UPISIOH 2590,
a uous pur unosg weurewoy,
a ky ystoul
YN vN v vweadopoun
YN YN a v fost
av av vN YN UpISIOH 9107 "Te S98:
YN a YN YN ssimg unoug, 9107 “Te12 sosmn5)
YN ‘Uesf0H yo ruewipes
a a v ‘Aueuuay ww s0Keld
vN rm 07 "19 yez2U0 FI
a UBIO 166t‘ouespayy pue weeuuouog
YN OoNaW UUSEH — p1OZ “TE PeDANy-sINYING
vN YN YN a (qemiyes x 3H) femsoug ptoz “Ie 19 420,
a vn WN YY) wewsoug uoisjop xuetsouy yong.
YN v a weysoug wirsion,
YN vN a pA
YN opt
a v v ‘esou0puy Uy weysoHy UIEISIOH
a pg wetssmg
a 10H 0661 “Te upueaty
‘GTS INaINOD GTA INSINOD __GTBIA_INGINOD __G7aIA
3SO1DV1_3S019V1_NIGLOWA _NIBLOWS vd ava au aaaua, sonmiasTt

“apneo Aurep ut syrey)
Axyenb puv park yur poouequa yIM syuELIEA g pue Y (ENSD) Uaseo-¥ ay) BuNeDOSSe SaIpMIS sMOIAad °Z'Z PIGEL

32

explain its significant amounts (7-12% of total milk proteins) in bovine milk. Even until
now, many are puzzled about the high amino acid sequence similarity of BLG with the
human glycodelin, a lipocalin that is expressed only in the uterus of humans and is

involved in reproductive process (Brownlow et al., 1997; Kontopidis et al., 2004).

The gene that codes for BLG is 4.7 kb long and has been mapped on bovine
chromosome 11 (BTA 11). It has seven small exons and six introns. There are 11 known
BLG variants or alleles, namely A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, and W, the most common
being the A and the B alleles (Zaglool et al., 2016). The bovine BLG A allele has
aspartate at position 64 and valine at position 118 while glycine and alanine, respectively
replaced these two amino acids in BLG B. Also, it is believed to be associated with
higher BLG concentration in the milk. On the other hand, genotype BB has been
reported to have higher casein and fat contents which are ideal properties for cheese
production (Ren et al., 2011). Table 2.3 presents a list of previous studies concerning the
effect of BLG variants on milk traits. Similar to k-casein, the association of BLG variants
with milk traits arouses interest among researchers and may vary across breeds and

country of origin,

33

-Apnas at kq pautuusyap 10u sem uoHyeIoOsse ay — s|]90 4UeLE,

yea) ¥ITW poueyus YIM pareroosse st g wee A —

‘yen qu axp upyas aueLTeA soMpIOU Ua9HNJOq UOHEIDOSSE OU St 94 — VN “yon yylus paoueyua yi pareioosse s} y weLEA — y
We a Taejon woe Doe Tm woHeZ
a HOH PUELONIN
@ vN v woo a av 09
v aa PUEDE
vN vWoOW woud
@ ensoua vepyy
v ‘w21j0H wepeurD
a pei ut
@ vn ‘nyg veiiey
YN @ ‘note WELT
VN, VN, YN Asesog pur
VN vN OWN ene w wena
vN OWN a (ewowug vewewoy,
vw VN VN fetes pue uotayota yo220 ‘opurjonD
v ous 2925
VN vN OWN vN OWN ous. woz
v a o8 sda
YN OWN wes WoO} £107 “ye meus)
VN YN VN. SINSKY pu poztuoijon anyAt-PUEDeIE 910218» OED
v @oo6y WEIS UOBIOH WSPIMS {102 “Ie EYSMONeLE-EAEMeIEAZD
v eysoug woo x umn Yon
YN a YN pueyesz man wt Asso X 4H Td
YN OWN YN puro
YN YN OWN. souopuy wy uma
v
GiaIA—INSINOD @aIAINSINOD TAIN INGINOD — GTHIA
8019¥1_3S059V1_NIgLOWs _NIaLOWs__Avs va asmua ones

“apes Aurep ut sen Awpenb

pue pjord sn pooueyus qm squeLen g pue y (97g) UNINgo|Bo.0e]-y ay) SuNEIDOsse SaIpmIs snOIAad “€°Z FIGEL

34

Molecular Phylogenetic Analysis

Molecular phylogenetic analysis has proven to be a valuable tool in inferring the
evolutionary processes that influenced the changes that happened to a gene or a taxon
through time. Consequently, it may contribute valuable information about the gene's
function based on its homology with previously studied genes whose roles have been

clearly identified.

Phylogenetic Tree Construction

In performing molecular phylogenetic analysis, standard bioinformatic procedures
are performed, such as BLAST search for homologous sequences from sequence
databases, multiple sequence alignment usually by means of ClustalW or MUSCLE, and
phylogenetic tree construction through various methods such as Neighbor Joining,
Maximum Parsimony, Maximum Likelihood and Bayesian Inference. MEGA
(Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis) (Kumar et al., 2018) is a software suite that
can carry out these procedures. Since all steps are performed in a single environment, it
eliminates the need to interconvert file formats. At the same time, it is flexible enough to
allow the use of other programs (Hall, 2013). MEGA X also has a feature that enables the
verification of the reliability of an alignment through computation of the amino
acid/codon identity. Alternatively, verification can also be done using the GUIDANCE2
web-server (http://guidance.tau.ac.il), which assigns a confidence score for each residue,
column, and sequence in an alignment. Unreliably aligned columns and sequences are

automatically removed to prepare the data for downstream analyses (Sela et al., 2015).

35

Bayesian phylogenetic analysis can be accomplished using BEAST (Bayesian
Evolutionary Analysis of Sampling Trees) which implements a family of MCMC
(Markov Chain Monte Carlo) algorithms over tree space, so that each tree is weighed
proportional to its posterior probability (Drummond et al., 2012). BEAST is a widely
used program for estimating trees by Bayesian Inference (Hall 2018). Aside from
BEAST, there are four more applications included in the BEAST package
(http://beast.bio.ed.ac.uk), namely BEAUTIi, TreeAnnotator, TreeStat and LogCombiner.
BEAUTIi (Bayesian Evolutionary Analysis Utility) is used to set up conditions for the
run and write a .xml input file for BEAST. BEAST runs the Bayesian analysis and
outputs a .trees file made up of a set of thousands of trees. BEAGLE, a high-performance
phylogenetic library, accelerates the core calculations of BEAST. TreeAnnotator yields
the consensus tree with posterior probabilities by which the reliability of each node is
statistically assessed. Tracer was additionally downloaded from tree.bio.ed.ac.uk. to
summarize those trees by discarding a number of early low-probability trees (burn-ins).
LogCombiner combines log and tree files from multiple output files into a single output
file. Lastly, FigTree (beast.bio.ed.ac.uk/FigTree) is a tree drawing program that is

compatible with the trees written by BEAST and TreeAnnotator.
Selection Analysis

While the methods mentioned above are commonly used, a major part of many
molecular evolution studies nowadays further involves exploring the occurrence of

adaptive evolution on certain genes. In adaptive evolution, beneficial alleles are selected

36

and thus increase in frequency while deleterious ones are disfavored. Selection analysis

allows us to know the type of selection and the impact of such selection on the gene.

In selection analysis, molecular evolutionists rely on dN and dS calculations, as
originally conceptualized by Miyata et al. (1980). dN, also denoted by 8, is the number
of nonsynonymous substitutions per nonsynonymous site in the coding sequence while
dS, also symbolized as a, is the number of synonymous substitutions per synonymous
site. Nonsynonymous substitutions are mutations in the DNA that result in a change in
the amino acid sequence of the coded protein, while synonymous substitutions are those
that change the DNA sequence but not the protein sequence due to the degeneracy of the
code. The first and second bases in a codon are the non-synonymous sites while the third
is a synonymous site. Because synonymous substitutions do not change the protein
sequence, they are not exposed to strong selective pressures and therefore tend to
accumulate at a constant rate. Hence, they are used as the baseline by which the rate of
nonsynonymous substitutions is compared. Thus, the dN/dS ratio (also denoted as Ka/Ks
or @) is computed to indicate the type of selection a particular site or the whole gene has
been under. A ratio that is equal to | indicates that the sequence underwent neutral
selection. That is, it was free to change with no constraints and pure chance determines
whether they will be fixed into the population. A ratio less than 1 implies negative or
purifying selection, wherein fewer nonsynonymous substitutions were allowed because
they reduce the function of the protein and are therefore deleterious. They get ultimately

eliminated from the population. Alternatively, in the case of positive or diversifying

37

selection (dN/dS >1), a nonsynonymous substitution conferred some advantage to the

organism and therefore increased in frequency in the population (Hall, 2018).

Presently, selection analysis can be performed using the Selecton
(http://selecton.tau.ac.il/) (Doron-Faigenboim et al., 2005; Stern et al., 2007) and the

Datamonkey (http://www.datamonkey.org) (Weaver et al., 2018) servers.

Selecton enables the detection of selective forces at a single amino acid site using
the Ka/Ks ratio (Doron-Faigenboim et al., 2005; Stern et al., 2007). The input file is a
Fasta file of homologous coding sequences that have been aligned and devoid of stop
codons. For precise testing, the MEC (Mechanistic Empirical Combination) model is
used as an evolutionary model since it takes into account the different amino acid
replacement probabilities. For instance, for other models, the probabilities of leucine
(UUG) being replaced by either tryptophan (UGG) or by phenylalanine (UUU) are equal
because they both require a single transversion. In contrast, using the MEC model, the
former gets a lower probability score than the latter because this model employs a
substitution matrix that accommodates the heterogeneity in the evolutionary process

across sites (Wang et al., 2008).

Meanwhile, Datamonkey 2.0 provides a carefully curated collection of methods
for interrogating coding-sequence alignments for imprints of natural selection, packaged
as a responsive, fully interactive, and API-enabled web applications (Weaver et al.,
2018). Datamonkey uses the HyPhy package, a very powerful multiplatform package for

carrying out likelihood-based analyses of rates and patterns of evolution. Datamonkey

38

provides access to complex and sophisticated evolutionary analyses including GARD
(Genetic Algorithm for Recombination Detection), FEL (Fixed Effects Likelihood),
MEME (Mixed Effects Model of Evolution), and FUBAR (A Fast, Unconstrained

Bayesian Approximation for Inferring Selection).

GARD (Genetic Algorithm for Recombination Detection) (Kosakovsky Pond et
al., 2006) is used as a pre-processing step for selection inference. It comprehensively
screens the alignment for recombination breakpoints and infers a unique phylogenetic
history for each recombinant block. Otherwise, selection inference disregarding
recombination leads to a significant increase in false positives. The resulting partitioned

data is then used as input to the succeeding selection analysis methods.

FEL (Fixed Effects Likelihood) (Kosakovsky Pond et al., 2005) infers dN and dS
for each site in a particular alignment of coding sequences and corresponding phylogeny
using maximum likelihood approach. It assumes that the selection pressure for each site
is constant along the entire phylogeny. FEL first optimizes branch lengths and nucleotide
substitution parameters then fits a MG94xREV model to each codon site to obtain dN and
dS substitution rates. To determine if dN is significantly greater than dS, it conducts a

hypothesis testing for each specific site using the Likelihood Ratio Test.

FUBAR (A Fast Unconstrained Bayesian Approximation For Inferring Selection)
(Murrell et al., 2013) is similar to FEL except that it uses a Bayesian algorithm to infer
Substitution rates. Evidence for diversifying selection is reported using posterior

probabilities, instead of p-values. Posterior probabilities of greater than 0.9 strongly

39

suggests positive selection. Since it employs a novel strategy of employing a pre-
specified discrete grid of dN and dS values that are applied across sites, FUBAR runs
more quickly than FEL. Due to its speed and sensitivity, it is more suitable for analyzing
large alignments containing hundreds and even thousands of sequences or when positive

selection seems to be present but relatively weak.

MEME (Mixed Effects Model of Evolution) (Murrell et al., 2012) is a tool to
detect individual codon sites evolving under episodic positive selection under a
proportion of branches. It uses a mixed effects maximum likelihood approach by
combining fixed effects at the site level and random effects at the branch level. Hence, it

is a modification of FEL since it allows w values to vary along the branches.

‘A growing number of papers that cited the use of these approaches have been
published. To name a few, Ahmad et al. (2017) found evidence for positive diversifying
selection in the MCIR gene, a gene that determines the melanin content in mammals.
Their study proposed that the evolution of MCIR may have been modulated by
domesticating events in indigenous goats. Likewise, Rey-Campos et al. (2020)
highlighted sites under significant positive and negative selection in the genes that code
for mycitins, a potent effector in mussel immune response to pathogenic infections. The
substitutions they detected in the gene might have shaped the evolution of Mytilus as they
are constantly exposed to mutable environmental conditions. Very recently, Kumar et al.
(2021) published an evolutionary portrait of the progenitor SARS-CoV-2 and its

dominant offshoots in the COVID-19 pandemic. Their study mainly relied on selection

40

analysis to identify the multiple replacements of predominant coronavirus strains in
Europe and Asia, as well as the continued presence of multiple high-frequency strains in
Asia and North America. Even now, daily screens of the individual genes from the
SARS-CoV-2 genome are being performed using the Datamonkey server to keep track of

variants that may be positively or negatively selected.

Motif Discovery

Motif discovery can be accomplished with the same set of sequences used in the
phylogenetic analysis using the MEME Suite (https://meme-suite.org/). A motif is an
approximate sequence pattern that occurs repeatedly in a group of related sequences
MEME searches for statistically significant candidate motifs in the input sequence set and
presents them as position-dependent letter-probability matrices (motif logos) that
describe the probability of each possible letter at each position in the pattem (Dinka et al.,

2020).

The HTML output of MEME allows the user to forward each candidate motif to
other web-based programs, such as TOMTOM and GOMo, for further analyses.
TOMTOM web server searches for sequences that match the identified motif for its
corresponding transcription factor (Gupta et al., 2007) while GOMo scans databases to
match the motifs with genes associated with one or more Gene Ontology (GO) term to
associate the motif with a particular biological, cellular or molecular function (Buske et

al., 2010).

41

These methods have been proven useful in various studies. For instance,
Mahmood et al. (2016) were able to identify motifs in the P450 genes of the housefly to
uncover valuable information on the evolution of insecticide resistance in flies. Dinka et
al. (2020) identified the binding site for the EXPREG transcription factor family that is
shared by all promoter regions of SARS-CoV-2 virus genes. As this TF family always
functions as transcriptional repressor in different cellular processes, their result could

help design potential intervention options for the SARS-Cov-2 outbreak.

CHAPTER IIL

POLYMORPHISM OF x-CASEIN AND 8-LACTOGLOBULIN GENES IN
HOLSTEIN X JERSEY MILKING COWS IN A COMMERCIAL
DAIRY FARM IN BATANGAS, PHILIPPINES

Abstract

Genetic variants of CSN3 (x-casein) and BLG (B-lactoglobulin) were investigated
in Holstein x Jersey crossbreds in a commercial dairy farm in the Philippines. Using
PCR-RFLP, SNP variants, particularly the D148A of the CSN3 gene and the VI18A of
the BLG gene were identified after restriction of PCR products using Hinfl and Bsnl,
respectively. Results show that all three genotypes for both loci existed in the population,
with the heterozygotes occurring most frequently in the population. The calculated gene
frequencies were almost equal for the CSN3 A (0.509) and B allleles (0.491), as well as
for the BLG A (0.507) and B (0.493) alleles. The genotypic frequencies of both loci also
showed no significant departure from the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Based on these
two milk genes, there exists adequate variability in this population of crossbreds that

breeders can use in the genetic improvement of cattle with enhanced milk yield and
composition in the Philippines.

Keywords: CSN3, BLG, PCR-RFLP, genetic polymorphisms

43

Introduction

With the ultimate goals of improving food security and elevating the livelihood of
dairy farmers, a major focus of dairy research is geared towards enhancing milk
production. Breeding for cows with high milk yield and good milk quality is a
sustainable approach to achieve these goals. It requires the evaluation and selection of
bulls that can produce progenies with superior milk yield and quality. Traditionally, bulls
are evaluated through progeny testing since milk production is a sex-limited trait. In
progeny testing, milk production of 60 to 100 daughters of each bull has to be recorded.
This entails high cost and thus limits the number of bulls that are tested every year
(Dekkers, 2012). Alternatively, using marker-aided selection, identification of bulls that
have better chances of producing high-performing individuals can be done faster even

during the early stages of life.

Presently, the most common type of genetic markers used are the SNPs (single
nucleotide polymorphisms). These are DNA sequence variations that occur when a
single nucleotide in a locus is altered. They are codominantly inherited and is constant
throughout the life of the individual. They are considered the best genetic variation
resource for population studies and genome mapping. In the traditional candidate gene
approach such as the use of PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP), SNP
genotyping can be done based on SNP markers within the gene of interest. PCR-RFLP

analysis has been able to provide cost-effective SNP genotyping and mutation

44

detection in various livestock species such as pigs (Gonzales et al., 2018), sheep

(awasreh et al., 2019), goats (Yue et al., 2013), and chickens (Cao et al., 2007).

Various researchers have identified candidate genes that can serve as genetic
markers for important dairy cattle traits. The present study considered two of them,
namely the BLG and CSN3 genes. These genes code for proteins that belong to the two
major groups of proteins that constitute bovine milk. BLG codes for B-lactoglobulin, a
major whey protein in milk while CSN3 codes for x-casein that belongs to the family of
proteins (caseins) that dominate the protein micelles in milk. These proteins are uniquely
found in milk. Genetic variants exist for these two loci, each resulting in protein variants
that differ from each other only by a few amino acids. The most common variants for the
BLG locus are the BLG A and BLG B, having a SNP at exon 4 where a T to C transition
results in a valine to alanine substitution, respectively (Zaglool et al., 2016). Meanwhile,
for the x-casein gene, CSN3 A and CSN3 B are the most frequent variants with an A to C
transversion leading to an aspartic acid to alanine amino acid substitution (Anggraeni et

al., 2017).

It is significant to determine the genotype of the members of a milking population
for these candidate genes. Such genotypic data can be utilized in assessing the degree of
variability in these loci and identify specific individuals that can be selected for the
breeding program. The general objective of this study was to genotypically evaluate the

Holstein x Jersey (HxJ) crossbreds in a commercial dairy farm in the Philippines based

45

on single nucleotide polymorphisms in two selected candidate genes (CSN3 and BLG) for
milk yield and quality, The specific objectives were to:
1. determine the genotypes of HxJ crossbred milking cows based on the D148A
SNP in the CSN3 gene and the VI18A SNP in the BLG gene using PCR-
RFLP;
2. describe the HxJ crossbred milking cow population using genetic parameters
(ie. genotype and allele frequencies, observed and expected homozygosity,
and effective allele number) for these two loci; and
3. determine if the population is under HW equilibrium with respect to the CSN3
and BLG loci.
This study was conducted at the Animal Biotechnology Laboratory of the Institute
of Animal Science, College of Agriculture and Food Science, University of the

Philippines Los Bafios, College, Laguna from January 2020 to January 2022.

46

Materials and Methods

Ethical Statement

All procedures for this research were carried out in compliance with the ethical
requirements and were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of the
University of the Philippines Los Bafios, with the Assigned Protocol Number CAFS-

2021-001.

PCR-RFLP Genotyping

DNA Isolation from Hair Follicles

Hair follicles were hand-plucked from the switch of each cow and taped onto
carefully labeled index cards. They were then placed in resealable plastic bags and stored

in a refrigerator until DNA extraction.

The end of the hair containing the hair follicle was cut and collected, making sure
that the cut hair did not exceed | cm in length. The hair samples from an individual cow
were placed in a single 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tube. DNA from the hair follicles was
extracted using the Vivantis® GF-1 Nucleic Acid Extraction Kit, following the
manufacturer’s manual. Buffer TL (250 pL ) and Proteinase K (200 uL) were dispensed
into each tube. After pulse vortexing, the tubes were added with 12 wL of Lysis
Enhancer and incubated at 65°C for 14-18 h in a shaking waterbath. To homogenize the

sample, two volumes of the resulting mixture (approximately 560 1L) were added, pulse-

47

vortexed and incubated for 10 min at 65°C. Absolute ethanol (200 uL) was added to the
solution and mixed immediately and thoroughly by pulsed-vortexing to prevent any
uneven precipitation of the DNA. The sample (650 L) was transferred into a column
assembled in a clean collection tube which was provided in the kit. After centrifuging at
5000xg for 1 min, the flow through was discarded. The column was washed with 650 uL
of Wash Buffer and centrifuged at 5000xg for 1 min. After discarding the flow-through,
the column was washed again. The column was placed into a clean microcentrifuge tube.
Next, 200 pL of preheated Elution Buffer, TE buffer or sterile water was added directly
onto the column membrane and allowed to stand at room temperature for two min. The
tube was centrifuged at 5000xg for one min to elute the DNA which was in tum stored at
4°C for immediate use or -20°C for long-term storage. To check the quality of the DNA,
they were electrophoresed in 1% agarose gel using 1xTBE buffer at 100 volts for 30-45
min. Bands were stained with GelRed™ and visualized using the Enduro™ Gel

Documentation System (Labnet, New Jersey).
PCR-RFLP

Regions in the CSN3 and BLG genes containing their corresponding SNPs were
amplified through PCR. Each PCR reaction mixture contained 2 uL of DNA along with
the other PCR components listed in Table 3.1 and was adjusted with sterile nanopure
water to a total volume of 20 lL per reaction. Primer sequences were based on previous
studies by Mitra et al. (1998) and Schlee et al. (1992) for CSN3 and Rachagani et al

(2006) for BLG.

4B

Table 3.1. PCR components for amplification of x-casein (CSN3) and B-lactoglobulin
(BLG) genes in dairy cattle (Bos taurus L.)

PCR FINAL CONCENTRATION
COMPONENT __CSN3 BLG
PCR buffer Ix Ix
MgCl 2mM 1.5 mM
dNTP 0.2 mM 0.2 mM

Forward primer* 0.5 uM ;
5'-CACGTCACCCACACCCACATTTA-3’ —5*sCACGTCACCCACACCCACATTTA-3*

Reverse primer* 0.5 uM 03
STAATTAGCCCATITCGCCTICTCTGT.3’ _S“TAATTAGCCCATTTCGCCTTCTCTGT-3°
Taq polymerase 0.2 U. 0.2U

*Primers were based on Mitra et al. (1998) and Schlee et al. (1992) for CSN3 and Rachagani et al.
(2006) for BLG.

49

PCR reactions were performed in Veriti™™ Thermal Cycler with thermal

conditions as follows:

(a) CSN3 locus: 94°C for 2 min, followed by 30 cycles of 94 °C for 1 min, 60°C for 30
sec, and 72°C for 1 min, followed by a final extension step at 72°C for 7 min.

(b) BLG locus: 94°C for 2 min, followed by 30 cycles of 94 °C for 1 min, 63°C for 30 sec,

and 72°C for 1 min, followed by a final extension step at 72°C for 7 min.

To verify the identity of the PCR product and the presence of the target SNPs in

the amplicon, the PCR products were sent to Macrogen for sequencing.

The PCR products for CSN3 and BLG were digested with Hinfl and Bsnl
(Vivantis, Malaysia) restriction enzymes, respectively. PCR product (7 L) was added to
the RFLP cocktail containing 3U of the restriction enzyme and 1x buffer, provided by the
manufacturer. Sterile nanopure water was used to adjust the final volume to 20 pL. Ina
thermal cycler, the samples were allowed to be digested at 37°C for 1 h, followed by
thermal inactivation of the restriction endonuclease at 80°C for 20 min and a holdover
step at 4°C. RFLP products, together with | Kb Plus DNA ladder (Invitrogen, California),
were separated using 3% agarose gel electrophoresis and GelRed® (Biotium, California)

staining.

Statistical Analyses

The genotype and allele frequencies of the CSN3 and BLG genes were computed

by manual allele counting according to Falconer and Mackay (1996). The GenAIEx 6.5

50

program (Peakall and Smouse, 2012; Smouse etal. 2017) was used to compute for Ne
(number of effective alleles), Ho (observed heterozygosity), He (expected heterozygosity)
and Fixation Index (F). To evaluate the goodness-of-fit of the observed distribution of
genotypes to the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium expectations, Chi-square test (72) test was

conducted.

Results and Discussion

PCR-RFLP Genotyping for C5N3 and BLG Genes

Using PCR-RFLP, 283 individual cows were successfully genotyped for the x-
casein gene. The primer pair used in this study flanks exon 4 and a very short segment of
intron 4. BLASTn results confirmed the successful amplification of the said region of

CSN3 (Fig. 3.12).

Exon 4 contains the D148A SNP which is so named because the aspartic acid
residue in the 148" position in the protein was replaced by an alanine. This is caused by a
single nucleotide difference of A in the CSN3 A allele in lieu of a C in the CSN3 B allele
(GATGCT). Thus, digestion of the 379 bp PCR product with Hinfl resulted in specific
band patterns for each genotype. As seen in Fig. 3.2a, the CSN3 AA genotype revealed
three fragments (156, 132 and 91 bp) due to the presence of the Hinfl recognition site
(G*ANTC). CSN3 BB genotype manifests only two fragments (288 and 91 bp) and
CSN3 AB genotype shows all four bands, as was verified through sequencing (Fig. 3.3).

It can be noted from the chromatogram that the homozygotes AA and BB have distinct

51

Figure 3.1. Screenshot of sample BLASTn results showing successful alignment and
identification of the sequenced PCR products for the (a) x-casein (CSN3)
and (b) 8-lactoglobulin (BLG) genes in dairy cattle (Bos taurus L.)

52

L123 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 NC

ss ae ee iano ae
ras a or ae =
=e oo SE aoe meee SS

AAAA AAAAABAB BB AB BB AAAB AAAA BBAA BB ABAA AB AA BB

@

L123 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 NC

it}

BB AABB ABAAABAB AA ABABAB AB BBBB AAAA BB ABABAB AB BB.

@)

Figure 3.2. Banding patterns of fragments generated upon (a) Hinfl-restriction of x-
casein (CSN3) amplicon and (b) Bsnl-restriction of 8-lactoglobulin
(BLG) amplicon, run on 3% agarose gel, for genotyping of a Philippine
population of Holstein x Jersey dairy cattle (Bos taurus L.). Genotypes
are designated as capital letters. (L - 1kb+ DNA ladder; NC — negative
control).

53

CSN3 AA BLG AA
BLG AB g
| |
|
|
My My Wil y
CSN3 BB > BiG BB 5
|
|

Figure 3.3. Sequencing chromatograms of representative PCR products from Bos
taurus L, having different x-casein (CSN3) and B-lactoglobulin (BLG)
genotypes. Yellow boxes highlight the codon that contains the SNP for
each locus. Heterozygotes have two overlapping peaks at the SNP
position while homozygotes have one distinct peak.

54

green and blue peaks, respectively at the SNP position. In contrast, the AB genotype has

overlapping green and blue peaks at the location of the SNP.

On the other hand, 275 individual cows were genotyped for the B-lactoglobulin
gene using PCR-RFLP as well. The primer pair amplified a region beginning at exon 4
and a short portion of intron 4 of the BLG gene. Successful amplification of this region
was confirmed by BLASTn results (Fig. 3.1b). The V118A SNP involves a T to C
transition in the 118 codon, which converts the GTC (valine) codon in the BLG A allele

into a GCC (alanine) in the BLG B allele.

Since Bsn1°s recognition site is GG*CC, two fragments (144 bp and 108 bp) were
obtained from digesting the 252 bp BLG PCR amplicon (Fig. 3.2b). In this case, the
genotype of the sample is BLG AA. Alternatively, a BLG BB genotype is scored when
three restriction fragments (74, 70 and 108 bp) are generated due to the presence of the
Bsn recognition site in the sequence. Thus, the heterozygote (BLG AB) has all four
possible fragment sizes. The sequencing chromatogram confirms the successful
genotyping of the region with the target SNP (Fig. 3.3). The heterozygote showed
overlapping red and blue peaks at the site of T>C substitution, whereas the homozygotes

had defined red (T for AA genotype) and blue (C for BB genotype) peaks.

55

Genotype and Allele Frequencies for CSN3 and BLG Genes

Table 3.2 summarizes the genotype and allele frequencies for BLG and CSN3.
For the CSN3 locus, the most common genotype was the AB (0.488), compared to AA
(0.265) and BB (0.247). The CSN3 A and B alleles had almost equal frequencies at 0.509
and 0.491, respectively. Similarly, close frequencies between the two CSN3 alleles were
obtained from Kalmyk, a Russian local breed (Glazko, et al., 2016), Brazilian HF
(Holstein Friesian) (Azevedo, et al., 2008) and Romanian HF populations (Bencsik et al.,
2007). On the contrary, B allele proved to be more frequent in studies by Soyudal et al.
(2019) for the HF breed in Turkey, Gurses et al. (2016) for Jersey breed in Turkey, Ilie et
al. (2009) for the Romanian local Brown breed, Gurses et al. (2016) for the Turkish
Brown Swiss, Caroli et al. (2009) for the Italian Brown Swiss, Akyuz et al. (2012) in
Turkish Brown breed and Zepeda-Batista et al. (2015) for Mexican Jersey. Altematively,
more studies have found a higher frequency for the A allele than the B allele (Dogru et
al., 1999 on Turkish Brown; Kucerova et al., 2006 on Czech Fleckvieh breed; Patel et al.,
2007 on HF x Zebu and Jersey x Zebu crossbreds; Neamt et al., 2017 on Romanian
Simmental; Strzalkowska et al., 2002 on Polish Black and White; Barbosa et al., 2019 on
Girolando; and Sitkowska, 2008; Gurses et al., 2016; and Susmiati et al. 2017 on
Holstein Friesian). Such variation in the relative proportions of the two alleles can be
attributed to the different histories of the breeds used and long-term geographical
isolation and selection towards certain traits such as high yield and high fat and

protein content, as mentioned by Zaglool et al. (2016). Muin and Supriyantono (2012)

56

Table 3.2. Genotype and allele frequencies and test results for Hardy-Weinberg
equilibrium for x-casein (CSN3) and B-lactoglobulin (BLG) genes in a
Holstein x Jersey crossbred cattle (Bos taurus L.) population in a commercial
dairy farm in Batangas, Philippines.
GENE GENOTYPE COUNT? GENOTYPE | ALLELE ALLELE 7 VALUE
FREQUENCY* FREQUENCY
CONS AA 75 0.265 CSNSA 0.509 0.169%
(N=283) (73.27) (0.259)
AB 138 0.488 CSN3B 0.491
(141.43) (0.500)
BB 70 0.247
(68.25) (0.241)
BLG AA 78 0.284 BLGA 0.507 2.849%
(N=275) (1.77) 0.257)
AB 123 0.447 BLGB 0.493
(137.50) (0.500)
BB "4 0.269
(66.78) _(0.423)

N= total number of genotyped individuals

*Values in parentheses are expected values assuming Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium.

1s = not significant (p> 0.05)

57

pointed out that there was an increase in the frequency of the B allele among their
crossbreds as a result of the migration of the B allele coming from the BB-genotyped
sires. Shaidullin et al. (2020) also reported the same trend upon selecting BB sires for

their Holstein breeding program.

Likewise, the BLG locus manifested the same trend in genotype and gene
frequencies. AB was the most common genotype, having a frequency of 0.447, followed
by AA (0.284) and BB (0.269), demonstrating the existence of variability in this gene in
the herd. BLG A and B frequencies were found to be almost equal at 0.507 and 0.493,
respectively, as was also observed in previous reports (Soyudal et al., 2019 on HF in
Turkey; Kucerova et al., 2006 on Czech Fleckvieh; Barbosa et al., 2019 on Girolando
cattle, a crossbred between Gyr amd Holstein; and Glazko et al., 2016 on Holsteinized
Black and White breed in Russia). In contrast, the B allele was observed to be more
frequent in the Aberdeen-Angus breed in Russia (Glazko et al., 2016), HF x Zebu and
Jersey x Zebu crossbreds in India (Patel et al., 2007), HF in Quebec (Ng-Kwai-Hang et
al., 1984), Holstein in Egypt (Zaglool et al., 2016), Sahiwal in India (Mir et al., 2014) and

Jersey in Mexico (Zepeda-Batista et al., 2015).

The balanced distributions for the CSN3 A and B alleles, as well as the BLG A
and B alleles, that were recorded in the present study signifies that there is still no
fixation of either alleles in the population. It would be easier to alter the gene frequencies

of this herd, compared to when an allele has already been fixed or become predominant.

58

The farm breeders have more freedom in deciding as to which allele to select depending

on what traits they intend to improve.

Furthermore, considering other population genetic parameters (Table 3.3), the Ho
or observed heterozygosity for CSN3 (0.488) was almost equal to the He or
expected heterozygosity (0.5). The same was observed for the BLG locus with Ho of
0.447 and He of 0.5. Consequently, the Fixation Index (F) which was derived from the He
and Hp values was also very low at 0.024 for CSN3 and 0.105 for BLG. This indicates the
absence of inbreeding within this population. This further supports the result of the x2
test that the genotype frequencies of both loci showed no significant departure from the
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) (p<0.05). This clearly indicates that there is no
selection in the population under study with regards to the two genes and that these genes
are in genetic equilibrium. Previous studies have reported cattle populations that were

not in HWE, reflecting the effect of selection that has been done already in those farms.

Moreover, according to Botstein et al. (1980), PIC is a parameter indicative of the
degree of informativeness of a certain marker. Polymorphism is said to be low if the PIC
value is less than 0.25, median if between 0.25 and 0.5 and high if greater than 0.5. In
the present study, both CSN3 and BLG had PIC values of 0.375, indicating that these two
loci have an intermediate polymorphism level in the examined population. The presence
of a good level of genetic variability was also confirmed by the calculated Ne values, the

number of equally frequent alleles it would take to achieve a given level of gene diversity

59

Table 3.3. Population genetic indices for k-casein (CSN3) and B-lactoglobulin (BLG)
genes in a Holstein x Jersey crossbred cattle population in a commercial dairy
farm in Batangas, Philippines.

Parameter CSN3 BLG
Number of Effective Alleles (Ne) 1.999 2.0
Observed Heterozygosity (Ho) 0. 488 0.447
Expected Heterozygosity (He) 0. 500 0.500
Fixation Index (F) 0.024 0.105
Polymorphism Information Content (PIC) 0.375 0.375

- >» D? ere P , isthe frequeney ofthe ith allele
F = 1-(HolHe)
i

aw
PIC = 1 - ye - Dy py 2P}P} stecratn sees eine sate
& ais

60

or expected heterozygosity. Since Ne was equal to the actual number of alleles, it shows

that the maximum gene diversity has been reached in the population.

The results indicate that there is sufficient variability in the two loci within the
HxJ crossbred population that can be utilized in marker-assisted selection and breeding.
Hristov et al. (2012) recognized the importance of constantly monitoring milk protein
variations in various breeds of cattle, especially when the goal is to increase the

frequency of genetic variants with desirable effects.

Summary and Conclusion

The genotype profile of a herd of 286 HxJ cows was determined using DNA
extracted from hair follicles. The two genes were amplified separately via PCR using
primers based on previous papers by Mitra et al. (1998) and Rachagani et al. (2006). The
amplicons for CSN3 and BLG were digested with Hinfl and Bsnl, respectively, to detect
the D148A SNP in CSN3 and the VI18A SNP in BLG. PCR-RFLP genotyping was
successfully done on 283 individual cows for CSN3 and 275 cows for BLG. Results show
that all three genotypes for both loci existed in the population, with the heterozygotes
occurring most frequently in the population. The calculated gene frequencies for the
CSN3 A and B alleles were almost equal at 0.509 and 0.491, respectively. Similarly,
almost equal gene frequencies were recorded for BLG A (0.507) and B (0.493) alleles.
The genotypic frequencies of both loci also showed no significant departure from the

Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Such balanced distributions for the two alleles of both loci

61

indicate the absence of fixation of either allele in the herd. This is advantageous for the
breeding program since more variability is available to select from, and the breeder has
more freedom to decide which genetic variant to select to produce milk with the desired
composition and quantity. Therefore, these findings can be applied in devising effective
selection procedures for breeding cattle with improved milk yield and composition within

the crossbred population in the Philippines.

Literature Cited

AKYUZ, B., O.K. AGAOGLU and O. ERTUGRUL. 2012. Genetic polymorphism of
kappa casein, growth hormone and prolactin genes in Turkish native cattle breeds.
Intemational Journal of Dairy Technology 65:38-44.

ANGGRAENI, A., C. SUMANTRI, A. FARAJALLAH and E. ANDREAS. 2017.
Kappa-casein genotype frequencies in Holstein-Friesian dairy cattle in West Java
province. Med Pet. 33: 61-67.

AZEVEDO, A.L., C.S. NASCIMENTO, R.S. STEINBERG, M.R. CARVALHO, M.G
PEIXOTO, R.L. TEODORO, R.S. VERNEQUE, S.E. GUIMARAES and M.A.
MACHADO. 2008. Genetic polymorphism of the kappa-casein gene in Brazilian
cattle. Genet Mol Res 7: 623-630. doi: 10.4238/vol7-3gmr428.

BARBOSA, S.B.P., ILM. DE ARAUJO, M.F. MARTINS, E.C. DA SILVA, L.A.
JACOPINI, A.M.V. BATISTA and M.V.B. DA SILVA. 2019. Genetic
association of variations in the kappa-casein and B-lactoglobulin genes with milk
traits in Girolando cattle. Rev. Bras. Saude Prod. Anim. 20:1-12.

BENCSIK I., N. PACALA, J. STANCULET, A. TELEA and A. BENCSIK. 2007. The
influence of k-casein alleles on milk production and quality in a Holstein-Friesian
cow population. Sci Pap Anim Sci Biotech 40: 13-17.

BOTSTEIN, D., R.L. WHITE, M. SKOLNICK and R.W. DAVIS. 1980. Construction of
a genetic linkage map in man using restriction fragment length polymorphisms.
Am J Hum Genet. 32(3):314-31.

62

CAO Z.P., Z. WANG, X.Y. WANG and H. LI. 2007. Association of Spotl4a gene
polymorphisms with body weight in the chicken. Poultry Science 86(9): 1873-
1880.

CAROLI, A., S. CHESSA, P. BOLLA, E. BUDELLI and G.C.GANDINI. 2009. Genetic
structure of milk protein polymorphisms and effects on milk production traits in a
local dairy cattle. Journal of Animal Breeding and Genetics 121: 119-127.

DEKKERS, J.C.M. 2012. Application of Genomics Tools to Animal Breeding Current
Genomics 13: 207-212.

DOGRU, U., M. OZDEMIR and S. ERCISLI. 2011. Genetic polymorphism in Kappa-
Casein gene detected by PCR-RFLP in Cattle. Journal of Applied Animal
Research 33(1): 65-68.

FALCONER, D.S. and T.F.C. MACKAY. 1996. Introduction to Quantitative Genetics,
4th ed.; Longman Group Ltd.: Essex, UK.

GLAZKO V.L, I.N. ANDREICHENKO, S.N. KOVALCHUK, T.T. GLAZKO and G.Y.
KOSOVZKY. 2016. Candidate Genes for Control of Cattle Milk Production
Traits. Russian Agricultural Sciences 42(6): 458-464.

GONZALES, D.R.R, R.R.C.S. YAMBAO, N.O. VILLA, C.B. DELA VINA, M.G.Q.
DIAZ and R.S.A. VEGA. 2018. Association Analysis of Leptin Gene Single
Nucleotide Polymorphisms with Some Production Traits in Pigs (Sus scrofa L.).
Philipp Agric Scientist 101(2):111-118.

GURSES, M., H. YUCE, E.0. ETEM and B. PATIR. 2016. Polymorphisms of kappa-
casein gene and their effects on milk production traits in Holstein, Jersey and
Brown Swiss cattle. Animal Production Science doi: 10.1071/AN15131.

HRISTOV P., D. TEOFANOVA, I. MEHANDZHIYSKI, L. ZAGORCHEV and G.
RADOSLAVOV. 2012. Application of Milk Proteins Genetic Polymorphism for
Selection and Breeding of Dairy Cows in Bulgaria. In N. Chaiyabutr (Ed.), Milk
Production—Advanced Genetic Traits, Cellular Mechanism, Animal Management
and Health, London: InTech. http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/50758,

ILIE, D.E., A. MAGDIN, A. SALAJEANU, R.I. NEAMT and I. VINTILA. 2009.
Influence of CSN 3 marker on milk composition in Romanian Brown and
Romanian Simmental cattle from SCDCB Arad. Sci Pap Anim Sci Biotech 42:
54-57.

JAWASREH, K., A. AL MAREEN and P. AAD. 2019. Effect and interaction of B-
Lactoglobulin, Kappa Casein, and Prolactin Genes on milk production and
composition of Awassi sheep. Animals 9:1-14.

63

KUCEROVA, J., A. MATEJICEK, A.M. JANDUROVA, P. SORENSEN, E.
NEMCOVA. M. STIPKOVA, T. KOTT., J. BOUSKA and J. FRELICH. 2006.
Milk protein genes CSNISI, CSN2, CSN3, LGB and their relation to genetic
values of milk production paramteres in Czech Fleckvieh. Czech. J. Anim. Sci
51(6): 241-247.

MIR, S.S., 0. ULLAH and R. SHEIKH. 2014. Genetic polymorphism of milk protein
variants and their association studies with milk yield in Sahiwal cattle. African
Journal of Biotechnology Vol. 13(4): 555-565.

MITRA, A, P. SCHLEE, I. KRAUSE, J. LUSCH, T. WERNER, CR.
BALAKRISHNAN and F. PIRCHNER. 1998. Kappa-casein Polymorphisms in
Indian Dairy Cattle and Buffalo: A New Genetic Variant in Bufalo. Animal
Biotechnology 9(2): 81-87.

MUIN, M.A. and A. SUPRITANTOMO. 2012. Allelic frequency of kappa-casein locus
(Asp148/Ala) in Fl: Simmental (Bos taurus) x Ongole Grade (Bos indicus).
Media Peternakan 2012: 157-162.

NEAMT, R.O., G. SAPLACAN, S. ACATINCAI, L.T. CZISTER, D. GAVOJDIAN and
D.E. ILIE. 2017. The influence of CSN3 and LGB polymorphisms on milk
production and chemical composition in Romanian Simmental cattle. Acta
Biochimica Polonica 64(3):493-497.

NG-KWAIN-HANG, K. F., J.F. HAYES and J.E. MOXLEY. 1984. Association of
genetic variants of casein and milk serum proteins with milk, fat, and protein
production by dairy cattle. Joumnal of Dairy Science, 67:835-840.

PATEL, R.J., J.B. CHAUHAN, K.N. SINGH, and K.J. SONI. 2007. Allelic frequency of
Kappa Casein and Beta-Lactoglobulin in Indian Crossbred (Bos taurus x Bos
indicus) dairy bulls, Turk. J. Vet. Anim. Sci 31(6): 339-402.

PEAKALL, R. and P.E. SMOUSE. 2012. GenAlEx 6.5: genetic analysis in Excel.
Population genetic software for teaching = and_—research-an
update. Bioinformatics 28: 2537-2539.

RACHAGANI, S., .D. GUPTA, N. GUPTA and S.G. GUPTA. 2006. Genotyping of 8-
Lactoglobulin Gene by PCR-RFLP in Sahiwal and Tharparkar Cattle Breeds.
BMC Genetics 7:31.

SCHLEE, P AND O. ROTTMANN. 1992. Bovine kappa-casein: determination of alleles
A and B by polymerase chain reaction and RFLP analysis using plucked hair as a
source of DNA. Arch. Tierz. 35: 347-349.

64

SHAIDULLIN, R., G. SHARAFUTDINOV, A. MOSKVICHEVA, T. FAIZOV and Y.
YULDASHBAEV. 2020. Inheritance of allelic variants of the kappa-casein gene
by cows. BIO Web of Conferences 17:59.

SITKOWSKA, B., W. NEJA and E. WISNIEWSKA. 2008. Relations between kappa-
casein polymorphism (CSN3) and milk performance traits in heifer cows. J Cent
Eur Agric 9: 641-644.

SMOUSE, P. E., S.C. BANKS, and R. PEAKALL. 2017. Converting quadratic entropy
to diversity: Both animals and alleles are diverse, but some are more diverse than
others. PLOS ONE 12: e0185499.

SOYUDAL B., S. ARDICLI, H. SAMLI, D. DINCEL and F. BALCI. 2019. Association
of polymorphisms in the CSN2, CSN3, LGB and LALBA genes with milk
production traits in Holstein cows raised in Turkey. Journal of the Hellenic
Veterinary Medical Society 69(4): 1271-1282.

STRZALKOWSKA, N., K. JOSEF, Z. LECH and R. ZOFIA. 2002. Effects of kappa-
casein and beta-lactoglobulin loci polymorphism, cows age, stage of lactation and
somatic cell count on daily milk yield and milk composition in Polish Black and
White cattle. Anim Sci Pap Rep 20: 21-35.

SUSMIATI, T., P.P. PUTRO, SARMIN , C.M. AIRIN, HARTININGSIH and P.B.
SATRIA. 2017. Polymorphisms in Genes Encoding Kappa Casein Milk Protein in
Dairy Cattle. Intemational Journal of Dairy Science, 12: 282-288.

YUE X.P., Q. FANG, X. ZHANG, C.C. MAO, X.Y. LAN, H. CHEN and C.Z. LEI.
2013. Effects of CSNIS2 Genotypes on Economic Traits in Chinese Dairy Goats.
Asian-Australas J Anim Sci. 26(7): 911-915.

ZAGLOOL, A.W., A. AWAD, LES. EL ARABY and K.M. EL-BAYOMI. 2016.
Association of B-Lactoglobulin gene polymorphisms with milk yield, fat and
protein in Holstein-Friesian cattle. World Vet J 6(3): 117-122.

ZEPEDA-BATISTA, J.L., B. ALARCON-ZUNIGA, A. RUIZ-FLORES, R. NUNEZ-
DOMINGUEZ and R. RAMIRZ-VALVERDE. 2015. Polymorphism of three
milk protein genes in Mexican Jersey cattle. Electronic Journal of Biotechnology
18(2015):1-4.

CHAPTER IV

INDIVIDUAL AND JOINT EFFECTS OF x-CASEIN AND 8-LACTOGLOBULIN
GENETIC VARIANTS ON MILK YIELD AND QUALITY
OF HOLSTEIN X JERSEY MILKING COWS

Abstract

The individual and joint effects of x-casein (CSN3) and B-lactoglobulin genetic
variants on milk yield and quality were investigated in Holstein x Jersey crossbreds in a
commercial dairy farm in the Philippines. Using PCR-RFLP, SNP variants, particularly
the D148A of the CSN3 gene and the VII8A of the BLG gene were identified after
restriction of PCR products using Hinfl and Bsnl, respectively. Univariate and multiple
regression analyses demonstrated that CSN3 A allele was significantly associated with
higher ADMY (average daily milk yield), FC (fat content), FY (fat yield), and LC (lactose
content) while CSN3 B was associated with higher PC (protein content) and PFR (protein-
to-fat ratio). On the other hand, BLG B was found to be significantly associated with
ADMY and FY. The interaction of the two loci was revealed to have an effect on PMY
(peak milk yield). Cows with combined CSV3-BLG genotype of ABBB were observed to
have a significant increase in PMY.

Keywords: CSN3, BLG, milk yield, milk quality, association analysis

66

Introduction

According to the National Dairy Authority, the Philippines is capable of supplying
only 1% of the country’s total dairy needs. In 2020, 2800 million metric tons of milk in
the form of processed milk, butter, cheese and curd was imported from New Zealand, USA
and Australia, while Philippine dairy farms collectively produced only 26,710 metric tons
(Philippine Statistics Authority, 2021). The Philippine government recognizes the need for
massive genetic improvement and herd build-up to sustainably expand local milk
production as part of its effort to improve food security and reduce the incidence of
malnutrition particularly among children, while also pursuing increased productivity and
profitability of dairy farmers (National Dairy Authority, 2019). Since cow’s milk
constitute about 65% of total milk produced in the country (Ang, 2020), breeding for cows

with high milk yield and good milk quality is a sustainable approach to achieve this goal.

Genetic improvement to increase milk yield has been the focus of dairy research
worldwide for the past decades and has allowed farmers to produce more milk without
increasing the herd size. The Holstein has always been the highest milk yielding breed
(Dawes, 2008). However, it is most adapted to cold temperate climates and has reduced
performance and survival when imported into tropical environments such as that of the
Philippines. Thus, crossbreeding of Holsteins with other breeds such as the more heat-
tolerant ones such as Jersey and some local breeds has been widely practiced. The
Philippines relies heavily on importing such crossbreds to ameliorate the country’s milking

herd (National Dairy Authority, 2019).

67

Owing to changes in the dietary preference of consumers, the focus of dairy
breeding has shifted from not just increasing milk production but also in improving milk
quality (Van Raden, 2004). Aside from the nutritional value that good quality milk
possesses, fat and protein contents principally mark the cheese yield and quality potential
of milk (El-Gawad et al., 2011). It also affects storage properties of other milk products
such as yoghurt, sour cream and cream cheese. Selection for milk with higher nutritional
quality such as the presence of health-promoting fatty acids and bioactive peptides has also

been under way (Givens and Shingfield, 2003; Kiplagat et al., 2012).

Evaluation and selection of bulls that can produce progenies with superior milk
yield and quality has been done traditionally using progeny testing especially for sex-
limited traits such as those related to milk production (i.e. male cows do not produce milk).
This requires gathering and recording of milking data from 60 to 100 daughters of each
bull. However, this is costly and limits the number of bulls that are tested every year
(Dekkers, 2012). Alternatively, using marker-aided selection, identification of bulls that
have better chances of producing high-performing individuals can be done faster even

during the early stages of life.

A number of candidate genes or molecular markers that are believed to be
associated with important milk traits have been proposed by various researchers. These
include BLG and CSN3 genes that code B-lactoglobulin and x-casein, respectively. 8-
lactoglobulin is a major whey protein in milk while x-casein belongs to the family of

proteins (caseins) that dominate the protein micelles in milk. These proteins are uniquely

68

found in milk. Genetic variants exist for these two loci, each resulting in protein variants
that differ from each other only by a few amino acids. BLG A and BLG B are the most
common variants for the BLG locus,, having a SNP at exon 4 where a T to C transition
results in a valine to alanine substitution, respectively (Zaglool et al., 2016). On the other
hand, for the x-casein gene, the most frequent variants are CSN3 A and CSN3 B, with an
A to C transversion leading to an aspartic acid to alanine amino acid substitution

(Anggraeni et al., 2017). These variants can be easily identified using PCR-RFLP.

The association of a genetic variant with a particular desirable economic trait seems
to be specific to the breed and the location of the herd. To date, there are no studies yet
that test the associations of the CSN3 and BLG genes with milk quality, protein, fat and
lactose contents in Holstein x Jersey (HxJ) crossbred cattle. The results of this study can
be used in the establishment of a marker-aided selection protocol for use in the genetic
improvement of cattle population in the Philippines to enhance milk yield and quality. The
general objective of this study was to detect associations between SNP markers in the
selected candidate genes and their interactions with milk yield and quality traits. The

specific objectives were to:

1. describe the basic statistics of milk yield and quality data (i.e. peak milk yield
(PMY), average daily milk yield (ADMY), fat content (FC), fat yield (FY),
protein content (PC), protein yield (PY), lactose content (LC), lactose yield
(LY) and protein-to-fat ratio (PFR)) of a HxJ crossbred milking population in

the Philippines;

69

2. determine the individual and combined effects of the CSN3 and BLG variants

on the nine milk traits using statistical tools; and

3. assess the effect of non-genotypic variables such as calving number, age at the

start of calving and breed composition on the selected milk traits.

This study was conducted at the Animal Biotechnology Laboratory of the Institute
of Animal Sciences, College of Agriculture and Food Science, University of the

Philippines Los Bafios, College, Laguna from January 2020 to January 2022.

Materials and Methods

Ethical Statement

All procedures for this research were carried out in compliance with the ethical
requirements and were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of the University

of the Philippines Los Bafios, with the Assigned Protocol Number CAFS-2021-001.

Phenotype Data Collection

The dairy cows used in this study were 286 Holstein x Jersey crossbreds of the
ACDI Commercial Dairy Farm in Iban, Batangas, Philippines (Fig. 4.1). Phenotype data
that were considered were those obtained from cows that have farm records for at least 240
days that started not later than the 60th day of lactation, to ensure that the data will cover

the peak milk yield which was previously reported to be reached in 40 to 60 days after

Figure 4.1. A Holstein x Jersey crossbred milking cow (Bos
taurus L.) in a commercial farm in Batangas,
Philippines.

70

iy

calving (Hutjens, 2002). Daily milk yield (i.e. the total or combined volume of milk from
the moming and afternoon milkings in a day) was averaged to obtain the average daily
milk yield (ADMY; liters) for each cow. The highest daily milk yield was considered as
the peak milk yield (PMY; liters). Aside from these milk yield traits, milk quality data that
were taken daily using an Affimilk™ Analyzer were also provided by the farm. Each daily
milk quality trait was averaged and presented as protein content (PC; %), fat content (FC;
%), and lactose content (LC; %). Yield parameters for protein (PY; kgs), fat (FY; kgs) and
lactose (LY; kgs) were calculated by multiplying the average daily milk yield with the PC,
FC and LC, respectively. Protein-to-fat ratio (PFR) was computed by dividing the PC by
the FC. Data on the calving or lactation number, age at the start of calving and breed
composition were also made available by the farm. For the breed composition, J=H
designation means these are offpsrings of an Holstein x Jersey (HxJ) cross, while J>H

indicates offsprings that resulted from backcrossing HxJ with J.

PCR-RFLP Genotyping

Hair follicles from the switch of each cow were hand-plucked. They were taped
onto carefully labeled index cards which were placed in resealable plastic bags and stored

in a refrigerator until DNA extraction.

DNA was extracted from the hair follicles using the Vivantis® GF-1 Nucleic Acid
Extraction Kit. The DNA isolates were electrophoresed in 1% agarose gel using 1xTBE
buffer at 100 volts for 30-45 min, to check the quality of the DNA. Bands were stained

with GelRed™ and visualized using the Enduro™ Gel Documentation System (Labnet,

2

‘New Jersey). The remaining DNA samples were stored at 4°C for immediate use or -20°C

for long-term storage.

PCR amplifications of the regions in the CSN3 and BLG genes containing their
corresponding SNPs were performed based on the procedures by Mitra et al. (1998) and
Schlee et al. (1992) for CSN3 and Rachagani et al. (2006) for BLG. The primer sequences
for CSN3 were 5’-CACGTCACCCACACCCACATITA-3’ (forward) and 5°-
TAATTAGCCCATTTCGCCTICTCTGT-3" (reverse). Those for BLG were 5’-
CACGTCACCCACACCCACATTTA-3 (forward) and5’-TAATTAGCCCATTTCGCC
TICTCTGT-3’ (reverse), Amplification reactions containing 1x PCR buffer, 1.5-2 mM
MgCl, 0.2 mL dNTP, 0.3-0.5 uM each primer and 0.2 U Taq polymerase and sterile

distilled water were carried out in a final volume of 20 pL.

The following thermal profiles were used in the PCR using a Veriti™ thermal cycler:
(a) CSN3 locus: 94°C for 2 min, followed by 30 cycles of 94 °C for 1 min, 60°C for 30 sec,
and 72°C for | min, followed by a final extension step at 72°C for 7 min.
(b) BLG locus: 94°C for 2 min, followed by 30 cycles of 94 °C for | min, 63°C for 30 sec,

and 72°C for 1 min, followed by a final extension step at 72°C for 7 min.

The PCR products for CSN3 and BLG were digested with Hinfl and Bsnl (Vivantis,
Malaysia) restriction enzymes, respectively, using manufacturer’s instructions. The
resulting fragments, together with 1 Kb Plus DNA ladder (Invitrogen, California), were

electrophoresed in 3% agarose gel. The resulting bands were scored manually.

B

Statistical Analyses

To roughly determine the association of certain variables with each other, various
correlation analyses were performed, namely Eta correlation for genotypes and milk traits,
Point Biserial correlation for breed composition and milk traits, Spearman Rank correlation
for calving number and milk traits, Pearson and Spearman Rank correlations for age at start
of calving and milk traits and for age at start of calving and calving number.

Using the Univariate General Linear Model procedure of IBM SPSS® Statistics
software, analysis of variance was performed to test for any significant differences between
the three genotypes for CSN3, the three genotypes of BLG and the nine genotype
combinations of these two loci. Age at the start of calving, calving number and breed
composition were included in the model as covariates. Post-hoc LSD tests with Bonferroni
adjustment were done for pairwise mean comparisons. Each trait was analyzed separately.
The model used in the ANOVA was

Yijxim = + CSN3i + BLG; + (CSN3 x BLG)j + CALVk + AGESTARTI + BREEDCm
+ Ejjuim, where:

Yijum = observed trait (PMY/ADMY/FC/FY /PC/PY/ LC/LY/PFR)

t= overall mean

CSN3i= effect of the i genotype at CSN3 (x-casein) locus (3 levels)

BLG= effect of the j genotype at BLG (8-lactoglobulin) locus (3 levels)

CSN3 x BLG)j = effect of the interaction between BLG genotypes and CSN3
genotypes (ij = AAAA, AAAB, AABB, ABAA, ABAB, ABBB, BBAA, BBAB,
and BBBB)

CALV; = effect of k" calving number (4 levels)

AGESTART = effect of I" age at start of lactation

BREEDCn = effect of m" breed composition (2 levels)

Exim = random error


14

The allele substitution effect was estimated by running a linear regression analysis
with the trait as dependent variable and the coded genotypes (AA=0, AB=1, BB=2) as the
independent variable (Mehmannavaz et al., 2009). The model used was y = bo + bixi+ ¢i,
where y is the trait (PMY, ADMY, FC, PC, LC, FY, PY, LY or PFR); bo is the y-intercept;
by is the regression coefficient; and xi is the genotype code. As stated by Falconer and
Mackay (1996), the regression coefficient estimates the average effect of allele substitution

or the average effect of replacing an A allele with a B allele.

To identify the best fitting model that can be used to predict a particular milk trait,
multiple regression was performed using the Linear Regression Procedure of IBM SPSS*
version 26 software (IBM Corp. 2019). Since the genotypes are categorical or nominal
variables, they needed to be dummy-coded into separate variables that either contain a 0 or
| in order to be run successfully in a linear regression procedure. The validity of the test of
significance of the regression model was evaluated by testing the assumptions that (1) the
errors (€i’s) are normally distributed using the Shapiro-Wilk Test, and (2) that there is
homogeneity of error variances at different levels of the prediction using the Levene’s test.
Transformation of the data was performed through square root, natural log or inverse
transformation to fit a more linearized model and in cases when the data is skewed or not
normally distributed. To estimate the severity of multicollinearity, the Variance Inflation
Factor (VIF) was calculated per predictor variable and was kept as low as possible (i.e. less

than 10) to rule out the problem of multicollinearity.

15

In general, the multiple linear regression model was defined as

Yi = Bo + BiXri + BoXni + BaXai + BaXai + °° & » where:

Y,- milk trait or phenotype of the i” cow

Bo - regression constant (y-intercept)

Bx, Bo, B3, Bg ... — regression parameters associated with the 1%, 2", 3", and 4!" ,
etc., independent or predictor variables, obtained via least squares estimation

X 1 Xoi, Xap Xqi -.. — the independent or predictor variables for the i cow
& — random error associated with the phenotype of the i'" cow

Results and Discussion

Descriptive Statistics

The means, standard deviations, standard errors, coefficients of variation, minimum
and maximum values for the two milk yield traits, peak milk yield (PMY) and average
daily milk yield (ADMY), and the seven milk quality traits namely, fat content (FC), fat
yield (FY), protein content (PC), protein yield (PY), lactose content (LC), lactose yield

(LY) and protein/fat ratio (PFR) are presented in Table 4.1.

Of the 246 records for each trait, 135 came from first calving or lactation data, 70
from second calving, 37 from third calving and only 4 from fourth calving. The standard
errors of the mean for all traits were relatively low indicating that the mean of this data set

approximates the mean of the population fairly well.

The highest PMY (43 kg) was recorded from the first calving data of cow with

Registry Number QC-1018 (genotype AAA). This was roughly two times greater than

16

Table 4.1. Descriptive statistics of milk yield and milk quality traits of Holstein x Jersey
crossbred cattle (Bos taurus L.) in a commercial dairy farm in Batangas,

Philippines.
MILK TRAIT N__MEAN SI x ‘CV(%)____MIN__ MAX
Peak Milk Yield (ke) 2462229 ~~5.46 0.35 24.50 9.30 43.00
Ist Calving 135° 2229 465 «040 (20.84 930 43.00
2nd Calving 70 2088 586 0.70» 28.06 9.50 34.00
3rd Calving 372488 6.60 1.09 26.54 13.10 3930
4th Calving 4231s 5432.71 23.46 18.00 _ 30.10
‘Average Daily Milk Yield (kg) -246~«41152 3.34 O21 2899 3.69 22.92
Ist Calving 135 1177 2830.24 24.04 5.08 19.00
2nd Calving 7 1006 331 040 «32.94 3.69 20.66
3rd Calving 37 1350 404 066 29.95 3.62 22.92
4th Calving 4 lo4t 146 0.73 14.01 872 __ 12.28
Fat Content (%) 246435. 028 002 651 365531
Ist Calving 135 4320.24 = 0.02, 5.47 3.78 4.85
2nd Calving 7 432 0320.04 7.49 365 531
3rd Calving. 37° 444 0310.05 6.88 3.77 5.02
4th Calving 4473041 0.20 8.66 4395.26
Fat Yield (kg) 2460490 0.147 0.009 29.92 0.160 1.023
Ist Calving 135 0.500 0.128 0.011 (25.57 0.209 0.852,
2nd Calving 70 0.420 0.136 0.016 32.41 0.160 0.869
3rd Calving 37 0.588 0.173 0.028 (29.44 0.244 1.023
4th Calving 40.477 _0.063__0.031_13.17 0.406 0.536
Protein Content (%) 2463.67 0.18 0.01 4.91 3.08 4.07
Ist Calving 135 371 016 = Ol 4.37 322 407
2nd Calving 7 361 0.19 002 5.29 3.08 3.97
3rd Calving 37365018 0.03 4.97 332 4.00
4th Calving. 4355 024 0126.83 3.28 3.79
Protein Yield (kg) 2460422 0.126 0.008 29.88 0.135 0.897
Ist Calving 135 0.436 0.105 0.009 24.06 0.179 0.660
2nd Calving 7 0359 0.119 0.014 33.12 0.135 0.724
3rd Calving 370.497 0.159 0.026 32.07 0210 0.897
4th Calving 40370 0.065 0.033__17.62 0325 0.466
Tactose Content (%) 246466 ~—~O.15 0.01 3.23 416 5.16
Ist Calving 135 465° 0.12 001265 427 498
2nd Calving 7 4.70 019 002 4.10 416 5.16
3rd Calving 37 4610.3, 0022.77 436 4.82
4th Calving 4461020 0.04.28 442 478
Tactose Yield (kg) 2460543 0.157 0.010 2887 0.177 1.017
Ist Calving 135 0554 0.137, 0.012, 24.74 0.241 0.911
2nd Calving 7 0481 0.159 0.019 33.00 0.177 0.975
3rd Calving 37 0.625 0.183 0.030 29.24 0.266 1.017
4th Calving 40.493 0.068 0.034 13.73 0.408 0.573
Protein-to-Fat Ratio 246 0.859 0.065 0.004 7.52 0.632 1.016
Ist Calving 135 0.871 0.054 0.005 6.21 0.692 1.000
2nd Calving 70 0853 0.065 0.008 7.64 0.667 0.969
3rd Calving 37 0838 «0.081 0.013, 9.71 0.667 1.016
4th Calving 40.769 0.099 __0.050_12.91 0.632_ 0.869

‘N-number of records; SD. ~ standard deviation; SE
value; MAX~ maximum value

= standard error ofthe mean; CV coefficient of variation; MIN — minimum


1

the mean PMY which is 22.29 kg. In contrast, cow QC-294-07 (CSN3 AB) during its first
calving obtained the lowest PMY (9.3 kg). For the ADMY, the highest value was 22.92
kg that was recorded during the 3% calving of cow QC-25629 (genotype ABBB).
Incidentally, this cow also exhibited a fairly high PMY (34.9 kg) during its third calving.
The lowest ADMY (3.69 kg) was exhibited by cow QC-25660 (ABAB) in its 2" lactation.
The wide range of PMY and ADMY values reflects the existing variation in this trait. This
is further supported by the relatively moderate CV of 24.5% for PMY and 28.99% for
ADMY. This existing diversity suggests the potential for selection for both traits in the

commercial herd.

Ina study by Raschia et al. (2018), the ADMY for HxJ cows was 17.8 + 2.7kg.
These values are expectedly higher than the ADMY in our crossbred herd (11.52 kg)
because their study was conducted in Argentina where temperature, climate and open
pastures are ideal for dairy production using Holsteins and Holstein-derived breeds (Fuller
etal. ,2006). Nonetheless, our ADMY was still lower than the average values reported for
purebred Holstein (26.5 kg/day) and Jersey (17.1 kg/day) breeds (Stocco et al., 2017). This
agrees with the results of Weigel and Barlass (2003) wherein purebred Holstein had a

higher milk yield (7,266 kg/lactation) while HxJ had 6,693 ke/lactation milk yield.

For the milk quality traits, the overall mean FC, PC, and LC were 4.35%, 3.67%
and 4.66%, respectively. Except for LC, these values are slightly higher than previously
published values for cattle in general such as those reported by Fox and coworkers (2015).

According to them, the average is 4% for fat content, 3.4% for protein content and 4.8%

8

for lactose content. Moreover, Coffey and his co-workers (2016) compared the biological
performance of Holstein and Jersey purebred cows with their crossbreds using a large data
set of 40 commercial dairy herds practicing crossbreeding in Ireland over a five-year
period. They confirmed that milk volume yield was highest for purebred Holstein,
producing 19% more milk that their Jersey contemporaries. For the milk constituents,
purebred Jerseys had 17% higher fat percentage and 15.6% higher protein percentage
relative to their purebred Holstein contemporaries. The HxJ F; cows produced significantly
more milk, greater fat yield and protein yield, compared with the parental breed average.
They attributed such enhanced performance to breed complementarity and heterosis as a
result of both inter- and intra- allelic interactions, as also suggested by Lopez-Villalobos et
al. (2000). Typically, heterosis tends to be high (ranging from 0 to 10% for milk production
traits) for crosses between genetically diverse breeds, such as the Holstein and the Jersey
(Cassell, 2007). The crossbreds in the present study may not have exhibited milk yield,
and fat and protein contents as high as those observed by Coffey et al. (2016), but the values

were still higher thant those reported for Holstein.

In contrast to the low CV’s and SD’s for FC, PC, LC and PFR, the remaining milk
quality traits, namely FY, PY and LY had CVs that are moderately higher at 29 to 30%.
Like the milk yield traits, there is considerable variation in these milk quality traits that is
present in this herd and can thus be used in breeding selection. The highest FY (1.023 kg),
PY (0.897 kg) and LY (1.017 kg) were all approximately twice their corresponding means.
They were all observed in the third calving data. Multiple comparison using the Games-

Howell test revealed that the first and second lactations did not have significantly different

79

FY, PY and LY. These values were only significantly different for the first two lactations,
with the first lactation being higher than second first. However, in general, Spearman Rank
correlation test suggests that there is really no significant association between the calving
number and all milk yield and milk quality traits studied, except for PC and PFR. These
two traits were found to be weakly correlated with calving number (r=-0.216 and -0.194,

respectively). This means that as the calving number increases, PC and PFR decreases.

Association of CSN3 Genotypes with Milk Yield and Milk Quality Traits

To have a preliminary assessment of the association of the CSN3 polymorphism
with the milk production and milk quality traits, Eta correlation was performed using the
CSN3 genotypes as the nominal independent variable and the phenotypes (milk traits) as
the interval scale dependent variables. Eta and Eta square (n’) statistics for each trait are
presented in Table 4.2. The Eta coefficients reveal that there was very weak association
between CSN3 polymorphism and PMY, ADMY, FC, LC, FY, PY and LY (n < 0.2).
Looking at the 1? values, CSN3 genotype was found to have only a small effect on these
traits. The proportion of variation in these traits that can be explained by CSN3 variation
ranged from only 0.3 to 4%. In contrast, PC and PFR exhibited moderate association with
CSN3 genotypes (0.4 <n < 0.6). Based on the 7}, it can be said that about 29.7% of the
variation in PC and 19.3% of that in PFR can be explained by variation in the CSN3

genotype.

80

Table 4.2. Eta (n) and Eta square (n2) coefficients between milk traits and x-casein (CSN3)
and B-lactoglobulin (BLG) genotypes.

CSN3

Milk Traits 7 BEG 7
al} v ul} v
Peak Milk Yield 0.088 0.008 0.161 0.026
Average Daily Milk Yield 0.144 0.021 0.163 0.027
Fat Content 0.202 0.041 0.085 0.007
Fat Yield 0.174 0.030 0.162 0.026
Protein Content 0.545 0.297 0.093 0.009
Protein Yield 0.058 0.003 0.148 0.022
Lactose Content 0.166 0.028 0.071 0.005
Lactose Yield 0.149 0.022 0.150 0.023
0.439 0.193 0.083 0.007


81

Association of the CSN3 genotypes with the milk traits was further studied using
univariate ANOVA (Table 4.3). PMY was not significantly affected by CSN3, although
it was observed that AA individuals had higher PMY than BB, with AB having PMY that
was intermediate between the two homozygotes. Soyudal and his coworkers (2017) also
found no significant effect of CSN3 on PMY, although they reported that PMY was highest

in both AB and BB Holstein-Friesian cows in Turkey.

In contrast, for ADMY, animals with the AA genotype produced significantly more
milk daily than those whose genotype is BB (12.25 kgs vs 10.87 kg; p<0.05) (Table 4.3).
Allele substitution effect further revealed that substitution of the A allele with the B allele
significantly decreased the ADMY by 0.7 kg (Table 4.4). Bovenhuis et al. (1992), Freyer
et al. (1999), and Hristov et al. (2012) also noticed the same negative effect of the B allele
on MY. The former suggested a 15% decrease in milk production of the BB animals
compared to the AB cows. However, these findings differ from those of Eenennaam and
Medrano (1991) and Rachagani and Gupta (2008) who suggested the superiority of the B
allele for MY in Holstein and Sahiwal, respectively. On the contrary, there are also studies
saying that MY is not influenced by the CSN3 genotype (Neamt et al., 2017; Gradinaru et
al., 2013; and Felenczak et al., 2008). In a study that considered MY in three different
periods of lactation, Gurses et al. (2016) reported no significant associations of the CSN3
genotypes with MY whether in the early, middle or late period of lactation of the Holstein
breed. However, the same paper noted a positive effect of the A allele on MY for the Jersey

breed.

82

Table 4.3. Effect of x-casein (CSN3) and B-lactoglobulin (BLG) genotypes on milk traits
in Holstein x Jersey crossbred cows (Least Squares Means + standard errors).

CSN3 GENOTYPES P-VALUE

TRAITS

AA (N=61) AB (N=128) BB (N=68)
PMY (kg) 23.05 £0.79 22.40 + 0.48 21.66 + 0.66 0.407
ADMY (kg) 12.25 + 0.48 11.64 + 0.29 10.87 + 0.40 0.080
FC (%)** 4.45 + 0.04 4.30 + 0.02" 4.35 + 0.03" 0.007
FY (kg)* 0.535 + 0.021 0.490 + 0.013 0.460 + 0.018 0.024
PC (%)e* 3.52 0.02° 3.6540.01° 3.804 0.02* 0.000
PY (kg) 0.432 £ 0.018 0.426 + 0.011 0.412 0.015 0.696
LC (%)* 4,69 + 0.02* 4.670.014 4.62 + 0.02° 0.035
LY (kg) 0.580 + 0.022 0.547 0.014 0.512 £0.019 0.068
PER** 0.807 + 0.008 0.865 + 0.005 0.888 + 0.007" 0.000

BLG GENOTYPES

AA (N=48) AB (N=128) BB (N=68)
PMY (kg) 22.94 + 0.68 21.39 £0.52 23.27 £0.67
ADMY (kg)* 11.50 + 0.42% 11.04 + 0.32 12,36 + 0.42*
FC(%) 4.31 £0.04 4.37 £0.03 4.35 £0.04
FY (kg)* 0.485 + 0.019" 0.471 + 0.014" 0.528 + 0.018"
PC(%) 3.67 + 0.02 3.69£0.02 3.65 £0.02
PY (kg) 0.421 £ 0.016 0.407 + 0.012 0.452 + 0.016
Le(%) 4.67 £0.02 4.65 £0.01 4.67 + 0.02
LY (kg) 0.543 + 0,020 0.521 £0.015 0.578 + 0.020
PER 868 + 0.008 0.860 + 0.006

‘W= number of records, PMY = peak milk yield, ADMY = average daily milk yield,
content; LC = lactose content; FY = fat yield; PY = protein yield; LY = lactose yield; PFR = protein
‘significant at P<0.05 **significant at P<0.01

‘means followed by the same letter in the same row do not differ by LSD test atthe particular level of significance


83

Table 4.4. Effect of substituting the A allele with the B allele for x-casein (CSN3) and B-
lactoglobulin (BLG) genes on nine bovine milk traits based on linear regression
coefficient estimates.

MILK CSN3 BLG
TRAITS ‘Allele Substitution Standard P-value | Allele Substitution Standard P-value
Effect Error Effect Error
PMY (kg) 0.702 0.510 0.170 0.186 0483 (0.701
‘ADMY (kg) -0.700* 0310 0.025 0.438 0299 (0.145
FC(%) -0.040 0.026 0.133 0.369 0.025 (0.369
FY (kg) 0.0370" 0.014 0.007 0.022 0.013 0.099
PC (%), o.143e o.o14 0.001 0.012 0.016 0.469
PY (kg) 0.010 0.012 0.390 ois ool 0.173
LC(%) -0.035* 0.014 0.012 0.002 0.013 0.886
LY (ke) -0.034* 015 0.020 0.018 0.014 0.202
PER 0.040% 0.005 0.000 0.006

PMY = peak milk yield; ADMY = average daily milk yield, FC = fat content, PC = protein content, Lt
‘content; FY = fat yield; PY = protein yield; LY = lactose yield; PFR = protein-to-fat ratio,
“significant at P<0.05 **significant at P< 0.01

84

FC and FY were also proven to be affected by the CSN3 polymorphism. FC was
found to be highly significantly different among the three CSN3 genotypes (p<0.01), with
AA having the highest FC (4.45%), followed by BB (4.35%) and AB (4.30%). Similarly,
fat yield also exhibited the same trend, as shown in Table 4.3. Replacing an A allele with
a B allele is likely to result in a 0.04 decline in the FC and FY (Table 4.4). Freyer et al.
(1999) found evidence that the homozygous genotype BB is superior in fat and protein
percentage in Holstein and Holstein x Jersey crossbreds. BB genotype was also observed
to have significantly higher FC and shorter curd firming time in a study by Albarella and
colleagues (2020). On the contrary, previous studies suggest no association between FC
and FY and CSN3 genotypes (Ng-Kwai-Hang et al., 1984; Bovenhuis et al., 1992; Soyudal
et al. 2019). As explained by Duifhuis-Rivera et al. (2014), results from various studies
are contradictory and may depend on the cattle breed, country of origin, number of animals

studied and data analysis approach.

Consistent with the Eta correlation analysis results, CSN3 genotypes were also
proven to be associated with PC and PFR. PC was significantly highest in animals with the
BB genotype (3.8%), followed by AB (3.65%) and AA (3.52%) (p<0.01). Likewise, the
highest PFR was recorded for the BB genotype (0.888). This ratio was significantly higher
than that observed for the AB (0.865) and AA (0.807) (p<0.01). Based on the a, replacing
the A allele with the B allele significantly increased the PC by 0.143 and the PFR by 0.040
(p<0.01). This demonstrates the favorable effect of the B allele with respect to PC and
PER and confirms the findings of earlier studies in Holsteins (Ng-Kwai-Hang et al., 1984;

Bovenhuis et al., 1992; Freyer et al., 1999; Tsiaras et al., 2005; Zambrano-Burbano et al.,

85

2012; and Anggraeni et al., 2017), and other cattle breeds (Kucerova et al. 2006 in Czech
Fleckvieh; Gurses et al., 2016 in Brown Swiss; and Shaidullin et al., 2020 in Russian Black-
and-White). Rachagani and Gupta (2008), afrter concluding that BB genotype had more
influence on MY and PY, recommended the selection of BB animals to improve milk

production and protein yield without increasing the herd size of Sahiwal cattle in India.

Lastly, LC of animals with AA (4.69%) and AB (4.67%) genotypes were
significantly higher than that of BB (4.62%) (p<0.05). AA animals also showed a tendency
for higher LY than the AB and BB genotypes, but the differences were only significant at
10% level. There were very limited studies on the effect of CSN3 on this milk component.
Gurses et al. (2016) reported that AB genotypes had the highest LC among the three
genotypes in Holstein but no significant effect in Jersey and Brown Swiss, as also noted
by Deb et al. (2014) in Frieswal cattle, A study by Soyudal et al. (2019) which dealt with
a Holstein herd that exhibited unequal genotypic distribution among the CSN3 genotypes

reported no significant effect of the CSN3 variants on LY and LC.
Association of BLG Genotypes with Milk Production and Milk Quality Traits

Eta correlation results indicate that 8-lactoglobulin genotypes had negligible to
small effects on milk yield and milk quality traits, having n? values ranging from only

0.005 for LC to 0.027 for ADMY (Table 4.2).

Univariate ANOVA results presented in Table 4.3 corroborate with those of Eta

correlation. There were no significant relationships between the BLG marker and the milk

86

ited

yield and quality traits except for the ADMY. Animals with the BB genotypes exhi
the highest ADMY (12.26 kg; p<0.05), followed by AA (11.5 kg) and AB (11.04 kg). The
calculated allele substitution effect for ADMY was 0.438 kg but was not statistically
significant (p>0.10). This is in agreement with the results obtained by Singh et al. (2014)
on Indian Frieswal (HF x Sahiwal) cattle wherein AB and BB genotypes had significantly
higher total MY and PMY than AA. Contrastingly, Aleandri et al. (1990) observed a higher
MY in first-lactating Holstein cows having the AA genotype. Swedish HF with AA
genotype was reported to produce more milk than BB cows (Czerniawska-Piatkowska et
al., 2011). Barbosa et al. (2019) concluded that there was no relationship between the BLG
variants with the 305-day MY of Girolando cattle, a dairy breed in Brazil that resulted from

the crossing of Gyr (a B. indicus breed) and Holstein (B. taurus).

There were no significant differences among the three genotypes in terms of the
remaining milk traits, namely PMY, FC, FY, PC, PY, LC, LY and PFR. However, there
was a tendency for animals with the BB genotype to have higher PMY, FY, LC and LY
compared to the other two genotypes while AB genotype had higher FC and PC than the
homozygotes. In accordance with the present results, Ng-Kwai-Hang et al. (1984),
Anggraeni et al. (2017), and Soyudal et al. (2019) also did not find any association between
BLG and MY, FC and PC on Holstein-Friesian breeds in Taiwan, Indonesia and Turkey,
respectively. Neither did Ojala et al. (1997) on Holstein and Jersey breeds, Glazko et al.
(2016) on Black-and-White Holsteinized and Ayshire breeds, and Mir et al. (2014) on

Holstein, Girolando, Czech Flechvieh and Sahiwal cattle breeds. Gradinaru et al. (2013)

87

and Neamt et al. (2017) stated that BLG polymorphism did not affect PC and FY. No

significant effect on LC was reported by Tsiaras et al. (2005) and Zaglool et al. (2016).

Contrary to our results for milk quality, the B allele was found to be favorable for
fat content (Ron et al., 1994 on Israeli Holsteins; Tsiaras et al., 2005 on Holsteins in Greece;
Beny et al., 2010 on HF x Jersey crossbreds; Czemiawska-Piatkowska et al., 2011 on
Swedish HF). According to Zaglool et al. (2016), the BB genotype was associated with a
higher fat percentage (3.85%), compared to AA (2.94%) and AB (2.97%) among Egyptian
Holsteins, such that substituting the A with the B allele enhanced the fat content by 0.525%.
Berry et al. (2010) in their work with F2 HF x Jersey crossbreds in New Zealand found out
that BB animals produced milk with significantly higher FC than AA animals.
Furthermore, with regards to protein yield, milk of AA cows exceeded milk obtained from
cows with AB and BB genotypes (Sabour et al., 1996). According to Van der Berg et al.
(1992), AA individuals produce milk with more BLG, less casein and less fat. Thus, milk
produced by BB cows yielded significantly more cheese than that produced by AA-

genotype cows.

Our findings suggest that since BLG polymorphisms were not highly significantly
associated with favorable milk quality, this locus may not be reliably used as a marker.
However, because there seemed to be some tendency for certain genotypes to show
association, further studies using a larger population size should be conducted to verify the

present results.

88

Combined Genotype Effects of CSN3 and BLG on Milk Traits

Strucken et al. (2015) emphasized the importance of considering not only the
effects of individual genes on milk production and milk quality, but also those of the
combined genotype effects. For quantitative traits such as milk production and milk
quality, the activity of many genes may interact and may even depend on each other.
Hence, marker effects should not just be studied independently from all other markers. The

effect of combined genotypes must also be evaluated.

Tables 4.5 and 4.6 show the results of the analysis of the joint effect of CSN3-BLG
genotypes. All nine possible genotype combinations of CSN3 and BLG genes were
observed in the HxJ crossbred population. The ABAB genotype combination was the most
frequent (22.4%), as was also reported by Matejicek et al. (2008) in Czech Fleckvieh cattle,
followed by BBAB, ABAA and ABBB. The least common genotype combinations were

AAAA (3.9%) and BBBB (4.8%).

Regarding PMY, its association with the combined CSN3-BLG genotype was only
significant at 10% level (p=0.069). Nonetheless, it is interesting to note that the interaction
had an evident effect on the trait, as illustrated in Fig. 4.2. The CSN3 AB and BLG BB
genotypes were typically characterized by low PMY. However, when the BLG BB
genotype was combined with the CSN3 AB genotype, the PMY went up to a very high
value (29.66 kg). Since the PMY was highly correlated with ADMY (r= 0.712), it can be
expected that the ADMY of ABBB combined genotypes are also high. However, the

differences in ADMY across the genotype combinations were not statistically significant.

89

Table 4.5. Genotype combinations for the x-casein (CSN3) and B-lactoglobulin (BLG)
genes and their frequencies of occurrence in a Holstein x Jersey crossbred
cattle (Bos taurus L.) population in Batangas, Philippines.

CSN3-BLG

GENOTYPE COMBINATION, NUMBER FREQUENCY
AAAA 9
AAAB 15
AABB 18
ABAA 36
ABAB 51
ABBB 35
BBAA 16
BBAB 37
BBBB ul

Total 228

90

‘ones vej-or-ursroud = yaa ‘Iat4 250198] = A ‘PIOIS
uppioud = Ad ‘Pla 18} = Aa ‘tuoru0d asoroe] = 37 ‘UaIU0d wIaroud = Sg ‘UarHOD ej = Oa ‘PION ANU AuEp oBeLOnE = ANY ‘PION tw Ieod = AWE
or 0> a eweoynsis,

sora gor gor0 ¥sr'0 96¢°0 ssro 870 zeeo 6900 antvacd
maltco Lieo | 10% 6cr0| wc ¥ 09% | cororo6co | wrioxe | Vor HO | s91F6e%] seeroTOL| ore 1061 aaa
ee9zco 7980 | zozorseso| sci Foc | osrorszvo| inizee| carorvaro| oo1eivy| ocprozit | wBeLFIsel avaa
pecorseeo | cozorceso| sxircoy| ivorsero| wirere| irorsvo| correre| cevecrtt| @izeresre wag
esoror liso | sezoresvo| wi Fo9%| szzorsovo| ecitese| suzorazco| wisesy| orotors1| «zi F967 aay
palzeor soso | izzorseso| eet Fose| serorsor0| oe1es9€ | oocoroeso| eo1szey| mpFescl | @resrorer ava
srcorvicn| cecorvio | mcieisr| erorvoso| ewiFsee | sovorzeso| esizory| cossicer| @898* 967 way
ses0t0F 8080 | sozorerso| acrezr| zsrorcoro| ici Fore | eavorsevo| soiFary| seyret | @lo8Foriz aavv
<oorors9c0| cerorzaro| reizosr| scrorssco| ieirere| sroForO| wisioy| Ieerccor| woerecee avvy
wroz0r Lio | sezorseso| ort zoe | zororszro| azitore | o1zorosso| oo1eery| weeesct | WO F LH LZ ww
NOILVNIGNOD

niga @pat} (WOT Gad] (ood @paa] oa] @) away +) And | -3dALOND
‘D74-£NSD

“sourddriyd ‘sedueyeg ut uonendod pasgssoso Aasiof Xx ulo}s[oH & Ur
s}re3 4]1W Uo sauad (7g) UINgo]Soyx]-q pur (¢VSD) Uldsed-4 ay} Joy suOHUIQUIOD adKjoUad Jo SATA “9'p AGEL


35

30

25

20

15

Peak Milk Yeild (kg)

10

Figure 4.2.

91

CSN3 Genotype

—a"

--48

AA AB 8B
BLG Genotype

Effect of genotype combinations for the x-casein (CSN3) and B-
lactoglobulin (BLG) genes on peak milk yield of a Holstein x Jersey
crossbred cattle (Bos taurus L.) population in Batangas, Philippines.

92

Nevertheless, it is worth mentioning that the highest ADMY was recorded from
cow QC-25629 which was genotyped as ABBB. Moreover, it can also be seen from Fig.
4.2 that AAAA animals also exhibited high PMY. Cow QC-1018 (AAAA genotype) had

the highest PMY in the herd.

Moreover, the interaction between the two genes did not show significant effects
on the other traits, namely, FC, PC, LC, FY, PY, and LY (p>0.10). However, the PFR was

observed to vary across genotype combinations although the p-value was 0.105.

Therefore, it can be concluded that based on our data, the interaction between the
CSN3 and BLG genes did not affect the studied milk traits, although there is a tendency for

ABBB and AAAA animals to have high peak milk yield and high PER, respectively.

To our knowledge, there are no reports yet on the combined effects of CSN3 and
BLG genes on milk production traits, as all studies concerning these two loci had only
looked at the individual main effects. However, a few studies have considered the
combined effects of other loci. According to Zheng et al. (2011), genotype combination
may reflect the interactions of multiple gene effects in a certain quantitative trait, Albarella
et al. (2020) detected more variability when they considered the composite genotypes of
the three loci they studied (ie. CSN/SI, CSN2 and CSN3) compared to when they are
considered separately. Meanwhile, in a study involving sheep, Jawasreh et al. (2019) found
a significant impact of the combined effect of BLG and PLR (prolactin) on milk production
even though the polymorphisms in these two genes did not show much association with

milk yield when analyzed individually. They also examined BLG and CSN3 but also found

93

that the interaction between these two genes did not improve milk production traits in
sheep. In the present study, the combined effects of CSN3 and BLG on milk production
traits should be further investigated using a bigger sample size to provide for a more robust

analysis.

Multiple Regression Analyses

Itis truly rare that a particular dependent variable such as milk yield or milk quality
can be explained by only one variable. Thus, it is necessary to conduct a multiple linear
regression, which is also simply referred to as multiple regression. It is a statistical
technique that uses more than one available explanatory or independent variables (also
known as predictors or regressors) to predict the outcome of a response or dependent
variable using the best fitting model (Ross, 2017). For this study, multiple regression was
conducted on each of the nine milk traits. Initially, a full model was used, which consisted
of all available predictors (i.e. the CSN3 genotypes, the BLG genotypes, the CSN3-BLG
combined genotypes, calving number, age at start of calving, and breed composition) (Eq.
1). It should be noted that CSN3 BB and BLG BB genotypes, as well as the combinations
that involve them (i.e. CSN3 BB x BLG AA, CSN3 BB x BLG AB, CSN3 AA-BLG BB,
CSN3 AB-BLG BB) were not shown in the model for all the milk traits, because they were
regarded as the reference variables after dummy-coding.

MilkTrait = By + B,CSN3,q, + B2CSN3qp; + BsBLGaa, + ByBLGap, (Eq.1)
+BsCSN3 qa; X BLG aa; + BeCSN3 qa; X BLGap, +

+ByCSN3qp; x BLGaa; + BoCSN3 5, X BLGaB,
+BoBREEDC; + B,oAGESTART, + By ,CALV; + &;

94

Aside from the usual check for normality and equality of error variances, this model
was evaluated based on the adjusted R2, investigation of scatter plots of residuals,
significance of the specific predictor variables, interpretability of the results and absence
of multicollinearity (Uyanik and Guler, 2013). Firstly, it is desirable for a regression model
to have relatively high adjusted R? since this value indicates the proportion of the variation
that can be explained by the model. The scatter plots of the residuals versus the predicted
values should show randomly scattered points, indicating random errors and homogeneity
of error variances. The p-value (sig.) of a particular predictor, as well as the whole model,
must be lower than 0.05, indicating that the predictor has a significant effect on the
dependent variable at the set 5% level of significance. In cases when transformation of the
data was necessary, it was performed taking into account the interpretability of the results
while aiming for the satisfaction of the assumptions of the statistical tests. Lastly,
multicollinearity should be avoided. It happens when predictors that are highly correlated
were simultaneously included in the model. This usually leads to biased estimation, sign
switching and bloated standard errors. For this reason, the VIF (variance inflation factor)
should not exceed 10 (Ott and Longnecker, 2010). The initial model was then modified by
excluding certain regressors or through data transformation and re-evaluated repetitiously
to optimize the regression parameters until the best fitted model was obtained which is now

presented here.

Table 4.7 summarizes the results of multiple regression analyses for the nine milk

traits.

95

sequin

Ae) — A TVD

Surayes Jo eis we o8e — LYVISIOV
uontsodusoo paaiq — agua

Piaik uisioid = Ad
quajuos utaioud = Da
prsté1ey = Ad

ones 1ey-0-utarord = Yad
PIat& asorse] = AT
ua}uos as019e| = 37

qu9U09 185 = Dd

rath ru Airep oBesone = AWAY

PIatA ypu yeod = AW

Toro>d ve yueoyutis,, S0'0>d te weoywuas,
sto aoo~—~=CeOD~«TOD =O ——=C*sSOO—=CLRO ry TEPDISTIY
~ ~ = ~ ~ ~ = LeLo «PB O- Vo
107 1000 ~ 1000 «e100 100° 000 $900 E10 Luv1sg0¥
9100-000" = S50 HOD 44890497010" we HLT 4S agaue
- = ¥e00 - — 6t00- = ore ey 1a X"ENSO
- - > - 8S woe x*YENSD
- - - - - ova x¥ENSD
- - - - - = = wore XYENSD
woo - ~ 100 - 910 sero "018
8200- - ~ PEO Sn ed worg
oo = L010 seth 0500 s100- ZIg0 +4850 ENSO
+9500 £900 40400 sf800 5100200 eit olteT YENSO
woo oso LI gerl sero shwr oun (queisvoa)
wiaia
MIN TIA
OWVULVd —QTAIA. IN3INOD —GT3IA. LN3INOD = TIA. INAINOD.—ATIVa. TI
“OLNIGLO¥d _3S019V1_3SOLDV1_NILOWd _NIBLOWa. Avi vs _g0VwaAV___ Vad suousianid

“("] snanp} sog) ayes posqssoso Aasiag x UlD)S[OH{ JO syed} yy! ouIU
410} s}apou! uorssax8ou apduyjnus aup Jo ;x parsnfpe pue sopo1pasd yoea Jo (g) stua!oyJo0o UoIssoIBOY “Lp IPL

96

Peak Milk Yield

Eq. 2 and Table 4.7 present the optimized regression model for PMY. Some
predictors in the initial model (i.e. genotype combinations CSN3 AA x BLG AA, CSN3 AA
x BLG AB) were omitted from the final model because their p-values exceeded 0.05 (and
even 0.10) and their VIFs were higher than 10. Likewise, their inclusion in the model
resulted in a diminished adjusted R?. These signify that these genotype combinations did
not really affect PMY.

PMY; = Bo + Bi CSN3 a; + B2CSN3,p; + BpBLGan, + BxBLGap, (Eq.2)
+BsCSN3,qp; X BLGaq, + BeCSN3qp, X BLGap,
+BBREEDC; + ByAGESTART; + ByCALV; + &
The low p-values (p<0.05) for the CSN3 AA genotype, BLG AA genotype, CSN3 AB
x BLG AB combined genotype and age at start of calving reveal their significant effects on
PMY. The even lower p-values (p<0.01) for CSN3 AB genotype, CSN3 AA- BLG AA
combined genotype and breed composition suggest a more significant effect on PMY.
Interpreting the 8 values of these significant predictors, it can be said that cows having the
CSN3 AA genotype can be expected to be higher in PMY by 2.327 kg compared to cows
having the CSN3 BB genotype (the reference genotype), with all the other factors such as
calving number, age at start of calving, and BLG genotype constant. This result matches
that of our univariate ANOVA analysis, although in the latter, the differences among the

genotypes were not statistically significant.

97

Moreover, cows that are more Jersey (J>H) in terms of breed composition are
expected to have PMY lower by 4.054 kg than cows that are J=H, again holding other
factors constant. Holstein breeds have been regarded as the breed that produces the highest
milk yield among all dairy breeds. Thus, our result is logical since the lesser the Holstein
breed proportion relative to Jersey in the crossbred, the less similar it is to the Holstein, the

lower the milk yield will be.

For every one month increase in age at the start of lactation, PMY is expected to
increase by 0.113 kg, with other factors held constant. This result supports previous
research by Atashi and his coworkers (2021) who explained that heifers which calved in a
later age were given enough time to grow so that at the onset of lactation, their bodies,
especially the milk secretory tissues, have been adequately prepared to divert all nutrients

and energy towards milk synthesis.

Cows with the BLG AA genotype showed PMY which was higher by 2.975 kgs
than those with BLG BB genotype (p<0.05). This appears to contradict the trend observed
from the univariate analysis. However, since the multiple regression model considered
the genotype interaction as well, it is not sufficient to look at the individual effects of the
genes. Thus, to interpret the effect of the CSN3 AB-BLG BB genotype interaction, using
the model (Eq. 2), the derivative of the dependent variable PMY with respect to the
predictor variable (i.e. change in Y over change in X) was computed (Eq. 3 and 4) as

follows:

98

apy,
Teanga, = B2 + BsBLGan, + BoBLGa, (Eq:3)

4.058 + (5.183 x BLGaq,) + (-3.167 x BLGap,) (Eq4)

Eq. 4 tells us that the difference in PMY of the CSN3 AB genotype compared to CSN3
BB genotype is dependent on the BLG genotype of the animal. Thus, applying Eq. 4 and
using | and 0 as multipliers since they correspond to the value of the dummy variables for
BLG AA genotype and BLG AB genotype, respectively, it can be said that a BLG AA cow
with CSN3 AB genotype is expected to produce 1.125 kg lower PMY compared to a BLG
‘AA cow with CSN3 BB genotype (Eq. 5). Similarly, a BLG AB cow with CSN3 AB
genotype is predicted to have 0.891 kg higher PMY compared to a BLG AB cow with
CSN3 BB genotype (Eq. 6). Lastly, a BLG BB cow with CSN3 AB genotype will attain a
PMY that is 4.058 kgs higher than the PMY of a cow with combined genotype of BLG BB

and CSN3 BB (Eq. 7).

4.058 + (—5.183 x 1) + (—3.167 x 0) = -1.125 (Eq. 5)
SPMYL_ = 4.058 + (-5.183 x 0) + (~3.167 x 1) = 0.891 (Eq. 6)

OCSN3a5; Gs. Yraltes Det 5

FEL = 4.058 + (5.183 x 0) + (-3.167 x 0) = 4.058 (Eq. 7)

This marked increase in PMY of animals with combined genotypes of CSN3 AB
and BLG BB corroborates our earlier observation based on univariate analysis that the

interaction of these two genotypes is favorable in enhancing the PMY.

99

This model has an optimal adjusted R? value of 0.111, indicating that 11.1% in the
variation in the PMY can be explained by this model. This value is rather low and may be
improved by including more variables, including other candidate genes, that can possibly

contribute to PMY.
Average Daily Milk Yield

The optimized components of the regression model for ADMY are presented in Eq.
8 and Table 4.7.

ADMY; = Bo + B:CSN3 gq; + B2CSN3 gp, + BsBLGaa, + ByBLGap, (Eq8)

+BsBREEDC, + BAGESTART, + ByCALV; + &

According to Table 4.7, the effects of the CSN3 and BLG genotypes and their
interaction on ADMY are not statistically significant (p<0.05). However, there is a
tendency (p<0.10) for CSN3 AA cows to produce 1.279 L higher ADMY than CSN3 BB
ones, and for BLG AB cows to produce 1.016 L lower ADMY than BLG BB ones, keeping

all other factors constant. These trends corroborate with those from univariate ANOVA.

It can also be seen that breed composition has a highly significant effect on the
ADMY (p<0.01). The model reflects that cows that are more Jersey are expected to have
ADMY that is lower by 1.749 L. This accords with our earlier observation based on
correlation analysis and with the findings of Ritsawai et al. (2014). Similarly, Wongpom
et al. (2017) reported the same trend using a Thai multiple breed farm population.

However, they also pointed out that upgraded crossbreds with high Holstein fractions may

100

fail to reach their high milk yield potential due to the hot and humid climatic conditions in
Thailand (Koonawootrittriron et al., 2009; Seangjun et al., 2009). Generally, cows with
Holstein fractions higher than 93.7 % have been found to be more sensitive to heat stress
(Boonkum et al., 2011). Thus, to reach the high milk production levels expected from H>J
crossbreds, appropriate management in terms of housing and feeding must also be

improved.

Like with PMY, the cow’s age at the start of lactation also appeared to affect

ADMY. A month of earlier calving meant a 0.065 decrease in the ADMY.

This model, however, has a low adjusted R, indicating that it can only explain
4.6% of the variation in ADMY. It is possible that other variables and perhaps other genes
have more pronounced effects on the trait. It is also possible that another form of

relationship, instead of linear, might be involved in the expression of this trait.
Fat Content

The parameters of the regression model for FC are presented in Eq. 9 and Table
4.7. The calving number was omitted in the model because its high correlation with the
age at the start of lactation (VIF >10) was noticeably lowering the adjusted R? value of the
model. Also, for this milk trait, it was necessary to perform natural logarithmic
transformation of the FC data to fit a more linearized model and to ensure homogeneity of
error variances at different levels of prediction.

logFC; = Bo + BiCSN3 qa, + B2CSN3pB, (Eq9)
+B3BREEDC; + B,AGESTART, + &;

lol

As a consequence of the transformation, the interpretation of the effects necessitates
a different approach. In this case, the marginal effect of a predictor is equivalent to
(e4-1) x 100 %. Thus, computing for the effect of CSN3 AA, the formula
(9-027_ 1) x 100 % tells us that cows with CSN3 AA genotype are predicted to have
2.737% higher fat content that those with CSN3 BB genotype. This verifies our earlier

observation that FC was significantly enhanced by the CSN3 A allele.

Breed composition and age at the start of lactation also had significant effects on
FC (p<0.05) based on the regression model. Cows that are more Jersey (J>H) are expected
to have 2.566% less fat than those with J=H breed composition. Jerseys have been reported
to have higher fat content than Holsteins (Franzoi et al., 2020). Moreover, a 1.001%
increase in FC can be predicted for every one month increase in the age of the cow at the
start of its lactation, keeping all other factors constant. This confirms the results of Ettema

and Santos (2004).

The adjusted R? of this model was 0.087, indicating that only 8.7% of the variation

in FC can be accounted for by the model.

Fat Yield

The regression model parameters for fat yield are presented in Eq. 10 and Table

47.

FY; = Bo + BiCSN3 qa; + BoCSN3 yp; + B3BLGaa, + ByBLGap, — (Eq.10)
+BsCSN3qp, X BLGap, + BgBREEDC,+ B,AGESTART, + €

102

The model for FY indicates that the FY of CSN3 AA cows can be predicted to be
significantly higher than that of CSN3 BB cows (p<0.05), holding all other factors constant.
Also, J>H cows can be expected to have FY lower by 0.068 kg compared to J=H cows.
All the other parameters in the model (BLG genotypes, ABAB combined genotype and age
at start of lactation) tend to affect FY but not significantly. Based on the B coefficients,
CSN3 AB has a higher FY than CSN3 BB while BLG AA has a lower FY than BLG BB.
Also, considering the genotype interaction, CSN3ap x BLGas is higher in FY than CSN3ap

x BLGas by 0.039 kg.

This model can account for only 5.5% of the variation in FY.

Protein Content

The regression model for PC had similar components as that for FC (Eq. 11 and
Table 4.7). However for this trait, the dependent variable PC had to undergo logarithm
and inverse transformation, as this resulted in a model with better adjusted R? (0.342). This
indicates that a relatively large proportion (34.2%) of the variation in PC can be explained

by this model.

log (7 — PC;) = Bo + BxCSN3aq, + B2CSN3,B, (Eq.11)
+B,BREEDC; + ByAGESTART; + &;

It is presented in Table 4,7 that the CSN3 genotypes AA and AB were highly

significantly different from the CSN3 BB genotype in terms of PC (p<0.01). To interpret

their effects, the marginal effect of the predictor X on PC is equivalent to Zé =

103

—B(7 — PC;). Thus, this equation shows that the amount of change will depend on the
initial magnitude of PC, and a positive B will cause a decrease in PC while a negative 8
will cause an increase in PC. Applying this concept, since the B of CSN3 AA was positive
(0.083), the PC of cows with CSN3 AA genotype can be expected to be lower than that of
CSN3 BB. To be exact, since the mean PC of CSN3 BB individuals was 3.8% (Table 4.3),
the mean PC of CSN3 AA cows can be projected to be lower by 0.2656 %, holding other
factors constant. This computed difference was calculated from [—B(7 — PC;) =
-0.083(7-3.8) = -0.2656]. This result confirms our earlier findings that the CSN3 B allele
is favorable with regards to PC, as what was also reported by various studies (Ng-Kwai-
Hang et al., 1984; Bovenhuis et al., 1992; Freyer et al., 1999; Tsiaras et al., 2005;

Zambrano-Burbano et al., 2012; and Anggraeni et al., 2017).

Regarding the effect of the age at start of lactation on PC, as age increases, PC
decreases. For example, a cow with 3.67% PC will decrease its PC by 0.003% if it would
start lactating at a later age (i.e. 1 month older), as was calculated from [-0.001(7-3.67) =
0.003]. Thus, this could indicate that milk with higher protein content can be obtained

from cows that started milking at an earlier age.
Protein Yield

Eq. 12 and Table 4.7 indicate the parameters of the best fitting model for milk

protein yield.

104

PY; = Bo + BrCSN3qq, + B2CSN3qp; + BzBLGaq, + ByBLGap, —(Eq.12)
+BsCSN3 qx; X BLGap; + BeBREEDC;+ BpAGESTART, + &;

The only predictor that can be expected to affect PY significantly was the breed
composition. That is, the J>H cows will have a PY lower by 0.055 kg than J=H cows. All
the other parameters in the model (BLG genotypes, ABAB combined genotype and age at
start of lactation) tend to affect PY but not significantly. CSN3 AA and AB cows tend to
have higher PY than CSN3 BB, as suggested by the positive 8 values (0.017 and 0.033,
respectively), BLG AA and AB are expected to have lower PY than BLG BB, as indicated
by the negative B values, -0.030 and -0.021, respectively. As for the interaction, CSN3,s x
BLGas tends to have a lower FY than CSN3ge x BLGae by 0.001 kg. This was computed

by adding the B coefficients of CSN3,s (0.033) and CSN3ap x BLGap (-0.034).

Based on the adjusted R?, 2.5% of the variation in PY can be explained by the

model.
Lactose Content

After repetitious evaluation of the initial models, the only predictors left in the
model for lactose content were the CSN3 genotypes (Eq. 13 and Table 4.7). All other
predictors had very high p-values and VIF, or could have drastically lowered the adjusted

R? and were therefore removed from the model.

LC; = Bo + BiCSN3qq, + BoCSN3,p, + &: (Eq.13)

105

The regression coefficients indicate that cows with CSN3 AA and AB genotypes
can be predicted to produce milk with 0.07% and 0.051% higher lactose content,
respectively, compared to CSN3 BB cows. This confirms our prior finding that the CSN3
Aallele improves the LC of milk. This model also shows that LC was also not influenced
by the BLG genotypes, the interaction of the CSN3 and BLG genotypes, calving number,
age at start of calving and breed composition, Franzoi et al. (2020) noted that generally,

Holstein and Jersey breeds have similar lactose contents (4.5%).

Based on the adjusted R? of this model, only 2.2% of the variation in LC can be

explained by the model.
Lactose Yield

The parameters in the regression model for LY are listed in Eq. 14 and Table 4.7.

LY; = Bo + BiCSN3aq, + BoCSN3ap, + B3BLGan, + BsBLGap, (Eq. 14)
+B .BREEDC,+ B,AGESTART, + &

Similar to PY, the only predictor that can be expected to significantly affect LY
was the breed composition. Higher LY is expected in cows having a JcH breed
composition. There is a tendency for the other listed variables to affect LY but their effects
were not significant. CSN3 AA cows tend to yield more lactose than CSN3 BB ones while

BLG AA tend to have lower LY than BLG BB.

This model can explain a small proportion (3.8%) of the variation in LY.

106

Protein-to-Fat Ratio

According to the regression model for PFR (Eq. 15 and Table 4.7), there were two
variables that can significantly affect PFR. These are the CSN3 genotypes and age at the

start of calving.

log (2 — PFR,) = Bo + Bi CSN3aa, + BoCSN3 ap, + BaBLGan, (Eq. 15)
+BsBLG ap, + BeBREEDC,+ ByAGESTART, + &;
Due to the log and inverse transformations that were done on the data, the

dependent variable PFR became log( 2- PFR,). Similar to what was done for PC, the
interpretation of the effects was not ordinary. The marginal effect of the predictor is

equivalent to °°" = —6(2 — PFR,). Since the mean PFR of CSN3 BB cows was 0.888
(Table 4.3), the difference between CSN3 AA and CSN3 BB cows in terms of PFR was
computed as [~8(2 — PFR,) = —0.075(2 — 0.888) = —0.0834]. This means that
CSN3 AA cows can be expected to have PFR that is lower by 0.0834 than CSN3 BB cows.

This is in conjunction with our earlier discussion considering the effect of the B allele on

PFR.

Similarly, the expected difference between CSN3 AB and CSN3 BB cows in terms
of PFR was computed as [—B(2 — PFR;) = —0.018(2 — 0.888) = —0.02], with CSN3
AB cows that are lower in PFR by 0.02. This is in conjunction with our earlier discussion

considering the enhancing effect of the B allele on PFR.

107

Moreover, the age at start of calving significantly affects PFR. A higher PFR is
expected from cows that calved earlier, as supported by the positive B value (0.001). In
terms of breed composition, J>H cows show some tendency have higher PFR than J=H

cows, as indicated by the negative 8 coefficient (-0.016).

This model has a relatively higher adjusted R2, suggesting that it can explain 25.5%

of the variation in PFR.

Summary and Conclusion

This study aimed to determine the association of the SNP variants of two candidate
genes, CSN3 gene for x-casein and the BLG gene for 8-lactoglobulin, on milk yield and
milk quality traits of HxJ crossbred milking cows in a commercial dairy farm in the

Philippines.

Using the PCR-RFLP genotype profiles for CSN3 and BLG genes of a Philippine
population of HxJ crossbreds, the individual and joint effects of CSN3 and BLG genes on
peak milk yield (PMY), average daily milk yield (ADMY), fat content (FC) and yield (FY),
protein content (PC) and yield (PY), lactose content (LC) and yield (LY), and protein-to-
fat ratio (PFR) were determined using two approaches, namely univariate ANOVA and
multiple linear regression (MLR). CSN3 A allele was proven to be significantly associated
with higher FC, FY and LC while CSN3 B was associated with higher PC and PFR. On
the contrary, the results for BLG were not as conclusive as those for CSN3 since BLG

variants that were previously reported to have strong correlation were found to be not

108

associated to these traits at all. This may be due to inconsistencies in rearing conditions,
breed used, and data analysis methods used by different researchers. In our study, BLG
was observed to be associated only with two traits, namely ADMY and FY, with the BLG
B allele contributing to higher ADMY and FY. However, BLG B also exhibited some
tendency to increase PMY, PC, PY, and LY, but not significantly. As such, further
validation on the effect of BLG using more samples is necessary. Furthermore, the
interaction of the two loci was revealed to have some effect on PMY. When considered
individually, CSN3 and BLG did not show any association with PMY. However, when
taken jointly, cows with combined CSN3-BLG genotype of ABBB were observed to have
a considerable increase in PMY. Contrastingly, a lower PMY was observed among cows

with ABAA combined genotype.

Our results suggest that increasing the frequency of the CSN3 B allele would have
a positive effect on milk that is sold to cheese manufacturers. Since this allele has been
shown to enhance protein content and protein-to-fat ratio significantly, we can expect a
higher cheese yield from milk obtained from CSN3 BB cows since a high protein content
has been shown to highly correlated with higher cheese yield (Verdier-Metz et al., 2001).
As the breeder selects for milk with high protein content, lactose content may also be
reduced since it has been shown in this study that CSN3 B was associated with lower LC
and LY. Alternatively, milk fat content can be improved by selecting for cows that are
homozygous for the CSN3 A variant. This would benefit herds that produce milk needed
to make soft and more flavorful cheese. As for milk yield, since CSN3 A and BLG B have

shown strong association with higher ADMY, these variants can be used as markers to

109

select for improving milk yield. Specifically, as revealed by the results of multiple
regression and univariate analyses, the goal of breeders should be to produce more cows
with the CSN3-BLG combined genotype of ABBB. Thus, these SNPs could be used as
potential markers to putatively identify enhanced genetic predisposition for milk yield and

quality among dairy crossbreds in the Philippines.

Although the results of these two approaches generally agree with each other, MLR
has the advantage of being able to explore simultaneously the effect of several predictors
of a particular milk trait. In this study, aside from the individual effects of CSN3 and BLG
genotypes, the interaction between these two loci were simultaneously evaluated alonwith
non-genotypic variables such as the breed composition, age at start of calving, and calving
number. It was observed that cows that are more Jersey had lower values for all nine milk
traits. Also, cows that calved in an older age or have calved previously tend to have higher

milk yield and fat content, but lower protein content and protein-to-fat ratio.

Also, it is important to note that this study could have been impossible to undertake
without the phenotypic data that were obtained from farm records. As Zambrano-Burbano
et al. (2012) emphasized, it is truly essential to keep reliable permanent records of
pedigrees, as well as all the productive and reproductive events of the herd because having
these information makes it possible to measure genetic variability and identify the superior
genetic qualities of animals through mathematical models. In this study, it was necessary
to limit the milk yield data within 240 days of lactation because a number of animals lacked

records to complete the usual 305-day lactation.

110

In conclusion, this study was able to demonstrate that the CNS3 and BLG variants
affect the yield and quality of milk from HxJ crossbreds in a commercial farm in the
Philippines. These findings can be applied in devising effective selection procedures for
breeding cattle with improved milk yield and composition within the crossbred population

in the Philippines.

Literature Cited

ALBARELLA, S. M. SELVAGGI, E. DANZA, G. COSENZA, S. CAIRA, A. SCALONI,
A. FONTANA. V. PERETTI, and F. CIOTOLA. 2020. Influence of the casein
composite genotype on milk quality and coagulation properties in the endangered
Agarolese cattle breed. Animals 10: 892.

ALEANDRI, R., L. BUTTAZZONI, J. SCHNEIDER, A. CAROLI and R. DAVOLI. 1990.
The effects of milk protein polymorphisms on milk components and cheese-
producing ability. J. Dairy Sci. 73, 241-255.

ANG, P. 2020. Dairy and Products Annual of the Philippines. United States Department
of Agricultural Foreign Agricultural Service Report RP2020-0074. pp. 10. DAWES
RJ. 2008, Breeds of Cattle. 2" ed, TRS Publishing Corp. Springfield, Missouri
pp. 391.

ANGGRAENI, A., C. SUMANTRI, A. FARAJALLAH and E. ANDREAS. 2017. Kappa-
casein genotype frequencies in Holstein-Friesian dairy cattle in West Java province.
Med Pet. 33: 61-67.

ATASHI, H., A. ASAADI, and M. HOSTENS. 2021. Association between age at first
calving and lactation performance, lactation curve, calving interval, calf birth
weight and dystocia in Holstein dairy cows. PLoS One 16(1): e0244825.

BARBOSA, S.B.P., LIM. DE ARAUJO, M.F. MARTINS, E.C. DA SILVA, L.A.
JACOPINI, A.M.V. BATISTA and M.V.B. DA SILVA. 2019. Genetic association
of variations in the kappa-casein and B-lactoglobulin genes with milk traits in
Girolando cattle. Rev. Bras. Saude Prod. Anim. 20:1-12.

BERRY, S.D., N. LOPEZ-VILLALOBOS, E.M. BEATTIE, S.R. DAVIS, L.F. ADAMS,
N.L. THOMAS, A.E. ANKERSMIT-UDY, A.M. STANFELD, K. LEHNERT,
H.E. WARD, J.A. ARIAS, R.J. SPLEMAN and R.G. SNELL. 2010. Mapping a
quantitative trait locus for the concentration of B-lactoglobulin in milk and the

mW

effect of &-lactoglobulin genetic variants on the composition of milk from Holstein-
Friesian x Jersey crossbred cows. New Zealand Veterinary Journal 58(1):1-5.

BOONKUM, W., I. MISZTAL, M. DUANGJINDA, V. PATTARAJINDA, S.
TUMWASORN and J. SANPOTE. 2011. Genetic effects of heat stress on milk
yield of Thai Holstein crossbreds. J. Dairy Sci. 94: 487-492.

BOVENHUIS, H. J.A. Van Arendonk JA and S. Korver. 1992 Associations between milk
protein polymorphisms and milk production traits. Journal of Dairy Science 75
2549-2559.

CASSELL, B. 2007. Mechanisms of inbreeding depression and heterosis for profitable
dairying. Proc. 4th Biennial W. E. Petersen Symposium, University of Minnesota,
St. Paul. University of Minnesota Press, St. Paul. pp. 1-6.

COFFEY, E.L., B. HORAN, R.D. EVANS and D.P. BERRY. 2016. Milk production and
fertility performance of Holstein, Friesian, and Jersey purebred cows and their
respective crosses in seasonal-calving commercial farms. J. Dairy Sci. 99:5681—
5689.

CZERNIAWSKA-PIATKOWSKA, E., M. SZEWCZUK, A. OLSZEWSKA and E.
CHOCILOWICZ. 2011. Association between beta-lactoglobulin (LGB)
polymorphismand yield and composition of milk of holstein-friesian cows
imported from Sweden. Acta Sci. Pol., Zootechnica 10 (1) 2011: 9-18.

DAWES RJ. 2008. Breeds of Cattle. 2"! ed. TRS Publishing Corp.: Missouri. pp. 391.

DEB, R. U. SINGH, S. KUMAR, R. SINGH, G. SENGAR AND A. SHARMA. 2014.
Genetic polymorphism and association of kappa-casein gene with milk production
traits among Frieswal (HF x Sahiwal) cross breed of Indian origin. Iranian Journal
of Veterinary Research, Shiraz University 15(4): 406-406.

DEKKERS, J.C.M. 2012. Application of Genomics Tools to Animal Breeding Current
Genomics 13: 207-212.

DUIFHUIS-RIVERA, T., C. LEMUS-FLORES, M.A. AYALA-VALDOVINOS, D.R.
SANCHEZ-CHIPRES, J. GALINDO, 0. GARCIA, K. MEJIA-MARTINEZ and
E. GONZALES-COVARRUBIAS. 2014. Polymorphisms in beta and kappa casein
are not associated with milk production in two highly technified populations of
Holstein cattle in Mexico. J. Anim. Plant & Animal Sciences 24(5): 1316-1321.

EL-GAWAD, M.A.M.A. and N.S. AHMED. 2011. Cheese yield as affected by some
parameters: Review. Acta Sci. Pol., Technol. Aliment. 10(2):131-153

12

EENENNAAM A. and J.F. MEDRANO. 1991. Milk protein polymorphisms in California
dairy cattle. J. Dairy Sci. 74: 1730-1742.

ETTEMA, J. AND J. SANTOS. 2004. Impact of Age at First Calving on Lactation,
Reproduction, Health, and Income in First-Parity Holstein on Commercial Farms.
Journal of Dairy Science 87: 2730-2742.

FALCONER, D.S. and T.F.C. MACKAY. 1996. Introduction to Quantitative Genetics, 4th
ed.; Longman Group Ltd.: Essex, UK.

FELENCZAK, A., Z. GIL, K. ADAMCZYK, P. ZAPLETAL and J. FRELICH. 2008.
Polymorphism of milk x-casein with regard to milk yield and reproductive traits of
Simmental cows. J Agrobiology 25: 201-207.

FOX, P-F., T. UNIACKE-LOWE, P.L.H. MCSWEENEY and J.A, O’MAHONY. 2015
Dairy chemistry and biochemistry. 2nd ed. Switzerland: Springer International
Publishing. 598 pp.

FRANZOI, M., C.L. MANUELIAN, M. PENASA and M. DE MARCHI. 2020. Effects of
somatic cell score on milk yield and mid-infrared predicted composition and
technological traits of Brown Swiss, Holstein Friesian, and Simmental cattle
breeds. Journal of Dairy Science 103(1): 791-804.

FREYER, G., Z. LUI, G. ERHARDHT and L. PANICKE. 1999. Casein polymorphism
and relation between milk production traits. J. Anim. Breed. Genet. 116(1999): 87-
97.

FULLER, F.H., J.C. BEGHIN, M. BOLANG, B.A. BABCOCK and W. FOSTER. 2006.
Global Prospects for Dairy in Argentina and Chile: Evidence from Field Visits and
Model Simulations. MATRIC Briefing Paper 06-MBP 11 August 2006 Midwest
Agribusiness Trade and Research Information Center Iowa State University Ames,
Towa 50011-1070 www.matric.iastate.edu.

GIVENS, I. and K. SHINGFIELD. 2003. Improving the nutritional quality of milk. Dairy
Processing: Improving Quality. 515-531. 10.1533/9781855737075.4.515.

GLAZKO V.L, LN. ANDREICHENKO, S.N. KOVALCHUK, T.T. GLAZKO and G.Y.
KOSOVZKY. 2016. Candidate Genes for Control of Cattle Milk Production Traits.
Russian Agricultural Sciences 42(6): 458-464.

GRADINARJU, A.C., D.E. ILIE and S. CREANGA.2013. Milk protein genetic variants in
Romanian Spotted, Holstein Friesian and Montbéliarde cows and some correlations
with milk parameters. Res J Biotech 8: 3-9.

113

GURSES, M., H. YUCE, E.0. ETEM and B. PATIR. 2016. Polymorphisms of kappa-
casein gene and their effects on milk production traits in Holstein, Jersey and
Brown Swiss cattle. Animal Production Science doi: 10.1071/AN15131.

HRISTOV P., D. TEOFANOVA, I. MEHANDZHIYSKI, L. ZAGORCHEV and G.
RADOSLAVOV. 2012. Application of Milk Proteins Genetic Polymorphism for
Selection and Breeding of Dairy Cows in Bulgaria. In N. Chaiyabutr (Ed.), Milk
Production—Advanced Genetic Traits, Cellular Mechanism, Animal Management
and Health. London: InTech. http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/50758.

HUTJENS, M.F. 2002. Dairy Farm Management Systems. In H. Roginski (Ed.),
Encyclopedia of Dairy Sciences. New York: Elsevier. pp. 693-699.

IBM CORP. 2019. IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, Version 26.0. Armonk, NY:
/ANIBM Corp.

JAWASREH, K., A. AL MAREEN and P. AAD. 2019. Effect and interaction of B-
Lactoglobulin, Kappa Casein, and Prolactin Genes on milk production and
composition of Awassi sheep. Animals 9:1-14.

KIPLAGAT, S.K., LIMO, M.K. and IS. KOSGEY. 2012. Genetic Improvement of
Livestock for Milk Production. https://www.intechopen.com/books/milk-
production-advanced-genetic-traits-cellular-mechanism-animal-management-and-
health/genetic-improvement-of-livestock-for-milk-production DOI:
10.5772/50761.

KOONAWOOTRITTRIRON, S., M.A. ELZO and T. THONGPRAPI. 2009. Genetic
trends in a Holstein x other breeds multibreed dairy population in Central Thailand.
Livest. Sci. 122:186-192.

KUCEROVA, J., A. MATEJICEK, A.M. JANDUROVA, P. SORENSEN, E.
NEMCOVA. M. STIPKOVA, T. KOTT., J. BOUSKA and J. FRELICH. 2006.
Milk protein genes CSNIS1, CSN2, CSN3, LGB and their relation to genetic values
of milk production parameters in Czech Fleckvieh. Czech. J. Anim. Sci. 51(6): 241-
247.

LOPEZ-VILLALOBOS, N., D. J. GARRICK, H. T. BLAIR and C. W. HOLMES. 2000.
Possible effects of 25 years of selection and crossbreeding on the genetic merit and
productivity of New Zealand dairy cattle. J. Dairy Sci. 83:154-163.

MATEJICEK, A., J. MATEJICKOVA, M. S CAROLI, TIPKOVA, A. HANUS, V.
GENCUROVA, J. MYSELOVA, E. NEMCOVA, T. KOTT, J. SEFROVA, M.
KREJCOVA, S. MELCOVA, I. HOLZELOVA, J. BOUSKA and J. FRELICH.
2008. Joint effects of CSN3 and LGB genes in milk quality and coagulation
properties in Czech Fleckvieh. Czech J. Anim. Sci. 53(6):246-252

MEHMANNAVAZ, Y., C. AMIRINIA, M. BONYADI AND R. TORSHIZI. 2009.
Effects of bovine prolactin gene polymorphism within exon 4 on milk related traits
and genetic trends in Iranian Hoistein bulls. African J. of Biotechnology 8:
10.43 14/ajb.v8i19.65169.

MIR, S.S., 0. ULLAH and R. SHEIKH. 2014. Genetic polymorphism of milk protein
variants and their association studies with milk yield in Sahiwal cattle. African
Journal of Biotechnology Vol. 13(4): 555-565.

MITRA, A., P. SCHLEE, I. KRAUSE, J. LUSCH, T. WERNER, C.R. BALAKRISHNAN
and F. PIRCHNER. 1998. Kappa-casein Polymorphisms in Indian Dairy Cattle and
Buffalo: A New Genetic Variant in Buffalo. Animal Biotechnology 9(2): 81-87.

NATIONAL DAIRY AUTHORITY. 2019. National Dairy Authority Growing Together
in Dairy 2019 Annual Report. Accessed 20 November 2021
(https://nda.da.gov.ph/images/2020/DEC/2019_AR_12162020.pdf>

NEAMT, R.O., G. SAPLACAN, S. ACATINCAI, L.T. CZISTER, D. GAVOJDIAN and
DE. ILIE. 2017. The influence of CSN3 and LGB polymorphisms on milk
production and chemical composition in Romanian Simmental cattle. Acta
Biochimica Polonica 64(3):493-497.

NG-KWAI HANG, K. F., J.F. HAYES and J.E. MOXLEY. 1984. Association of genetic
variants of casein and milk serum proteins with milk, fat, and protein production
by dairy cattle. Journal of Dairy Science, 67:835-840.

OJALA,M., T.R.FAMULA and J.F.MEDRANO. 1997. Effects of milk protein
genotypes on the variation for milk production traits of Holstein and Jersey cows
in California. J. Dairy Sci. 80: 1776-1785.

OTT, L. and M. LONGNECKER. 2008. An Introduction to Statistical Methods and Data
Analysis. Australia: Cengage Learning. 1296 p.

PHILIPPINE STATISTICS AUTHORITY. 2021. Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Database: Dairy: Volume of Production by Quarter, 1981-2021. Accessed 20
November!021 ,<https://openstat.psa.gov.ph/PXWeb/pxweb/en/DB/DB_2E_LP>

RACHAGANI, S. and I. D. GUPTA. 2008. Bovine kappa-casein gene polymorphism a
its association with milk production traits. Genet. Mol. Biol. 31:893-897.

RACHAGANI, S., I.D. GUPTA, N. GUPTA and S.G. GUPTA. 2006. Genotyping of 8-
Lactoglobulin Gene by PCR-RFLP in Sahiwal and Tharparkar Cattle Breeds. BMC
Genetics 7:31.

115

RASCHIA M.A., J.P. NANI, D.O. MAIZON, M.J. BERIBE, A.F. AMADIO, and M.A.
POLI. 2018. Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms in candidate genes associated with
milk yield in Argentinian Holstein and Holstein x Jersey cows. Journal of Animal
Science and Technology 60:31.

RITSAWAI P., S. KOONAWOOTRITTRIRON, D. JATTAWA, T. SUWANASOPEE,
and M.A. ELZO. 2014. Fraction of cattle breeds and their influence on milk
production of Thai dairy cattle. Proceeding of the 52th Kasetsart University Annual
Conference. Bangkok, Thailand. pp. 25-32.

RON, M., 0. YOFFE, E. EZRA, J. F. MEDRANO and J. I. WELLER. 1994, Determination
of effects of milk protein genotype on production traits of Israeli Holsteins. J. Dairy
Sci. 77:1106-1113.

ROSS, S.M. 2017. Introductory Statistics. 4'" Ed. New York: Elsevier. pp. 797-800.

SABOUR, M., C. LI, A. LEE and A. MCALLISTER. 1996. Association Between Milk
Protein Genetic Variants and Genetic Values of Canadian Holstein Bulls for Milk
Yield Traits. J Dairy Sci 79: 1050-1056.

SCHLEE, P AND O. ROTTMANN. 1992. Bovine kappa-casein: determination of alleles
‘A and B by polymerase chain reaction and RFLP analysis using plucked hair as a
source of DNA. Arch. Tierz. 35: 347-349.

SEANGJUN, A., S.KOONAWOOTRITTRIRON and M.A.ELZO. 2009.
Characterization of lactation patterns and milk yield in a multibreed dairy cattle
population in the Central Thailand. Kasetsart J. (Nat. Sci.) 43: 74-82.

SHAIDULLIN, R., G. SHARAFUTDINOV, A. MOSKVICHEVA, T. FAIZOV and Y.
YULDASHBAEV. 2020. Inheritance of allelic variants of the kappa-casein gene
by cows. BIO Web of Conferences 17:59.

SINGH, U., R. DEB, S. KUMAR, R. SINGH, G. SENGAR and A. SHARMA. 2014.
Association of prolactin and beta-lactoglobulin genes with milk production traits
and somatic cell count among Indian Frieswal (HF x Sahiwal) cows. Biomarkers
and Genomic Medicine 7 (1):38-42.

SOYUDAL B., S. ARDICLI, H. SAMLI, D. DINCEL and F. BALCI. 2019. Association
of polymorphisms in the CSN2, CSN3, LGB and LALBA genes with milk
production traits in Holstein cows raised in Turkey. Journal of the Hellenic
Veterinary Medical Society 69(4): 1271-1282.

STOCCO, G., C. CIPOLAT-GOTET, T. BOBBO, A. CECCHINATO, and G.
BITTANTE. 2017. Breed of cow and herd productivity affect milk composition

116

and modeling of coagulation, curd firming, and syneresis. J. Dairy Sci. 100:129-
145.

STRUCKEN, E.M., Y.C.S.M. LAURENSON and G.A. BROCKMANN. 2015. Go with
the flow-biology and genetics of the lactation cycle. Frontiers in Genetics 6:118.

TSIARAS, A.M., G.G. BARGOULI, G. BANOS and C.M. BOSCOS. 2005. Effect of
Kappa-Casein and Beta-Lactoglobulin loci on milk production traits and
reproductive performance of Holstein cows. J. Dairy Sci. 88: 327-335.

UYANIK, G.K. AND N. GULER. 2013. A study on multiple linear regression analysis.
Procedia-Social Behavioral Sciences 106:234-240.

VAN DEN BERG, G., J.T.M. ESCHER, P.J. DE KONING and H. BOVENHUIS. 1992.
Genetic polymorphism of x-casein and B-lactoglobulin in relation to milk
composition and processing properties. Neth. Milk Dairy J. 46:145-168.

VAN RADEN, P.M. 2004. Invited review: selection on net merit to improve lifetime profit.
J. Dairy Sci. 87: 3125-3131.

VERDIER-METZ, I., J.B. COULON and P. PRADEL. 2001. Relationship between milk
fat and protein contents and cheese yield. Animal Research, EDP Sciences5SO
(5):365-371

WEIGEL, K.A. and K.A. BARLASS. 2003. Results of a producer survey regarding
crossbreeding on US dairy farms. J. of Dairy Sci. 86(12):4148-54.

WONGPOM, B., S. KOONAWOOTRITTRIRON and M.A. ELZO. 2017. Milk yield, fat
yield and fat percentage associations in a Thai multibreed dairy production.
Agriculture and Natural Resources 51: 218-222.

ZAGLOOL, A.W., A. AWAD, LE.S. EL ARABY and K.M. EL-BAYOMI. 2016.
Association of B-Lactoglobulin gene polymorphisms with milk yield, fat and
protein in Holstein-Friesian cattle. World Vet J 6(3): 117-122.

ZAMBRANO-BURBANO G.L., Y.M. ERASO-CABRERA, C.E. SOLARTE-PADILLA
and C. Y. ROSERO-GALINDO. 2012. Relationship between Kappa Casein genes
(CSN3) and industrial yield in Holstein cows in Narino-Colombia. Milk Protein.
London: IntechOpen. pp. 261-282.

ZHENG, X. Z. JU, J. WANG, Q. LI., J. HUANG, A. ZHANG, J. ZHONG and C. WANG.
2011. Single nucleotide polymorphisms, haplotypes and combined genotypes of
LAP3 gene in bovine and their association with milk production traits. Mol. Biol
Rep. 38: 4053-4061.

CHAPTER V

MOLECULAR PHYLOGENETIC ANALYSES OF THE
COMPLETE CODING SEQUENCE AND
PROMOTER REGION OF THE
8-LACTOGLOBULIN GENE

Abstract

In silico analysis of the complete coding sequence and promoter region of the B-
lactoglobulin gene revealed phylogenetic groupings that were consistent with the present
taxonomy of the 13 selected eutherian taxa. There was no clear separation of the taxa
according to milk nutrient composition since taxa that are known to produce milk with
high fat, protein or lactose content did not cluster together. Further evolutionary analysis
identified codon sites under positive and negative selection. There were signatures of
positive diversifying selection at D96, K100, S110, E112, P113, QIIS, V118, V128,
A139, A142 and F151 among other codon sites of the BLG gene. These sites were mainly
located in the a-helical coils outside the B-barrel. In contrast, sites undergoing negative
purifying selection were in the 8-strands in the vicinity of ligand-binding sites of the B-
barrel, supporting the proposed transport function of BLG. Lastly, ten conserved motifs
were identified in the promoter region of the BLG. Two of which were shown to be
putative binding sites of a zinc finger transcription factor that may possibly regulate
transcription of the gene.

Key words: B-lactoglobulin, molecular phylogeny, codon selection, DNA-binding motifs

118

Introduction

B-lactoglobulin (BLG) is one of the most promising candidate genes that can be
used as a suitable genetic marker for important milk production traits in cattle. BLG is a
4.7 kb long gene that has been mapped on bovine chromosome 11. It codes for B-
lactoglobulin, the major whey protein in the milk of most species, but is absent from the
milk of humans, camels, rodents and lagomorphs (Costa et al., 2019). It is a relatively
small protein composed of 162 amino acids upon cleavage of the 16-amino acid signal
peptide. Its specific function in mammals is not yet fully known. Aside from its obvious
nutritional role, BLG is speculated to perform a major role in the binding and transport of
certain molecules, similar to the other members of the lipocalin family. Furthermore, the
significant amount of BLG in bovine milk (7-12% of total milk proteins) suggests even
more important physiological functions (Sawyer, 2021). Incidentally, BLG is also the
bovine milk protein that is most allergenic to human infants. Thus, there is growing
interest to produce BLG-free whey protein products for the manufacture of infant formula

that is more similar to human milk.

Due to the enormous improvement in sequencing technology, the use of DNA
sequences has been particularly rewarding in molecular phylogenetic reconstruction.
Molecular evolutionary studies not only provide an understanding of the genetic
development occurring across species but also gives valuable information in
understanding the function of particular genes in the evolution of species. Mutation and

recombination create new genetic variants, which are in turn maintained in the population

119

through genetic drift or natural selection. Ahmad et al. (2016) also noted that it may also

provide useful insights into the design of marker-assisted selection strategies.

Molecular phylogenetic approaches have been developed to understand
the evolutionary relationships between genes in different species and unravel the
phylogeny of species. These include traditional bioinformatic techniques such as
multiple sequence alignment and phylogenetic tree construction. In addition, a major part
of many molecular evolution studies involves determining the selection pressures that
have influenced genetic variation. According to Kosakovsky Pond and Frost (2005), a
common approach to this problem is by estimating the rates of nonsynonymous (dN) and
synonymous (dS) substitutions at each site in a coding sequence. The dN/dS ratio is an
indicator of the strength of positive (>1) or negative (<1) or neutral (=1) selection
pressure on a codon. Silent or synonymous substitutions are neutral since they do not
change the protein. In such case, pure chance determines their fixation in the population.
On the contrary, positive or diversifying selection generates variation and disseminates
favorable genes in a population (Farmanullah et al., 2020). Alternatively, new deleterious

mutations are removed by purifying or negative selection as they arise (Kreitman, 2000).

Molecular phylogenetic studies have been done extensively on other candidate
genes for milk production such as CSN3, the gene that codes for k-casein. As early as
1990’s, Ward et al. (1997) studied the pattern of nucleotide substitution in CSN3
sequences among representative bovid taxa and revealed that positive selection hastened

the diversification of x-casein at the amino acid sequence level. Until then, numerous

120

studies have delved into the evolution of this milk protein. Recently, Manguy and Sheilds
(2019) were able to describe specific codons and amino acid residues in the
glycomacropeptide (GMP) and para x-casein (PKC) regions of the protein that allow k-
casein to perform its role in the self-assembly and aggregation of casein micelles, More
recently, Rehman et al. (2021) identified conserved motifs in all members of the casein
family in Bubalus bubalis and closely related species including Bos taurus. Up to now,
no detailed molecular phylogenetic examination has been done on the BLG gene, except
for a study by Momoh et al. (2015). However, one major flaw of their study was the use
of BLG sequences that correspond to different regions of the gene (i.e. promoters, 3”
UTR and different exons). Thus, to gain more reliable insights about the evolutionary
history and signatures of selection that have acted upon this gene, the present study
conducted a molecular phylogenetic analysis of the complete coding sequence and

promoter region of the BLG gene. The specific objectives were to:

1. investigate in silico the genetic diversity and evolutionary relationships of
selected mammalian species based on their BLG coding sequences and

promoter region;

2. detect signatures of selection in the BLG gene in selected mammalian species;

and

3. describe variation in motif sequences in the promoter region of the BLG gene

of selected mammalian species.

121

This study was conducted at the Institute of Biological Sciences, College of Arts
and Sciences, University of the Philippines Los Bafios, College, Laguna from June 2021

to February 2022.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Sequence Retrieval

Thirty-nine complete coding sequences and ten promoter regions of the B-
lactoglobulin (BLG) gene of selected mammalian species were obtained from the
nucleotide database of the NCBI (http://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). Table 5.1 summarizes the
mammalian taxa selected for the analyses. These include dairy animals (i.e. animals that
are known to produce milk for human consumption) particularly taurine cattle (Bos
taurus), indicine cattle (B. indicus), yak (B. mutus), bison (Bison bison), water buffalo
(Bubalus bubalis), sheep (Ovis aries), goat (Capra hircus), reindeer (Rangifer tarandus),
horse (Equus caballus), and donkey (E. asinus). Also in the list are species with notably
high fat and protein contents, namely the fur seal (Arctocephalus tropicalis) and the
beluga whale (Delphinapterus leucas). Outgroups include the PAEP (progestagen-
associated endometrial protein) gene from primates, Papio anubis, P. hamadryas

eynocephalus, and Homo sapiens (Table 5.1).

Table 5.1. Coding sequence accession numbers of selected mammalian taxa used for
hylogenetic analysis of the B-lactoglobulin gene.

122

‘Species Common Name [Coding Sequence TCDS [Length Nunberof Amino Aad)
(CDS) Le

cepa |‘ep [Sem [wee | To

“Areiocephalus ropicalis | Subantareic Fur | KCIT29071 36 163 Ter
Seal KC172906.1 543 162 181

Bison bison bison Bison xM_010856756.1 | 537 Not ND 178
Bos indicus Indicine Cattle | XM_o19971082.1 | 537 ND ND 178
Bos tourus xB. indicus. | Angus X Brahman | XM_027556707.1 | 537 ND ND 178
XM _027556706.1 | 537 ND ND 18

Bos minus Wild Yak xM_o14481456.1 | 537 ND ND 178
xM_oosaeasis.2 | 337 ND ND 8

Bos tours Taurine Cattle NM_173929.3 337 16 162 178
xm_0158735972 | 537 16 162 178

DQé89319.1 337 16 162 178

248308. 337 16 162 178

xua7i2.t 337 16 162 18

8C108213.1 337 16 162 178

Bubatus bubalis Buffalo NM_001290964.1 | 543, 19 161 180
xm _006062183.2 | 543, 19 161 180

FN377869 38 19 161 180

83005429 38 19 161 180

Capra hireus Goat NM_001285539.1 | 543 18 162 180
xM_o1sosaess.1 | $43 18 162 180

233881.1 543 18 162 180

xs8471 543 18 162 181

Delphinapterus leucas | Beluga Whale XM _0225782652 | 543 ND ND 180
Equus asinus ‘Ass / Donkey HM012800.1 546 ND ND 181
HM012799.1 546 ND ND 181

Equus caballus Hone NM_ootos2a94.1 | 546 18 163 181
NM_001082493.3 | 543 18 162 180

us0356 543 18 162 180

AFIOT201.1 546 18 163 181

Ovis aries Sheep NM _001009366.1 | 543 18 162 180
X12817.1 543 8 162 180

‘AH001283.2 543 18 163 181

Rangifertorandus Reindeer AHOIS146.2 543 ND ND 180
Sus serofa Pig X54976.1 337 18 160 178
NM_213754.2 337 18 160 178

Outgroup

Homo sapiens Human NM_oo1o1s049.3 | 543 8 162 180
NM_002571.4 543 18 162 180

Papio anubis Olive Baboon xM_003911112.4 | 699 ND ND 232
Papo hamadas Yellow Baboon | AFO21261.1 561 18 168 186

a

*ND = no data available


123

For the promoter region, 1000 bp segment directly upstream from the start codon
of the BLG gene was extracted from the available genome assemblies of a subset of the
species in Table 1. These include Bos taurus (NC_037338.1), B. indicus (NC_032660.1),
B. mutus  (NW_005393001.1), Bubalus bubalis (NC_059168.1), Ovis aries
(NC_056056.1), Capra hircus (NC_030818.1), Sus scrofa (NW_018084833.1),

Delphinapterus leucas (NW_022098011.1), and Equus caballus (NC_009168.3).

Likewise, the corresponding region for the Homo sapiens PAEP gene
(NC_000009.12) was also obtained and used as outgroup to construct the phylogenetic

tree.

Phylogenetic Tree Construction

Multiple sequence alignments (MSA) by codon for the coding sequences and by
nucleotide for the promoter region were performed separately using MUSCLE (Multiple
Sequence Comparison by Log-Expectation) (Edgar, 2004), as implemented in MEGA X
(Kumar et al., 2018). After trimming, the reliability of the alignments was verified using
GUIDANCE? (http://guidance.tau.ac.il) (Sela et al., 2015) and by computing the over-all

mean distance in MEGA X.

Phylogenetic trees based on the coding sequences and the promoter regions were

estimated using Bayesian inference and maximum likelihood, respectively.

Bayesian inference was performed using BEAST (Bayesian Evolutionary

Analysis Sampling Trees) software package v1.10.4 (Drummond et al., 2012; Suchard et

124

al., 2018). Prior to Bayesian analysis, the MEGA X alignment file was exported as a
FASTA file and then converted to a NEXUS file using SeaView version 4 (Gouy et al.,
2010) The latter was imported into BEAUTi (Bayesian Evolutionary Analysis Utility)
v1.10.4 to generate the input file for BEAST. Using BEAUTi, various parameters were
set, including HKY+G as substitution model, the Yang96 model for partitioning the three
codon positions, strict clock as the default clock, UPGMA as the starting tree and the
Yule Process model for the Tree Prior. The MCMC operator settings were all set at their
defaults. For the MCMC tab which provides the settings to control the actual running of
BEAST, the length of chain was left at its default setting of 10 000 000 steps. Finally, the
xml file that was generated by BEAUTi was analyzed in BEAST v1.10 .4, with the help
of the BEAGLE library (Ayres et al., 2012). Tracer (v.1.7.2) was used to view the log file
generated by BEAST to identify the number of bum-ins which was reduced from
10000000 to 200000. This value was plugged into TreeAnnotator to generate a consensus
tree (MCC or Maximum Clade Credibility tree). The tree was viewed and labeled using

FigTree (http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/).

For the maximum likelihood method, phylogeny reconstruction was done with
MEGA X using Tamura 3-parameter model. The reliability of the tree was estimated

using 1000 bootstrap iterations.

125

Positive and Negative Selection Analyses of the Complete Coding Sequence of BLG

The codon-aligned nucleotide sequences of the whole coding region of the BLG
gene were analyzed to estimate the degree of site-specific positive (diversifying) and
negative (purifying) selection using two web servers, namely the Selecton
(https://www.tau.ac.il/) (Stem et al., 2007; Doron-Faigenboim et al., 2005) and the
Datamonkey Adaptive Evolution Server (https://www.datamonkey.org) (Weaver et al.,

2018).

Using the MEC model, Ka/Ks ratio for each site and the statistical significance of
each score were computed using the Selecton server. The scores were projected onto
3NPO, a published three-dimensional structure of the BLG protein (Bonarek et al., 2011)

and viewed via the ConSurf server (Glaser et al., 2003).

Various analyses were performed using the Datamoney server. First, using
GARD, the MSA was screened for the presence of recombination as evolutionary
analyses can be confounded by recombination which introduces apparent substitution rate
heterogeneity among sites (Kosakovsky Pond et al., 2006). After examining 4042
models, GARD was able to infer two breakpoints in the alignment. The generated
partitioned dataset was then exported for use in the succeeding selection inference
analyses, namely MEME, FEL, and FUBAR. MEME algorithm (Murrell et al., 2012) was
applied to detect sites evolving under episodic positive selection while pervasive positive
or negative selection was detected using FEL (Kosakovsky Pond et al., 2005) and

FUBAR (Murrell et al., 2013) algorithms. To highlight the sites under significant

126

positive and negative selection (i.e. p-value <0.1 threshold for MEME and FEL; posterior
probability >0.9 for FUBAR), iCn3D (Wang et al., 2020) was used for visualization on
the three-dimensional structure of the BLG protein (PDB 3NPO) previously published by

Loch et al. (2011).

Motif Finding Analysis on the Promoter Region of BLG

De novo motif finding analysis was run using MEME (Multiple Expectation
Maximization for Motif Elicitation) Suite version 5.4.1 (https://meme-suite.org) (Bailey
and Elkan, 1994). The motif discovery mode and site distribution were set to classic and
Zoops (zero or one occurrence per sequence), respectively. Motifs that were consistently
present in all species were further analyzed using GOMo (Gene Ontology for Motifs)
(Buske et al., 2010) to identify possible roles (gene ontology terms) for these motifs.
GOMo was run against promoters of multiple species whenever available, using a
significance q-value threshold of 0.05, 1000 score shuffling rounds. The motifs were also
submitted to TOMTOM (Motif Comparison Tool) (Gupta et al., 20007), which compared
each motif against a database of known vertebrate motifs. The Pearson correlation
coefficient was selected as the motif column comparison function, with a significance q-

value threshold of 0.05.

127

Results and Discussion

Phylogenetic Relationships Based on BLG Coding Sequences

The resulting MSA for the BLG coding sequences (CDS) showed a 28% average
evolutionary divergence (72% amino acid identity) over all 39 sequence pairs. This
surpasses the minimum 30% identity threshold for an acceptable alignment of protein-
coding genes (Ogden and Rosenberg, 2006). Thompson et al. (1999) noted that when the
average percent identity in pairwise comparison is too low, the accuracy of the alignment
falls below the level where it can produce reliable phylogenetic trees (Hall, 2018).
Likewise, the GUIDANCE alignment score of 99.4% supports the appropriateness of the

MSA for tree construction.

The CDS-based Bayesian phylogram (Fig. 5.1) shows that Bos taurus and B.
indicus BLG sequences were tightly clustered in a clade with high Bayesian posterior
probability (PP) of 1.0. Their estimated evolutionary divergence was only 0.003 (Table
5.2). This is in agreement with previous evolutionary studies on these two species. In
fact, to differentiate these closely related groups of cattle, B. indicus has been previously
classified as a subspecies of B. taurus (i.e. B. taurus indicus) while B. taurus was named
B. taurus taurus (Cronin et al., 2013). The former is adapted to tropical (indicus)
environments whereas the latter thrives well in temperate (taurus) environments. Also,
they readily interbreed producing hybrids that exhibit heterosis (Chan et al., 2010). The
BLG sequence of the Taurine x Indicine crossbred also indicates that the crossbred is

equally similar to B. taurus as it is to B. indicus.

128

Femity

F.Suidae
Fenccsetenin ariorson 0. Perssodacty

Figure 5.1. A phylogenetic tree generated by Bayesian Inference analysis of 8-
lactoglobulin coding sequences of selected mammalian species. Numbers
on the nodes are Bayesian posterior probabilities (PP), The tree was
rooted with BLG-related PAEP (progesterone-associated endometrial
protein) gene sequences from Homo sapiens, Papio anubis and P.
hamadyras.

129

Table 5.2. Estimates of evolutionary divergence over sequence pairs between
mammalian taxa based on B-lactoglobulin (BLG) coding sequences.

003
00 ou dont 03s 9087 ome

ose G05) Gast 0652 ost 90st 0055 cast

Dist Glco Ol6l Otel 16s oles Ohad 1G OST

Giss Gist Gis) O30) O30) o1na a205 Gis Ol zis

Sa oan Om) O25 Oa) Oasl Gam Ome 2M 219 O2s

O29) 0288 039) 039) 249 Oar 08s 02 O3M ast 310 OAR

0356 0253 0357 0356 0256 02st 0369 0250 0255 0240 O2Hl 0195 009s
314030 0312 0309 0311 _ 0305 _o02_0305 0788 _0302_0307_0372_ 03040200


130

These two Bos species also showed high similarity with another member of the
Bos genus, Bos mutus, with an estimated evolutionary divergence of only 0.01. B. mutus,
in tum was closely related to Bison (0.006 divergence). Interestingly, Bison bison is
sometimes classified as Bos bison (Cronin et al., 2013). The close relationship of these
species is evidenced in the successful crossbreeding done between them. The yak has
been known to cross with Bos taurus and B. indicus (Wangdi, 2015). The yakalos are the
hybrid offsprings of the Tibetan yak and the American bison (Weiner, 2003). Also in the
same clade were the four Bubalus bubalis sequences. The clade that contains Bos, Bison
and Bubalis sequences was highly supported with 0.99 Bayesian PP and coincides with
their present classification into one subfamily (Bovinae). Since Bubalus is the farthest
relative of Bos in this clade, it may be expected that it remains to be a challenge to
produce buffalo-cattle hybrids since the embryos of such hybrids do not reach maturity in

laboratory experiments (Hoffman and Cawthorn, 2014).

Meanwhile, Ovis aries and Capra hircus sequences belonged to a single clade
that was highly supported by Bayesian PP of 1.0. The sheep and goat sequences showed
only 1.4% divergence. This supports their classification into one subfamily (Caprinae),
as also supported by archaeological, morphological and microsatellite DNA data (Sun et
al., 2004). This goat-sheep clade in turn clustered with the rest of the members of the

family Bovidae, including subfamily Bovinae (Bayesian PP 1.0).

131

Moreover, the Bovidae clade clustered with the rest of the taxa belonging to Order
Artiodactyla (even-toed ungulates), namely Rangifer tarandus (Family Cervidae) and Sus
scrofa (Family Suidae). Rangifer formed a highly supported clade (PP 1.0) with the

Bovids and thus appeared to be more closely related to the Bovids than to the Suids.

As for the perissodactyls (odd-toed ungulates), the donkey (Equus asinus) and the
horse (E. caballus) formed a highly reliable single clade (PP 1.0). It is interesting to note
that two E. caballus sequences (NM_001082494 and AF107201) were found to be more
closely related to the E. asinus sequences than to the other two E. caballus sequences
(NM_001082493 and U60356) in this study. It can be noted that NM_001082493 and
U60356 are BLG I sequences while NM_001082494 and AF107201 are BLG Il. These
are the two BLG variants that have been observed in horse milk. MSA indicates that

BLG I shares 83% identity with BLG II and is one amino acid shorter than BLG II.

Meanwhile, two marine mammalian species, Delphinapterus leucas (beluga
whale) and Arctocephalus tropicali (fur seal), were included in the analysis since these
two, together with Rangifer tarandus, have been reported to produce milk with notably
high fat and protein contents. It is evident that these three species did not cluster closely
in the phylogram and the grouping according to the BLG CDS did not reflect milk

content.

As also seen in Fig. 5.1, Rangifer grouped with the bovids. The latter generally
produces milk with fat content ranging from 1.7% to 10.4% and protein content ranging

from 3.1 to 5.9% while reindeer milk contains high amounts of fat (22.5%) and protein

132

(10.3%) and relatively low lactose content (2.5%) (Table 5.3). Reindeer cheese is
regarded as among the creamiest of all whole milk cheeses. Since milk is intended by
nature to the offspring, the richness of reindeer milk can be explained by the fact that a
reindeer makes only about 1.5 cups of milk per day (Skibiel et al., 2013). This is in
accordance with the findings of Landete-Castillejos et al. (2003) that to meet the
metabolic and nutritional demands of the neonate, the total amount of nutrients
transferred to young is not only a function of the concentration of milk constituents but

also the quantity of milk produced.

Among the taxa included in this study, the fur seal and the beluga whale have the
highest reported fat and protein content. The fur seal milk has an average of 52.1% fat
and 12.1% protein while milk from the beluga whale has 50% fat and 10.3% protein
(Table 5.3). According to Skibiel et al. (2013), aquatic mammals produce milk that is
higher in fat and energy density so that an insulating subcutaneous fat layer can be
quickly deposited in the neonate. Such layer enhances its survival by reducing heat loss
and attaining thermal balance. Moreover, the same study revealed that maternal diet
contributes to differences in the availability of raw materials to the mammary gland for
milk synthesis. Thus, carnivorous species, such as these two, produce milk higher in fat,
protein and dry matter concentration than both herbivores and omnivores. Despite these
similarities, the beluga whale and the fur seal appeared to be distantly related to each
other based on their BLG sequences. The beluga whale (Order Cetacea) grouped with the
artiodactyls, with a higher similarity to Sus scrofa (21.5% divergence). This result agrees

with fossil and other molecular data (Nikaido et al., 1999; Gatesy and O’Leary, 2001;

133

Table 5.3. Fat, protein and lactose content of milk from some mammalian species.

PERCENTAGE BY WEIGHT

SPECIES REFERENCE
FAT PROTEIN LACTOSE

Bos taurus 35 31 49 | Jensen and Newburg, 1995
Bos indicus 49 3.9 5.1 | Jensen and Newburg, 1995
Bos mutus 71 49 5.8 | Wangdi, 2015
Bison bison 17 48 5.7 | Jensen and Newburg, 1995
Bubalus bubalis 10.4 59 4.3 | Jensen and Newburg, 1995
Ovis aries 53 55 4.6 | Jensen and Newburg, 1995
Capra hircus 3.5 3.1 4.6 | Jensen and Newburg, 1995
Rangifer tarandus 22.5 10.3 2.5 | Jensen and Newburg, 1995
Delphinapterus leucas 50.0 15.0 18 — | Oftedal, 1997
Sus scrofa 8.2 58 48 | Jensen and Newburg, 1995
Arctocephalus tropicalis | 52.1 12.1 No Data | Georges et al., 2001
Equus asinus 12 17 6.9 | Jensen and Newburg, 1995
Equus caballus 16 27 6.1 | Jensen and Newburg, 1995
Homo sapiens 45 re 6.8 | Jensen and Newburg, 1995
Papio anubis 45 1s 7.8 | Oftedal and Iverson, 1995
Papio cynocephalus 45 15 7.8 | Oftedal and Iverson, 1995
Mammals (in general) 5 6 | Zhang et al., 2018

134

Thewissen et al., 2009) showing that modem representatives of artiodactyls including
pigs, hippopotamus, deer, sheep, and cattle are the closest living relatives of cetaceans. In
fact, cetaceans were even grouped with the artiodactlyls in a new order called
Cetartiodactyla (Nikaido et al., 1999). On the other hand, the fur seal grouped together
with the Equus sequences (PP 0.99). The two Equus species produce milk of relatively
low fat (1.2 to 1.6%) and protein content (1.7 to 2.7%), even lower than the reported
averages for cow’s milk (3.5% fat and 3.1% protein content). According to Prasad et al.
(2008), seals are actually related to land camivores such as dogs and bears based on
fossil, morphological and genomic data, and are therefore classified under the Order
Carvivora (Hofmeyr, 2015). It has been strongly suggested that carnivores and
perissodactyls are closely related based on mitochondrial genomes (Robinson-Rechavi

and Graur, 2002).

It is also interesting to note that next to the fur seal, beluga whale and reindeer,
milk with high average fat and protein contents belonged to Bubalus bubalis (10.4% fat,
5.9% protein), Sus scrofa (8.2% fat and 5.8% protein), Bos mutus (7.1% fat and 4.9%
protein) and Ovis aries (5.3% fat and 5.5% protein) (Table 5.3). However, these taxa
were scattered throughout the phylogram. Likewise, the highest lactose content among,
these taxa was reported for the closely related Bos mutus and Bison bison. However,
species with even higher lactose content, ranging from 6.1 to 7.8% was recorded in non-
bovids (i.e. horse, Papio and humans). Therefore, the patterns observed based on BLG
coding sequence variation were driven by species phylogeny. They did not allow clear

separation of these mammalian species that produce milk with low and high fat, protein

135

nor lactose content. These results could suggest that BLG gene alone may not play a
general role in controlling milk composition across the whole eutherian clade. However,
it should be noted that it is possible to identify patterns of selection if the analysis will be
limited to a smaller and more specific group. As also suggested by Lugo Ramos et al.
(2017), the use of a more constrained phylogenetic scale can improve resolution to

uncover pattems of phenotype associated to a candidate gene.

Positive and Negative Selection Analyses of the BLG Coding Sequence

Analysis of the BLG coding sequence using Selecton revealed a total of 30 sites
having Ka/Ks greater than 1, highlighted in orange and yellow in Fig. 5.2. This implies
the occurrence of positive diversifying selection in these sites. The inference of positive
selection was most strongly statistically reliable for five of the 30 sites, namely K100,
$110, E112, QI15S and A142. Figure 5.3 shows a 3D view of the BLG protein showing
the location of these five diversifying sites on its outer surface. The BLG protein is made
up of a single polypeptide chain that folds up into a barrel (also referred to as the calyx)
composed of eight antiparallel 8-strands, 3-turn a-helices on the outer surface and a ninth
B-strand flanking the first strand (Kontopidis et al., 2004). The positively selected sites
were mainly found in the coils connecting the B-strands. In contrast, 31 purifying sites
were identified (highlighted in dark purple in Figs. 5.2 and 5.3) and were mostly located
on the B-strands where most ligand-binding sites are situated (Sawyer, 2021). If BLG
were to function as a transporter of specific molecules, as has been previously proposed,

non-synonymous substitution of these ligand-binding amino acids within the calyx may

OSAMBRVY@E EB:
101 111
DALNENKVLV

161

Positive selection Purifying selection

Figure 5.2. Primary sequence of the bovine B-lactoglobulin protein showing amino
acid sites that are positively (orange and yellow highlights) and negatively
(dark purple) selected, based on Selecton codon selection analysis using

the MEC model.


137

Figure 5.3.

Three-dimensional representation of the B-lactoglobulin protein with
emphasis on (a) the 5 positively selected sites (shown as yellow-orange
balls) and (b) 31 negatively selected sites (purple balls) detected by
Selecton. The yellow green and blue triangles represent the amino- and
carboxyl- ends of the protein. Red arrow points to the central cavity or
the calyx.

138

cause detrimental effects. This supports the essentiality of these residues found within

the calyx.

To further evaluate « values and verify evolutionary signatures of selection in the
BLG gene, analyses using Datamonkey were performed. Five sites under positive
selection were identified using MEME, three using FEL and two using FUBAR.
Collectively, MEME, FEL and FUBAR detected six sites under positive selection,
namely D96, P113, V118, V128, A139 and F151. Among the six, three sites were
consistently positive in at least two methods. These include V118 and A139 by both
MEME and FEL, and P113 by both FEL and FUBAR. These three sites, together with the
ones identified by Selecton are labeled in Fig. 5.4. This implies that in these sites, the
amino acid substitutions may have conferred some benefit and thus allowed these sites to
diversify and the species to undergo adaptive evolution. It should be noted that site 118
is a reputable polymorphic candidate SNP marker associated with enhanced milk
production and quality in cattle. BLG A and B are the two variants for this SNP. BLG A
has valine in this site while BLG B has alanine. Located in 8-strand H, V118 is likewise
identified as a putative ligand-binding site in the central calyx (Sawyer, 2021). On the
other hand, P113 and A139 are located in separate a-helical coils. P113 is found in the a-
helix connecting B-strands G and H while A139 is located on the a-helix after B-strand H
towards the end of the protein. Such long and flexible a-helices are situated on the outer

surface of the B-barrel (Kontopidis et al., 2004).

139

P wos ae 2 ws a
sl os 7 os sm
ee
SOLE TCLORWENGECAOKKITAEKTK| PAVFRIDALNENKVLVUBTOY

—s AN,
[rv CLFOMENBARREBS(ACOCLVRTPEMDDEALERFOKALKALP

Figure 5.4. 3D and linear representations of the BLG protein, with emphasis on the

positively selected sites detected by Selecton and Datamonkey (MEME,
FEL and FUBAR), drawn on 3NPO using iCn3D.

140

Several sites undergoing negative purifying selection were identified by Selecton
(30 sites), FEL (40 sites) and FUBAR (28 sites) (Fig. 5.5). Five sites (D11, A16, S27,
L31 and D33) were found to be consistently negative in all three selection tools. More
synonymous substitutions compared to nonsynonymous ones were allowed in these sites,
suggesting that nonsynonymous mutations in these sites were deleterious such that
selection did not favor their increase in frequency in the population. D11,D33 and $27
may be essential to the proper functioning of BLG since it was noted that polar amino
acids can participate in intramolecular and/or intermolecular salt-bridges, or even
catalytic or substrate-binding (Wang et al., 2008). | Moreover, hydrophobic residues
such as L31 and Al6 may contribute to the local stability of the folded structure of a
globular protein (such as BLG) as they interact and condense towards each other (Jayaraj

et al., 2009).

To summarize, several sites subject to positive or negative selection in the mature
peptide region of the BLG were identified. However, the exact structural and functional

role of these sites remain unknown and need further investigation.
Phylogenetic and Motif Analysis of the Promoter Region of BLG

Maximum likelihood analysis of the 1000-bp sequence upstream from the start
codon of the BLG gene generated the phylogram presented in Fig. 5.6. The tree revealed
a topology that was generally similar to the BLG CDS tree. A highly supported clade

composed of the bovids, namely Bos taurus, B. indicus, B. mutus, Bubalus bubalis, Ovis

141

= SPADA
Tran FWUBNSAEPEOSUNCaCTVRTPEVOMEX. FRYOXALKALP.

Soa
ihrntsFnProveeacw

Figure 5.5. 3D and linear representations of the BLG protein, with emphasis on the
negatively selected sites detected by Datamonkey (FEL and FUBAR),
drawn on 3NPO using iCn3D.

99, Bos taurus
°8{! Gos indicus
71 Bos mutus

38] L gubats bubats
Lp owas
Capra hircus

Delphnapterus leucas

‘Sus scrofa

Equus caballus

Homo sapiens

owe
Figure 5.6. A maximum likelihood phylogram based on the promoter
region of the B-lactoglobulin gene of selected mammalian
species. Bootstrap values are shown on the nodes. The
PAEP gene from Homo sapiens was used as outgroup.

142

143

aries and Capra hircus, was evident, with 98% bootstrap value. Also, Delphinapterus
leucas clustered with Sus scrofa, although bootstrap support was low (36%). The
relatively distant relationship of Equus from the bovids was again observed. However,
due to the unavailability of the promoter sequences of Rangifer tarandus and
Arctocephalus tropicali in genome databases, these taxa were not included in this

analysis.

Furthermore, the same promoter region was analyzed to identify putative regions
that may be involved in the regulation of BLG gene expression, as it has been reported
that mammalian species produce varying amounts of BLG in milk (Roy et al., 2020),
Motif search using MEME Ver. 5.4.1 revealed ten conserved 50-bp motifs (p<0.05). The
motifs were numbered in ascending p-values. Figure 5.7 shows that they were present in
slightly varying combinations among the nine mammals. All species possess motifs 1, 7,
9, and 10. However, for pigs, motif 10 was located towards the middle of the region,
whereas for the other animals, it was closer to the start codon. Motif 8 was present in all
bovid species and absent in pigs, whale and horse. Motifs 5, 2, 4, 3 and 6 were present in
all species except horse. Horse had only four of the conserved motifs, namely 7, 1, 10 and

9.

These motifs identified using MEME were further analyzed using TOMTOM and
GOMo tools of the MEME Suite (Table 5.4). TOMTOM was used to find shorter
sequences within each 50-bp motif that match eukaryotic transcription factor binding
sites that are curated in databases such as JASPAR 2022 (Gupta, et al., 2007). On the

other hand, GOMo aims to identify gene function associated with these motifs as it

Name P-value Motif Locations moat
Bos. taurus ee
Bos indicus 1960-261 +L A EE hoa
Bos _mutus ed
Bubaksbbals 4300-240 “MM TY 35
Ovis_ces 75020 + MM css
apa eus 2orezt (MM sso
Sus, serola 2eceise + Ne
Delphinapterusfouces 1400-160 +H SSO te
Equus_cabalius 1.14e83 + Ce

Figure 5.7. Block diagrams showing the relative positions of candidate motifs
detected by MEME (Multiple EM for Motif Elicitation) tool, and
the corresponding 8-lactoglobulin contents of different
mammalian species (Roy et al., 2020).

145

‘anyon suse dope (eeu) 373

29
ES

core PIERRE PAY,
Pap PLP:

or 860-09 ®

POO
«covey TRIP,

oe PELL

sue

oe °
‘OnOD
adaait WOuKOL
sUNgat ‘A@SLIH
swe, INV
+0109 ‘09 sUaINOI8
AW SNOULDIORUA D1HIDASS JOL_40'ON. SOON _antaca 0907 a9NanDaS ANY WIMINAN ALLOW,

“auad (97g) UIINqojZo}0e]-g oy) Jo Uo!Bos Jo}OWLONd auf J0y SyINSeI OWOD Pu WO.LINOL ‘AWA 50 Areurums “p's 214.1,

146

woroUTY JeINooJOU = JW pue jWauOdutod re[N]]99 = DO ‘ssadoad [eo1o}O1g = doe«
$0'0 > anyea-b ye yueoytuais,

os coven PNET RNR.
SRSt + cooave ULURIVRLYRUEENLE YL UOELNT-

KOLNOL WoLWOL

SHOLDVE INYO
+.01W09 NOWANDSNVIL —-MINDIS
Aa SNOUDIaIA JUNIDBaS Ss AOL S40L___40ON_antvica (0907 3oNanDAS ANY WAMWAN ILLON,

“panuyuod “p's 2481

147

identifies significant GO terms that suggest the biological roles of the motifs (Buske et

al., 2010).

TOMTOM results indicate that motif 9 has the eukaryotic core promoter since it
contained the canonical TATA box recognized by TATA-binding proteins during
transcription initiation. Moreover, it was also evident that the other TFs identified have
DNA-binding motifs, including the C2H2 zine finger and bHLH (basic helix loop helix),
specifically those that bind motifs 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,9 and 10. Among these TFs, ZNF331 was
found to bind two motifs, namely motif 2 (q-value = 0.035) and 6 (q-value = 0.00496)
(Fig. 5.8). Their low q-values indicate that the binding of ZNF331 to both motifs is
highly probable. According to Gupta et al. (2007), q-value is the false discovery rate at
which the observed similarity would be deemed significant. Thus, at this point, it can be
hypothesized that motifs 2 and 6 are cis-regulatory elements that are bound by zinc finger
TFs to enhance transcription of the BLG gene. Since these two motifs were observed to
be absent in horses, this may explain why equine BLG expression is lower (2.55 g/L on

the average; Roy et al., 2020) than that of cows, buffalos, sheep and goats (Fig. 5.7).

As for the GOMo results (Table 5.4), no significant GO-term could be associated
with motif 1. On the other hand, for the other three motifs that are common to all species
(motifs 7, 9 and 10), the most significant GO terms that were related to them include

molecular functions such as transcription factor activity, protein binding and sequence-

148

ZF S- 4 io

HCalbteT Coal OCCT caGHGCrcAGAdCesesheCoradCTCCHGt

Figure 5.8. ZN331 binding sites detected by TOMTOM in motifs 2 (top) and 6 (bottom)
of the BLG promoter region.

149

specific DNA binding, cellular component functions such as transcription factor complex,
and biological processes such as negative regulation of signal transduction. As for motif 8
which was only found among the bovids, the most significant GO terms were related to

sensory perception, G-protein-linked signaling pathway and innate immune response.

However, the exact roles of these identified motifs in BLG gene expression and

consequently on milk synthesis need to be further investigated experimentally.

Summary and Conclusion

One of the potential genetic markers for dairy cattle productivity and quality is the
B-lactoglobulin (BLG) gene. The bovine BLG gene is 4.7 kb long and its coding
sequence (CDS) yields a 178 amino acid long polypeptide chain upon translation. Upon
cleavage of a 16 amino acid long signal peptide, the BLG protein folds into a globular
protein with a B-barrel-type calyx. Because of this lipocalin-like conformation, BLG has
been proposed to serve as a transporter of retinol, cholesterol, and vitamin D, aside from
being a good source of amino acids for the young animal. Also, it has been reported that
while most mammalian milk has BLG, milk from a few mammals such as humans,

camel, llama, rodents and lagomorphs are known to be devoid of this protein.

The phylogenetic trees that were generated from the coding sequences and the

promoter regions of the BLG gene revealed groupings that were consistent with the

150

present classification of the 13 eutherian mammalian taxa included in this analysis. The
three Bos species (B. taurus, B. indicus and B. mutus) showed very low divergence. They
were also grouped closely with Bison bison and Bubalus bubalis, as they all belong to
subfamily Bovinae. Ovis aries and Capra hircus of the subfamily Caprinae formed a
single cluster. These two subfamilies in tum formed a larger group, consistent with their
classification into the family Bovidae. Meanwhile, Rangifer tarandus of the family
Cervidae and Sus scrofa of the family Suidae joined members of the family Bovidae to
form a larger group corresponding to order Artiodactyla. Delphinapterus leucas of the
Order Cetacea was included with the artiodactyls, corroborating earlier reports of close
ancestry of the cetaceans with artiodactyls. Equus asinus and E. caballus of order
Perissodactyla belonged to one group which was closely related to Arctocephalus

tropicali of Order Camivora,

Further analysis of the phylogram shows that the groupings did not reflect
classification of milk according to fat, protein and lactose content. The three species that
have been reported to produce remarkably high fat and high protein milk, namely
Arctocephalus tropicali, Delphinapterus leucas and Rangifer tarandus, did not cluster
together and were rather found in distant positions in the tree. Similarly, the two Equus
species which produce high lactose milk were found to be more closely related to
Arctocephalus leucas, a low lactose milk producer, than to Bos mutus and Bison bison

which are also sources of high lactose milk.

151

Evolutionary analysis for signatures of selection identified codon or amino acid
sites that are undergoing diversifying selection. These include D96, K100, $110, E112,
P113, QUIS, V118, V128, A139, Al42 and F151, as identified by Selecton and
Datamonkey servers. Most of these diversifying or positively selected sites are situated
in the a-helical coils that are usually outside the B-barrel or calyx. In these sites, the non-
synonymous amino acid substitutions may have been beneficial and thus were favored.
This led to diversification of the protein at these sites. In contrast, a larger number of
purifying sites were identified in the BLG. Collectively, Selecton and Datamonkey
recognized 54 purifying sites distributed throughout the protein. In these sites, non-
synonymous substitutions were not allowed to persist due to their deleterious effect.
This, in turn, reflects the importance of these sites in the function of BLG. Such sites
located within the calyx may coincide with ligand binding sites that are essential in the

postulated transport function of BLG.

Lastly, the 1000 bp sequence upstream from the start codon of 9 mammalian
species were used for evolutionary analysis and motif discovery, as this region is
assumed to contain the promoter and possible binding sites of transcription factors
involved in gene regulation. The phylogenetic tree generated here coincided with the
previous tree based on the BLG coding sequences. Also, ten conserved motifs were
found in this region. Motifs 1, 7, 9 and 10 were present in all nine species. The bovids
had the same combination and location of motifs while Sus scrofa and Delphinapterus
leucas had their own motif profile. Interestingly, Equus caballus had only four of the

conserved motifs. TOMTOM and GOMo tools revealed the presence of binding sites for

152

a zine-finger transcription factor in motifs 2 and 6, signifying the possibility that the
absence of these motifs in Equus caballus could explain why BLG expression in horses is
relatively lower than bovids. Although this remains to be proven through laboratory
experiments, this information may prove to be valuable in the production of bovine milk
with reduced BLG levels, in the context of decreasing the allergenic effect of bovine milk

on human infants.

Finally, this study highlights the significance of online sequence databases that
allow researchers to access useful genomic, transcriptomic and proteomic data. Also, as
more user-friendly bioinformatic tools and servers become available, analysis of such
data becomes more efficient and comprehensive in obtaining new information about

biological systems.

Literature Cited

AHMAD, HL, L. GUIQIONG, X. JIANG, C. LIU, Y. CHONG and H. HUARONG.
2017. Adaptive molecular evolution of MCIR gene reveals the evidence for
positive diversifying selection in indigenous goat populations. Ecology and
Evolution 7:5170-5180.

AYRES, D.L., A. DARLING, D.J. ZWICKL, P. BEERLI, M.T. HOLDER, P.O. LEWIS,
J.P. HUELSENBECK, F. RONQUIST, D.L. SWOFFORD, M.P. CUMMINGS,
A. RAMBAUT and M.A. SUCHARD. 2012. BEAGLE: An Application
Programming Interface and High-Performance Computing Library for Statistical
Phylogenetics. Systematic Biology 61(1): 170-173.

BAILEY, T.L. and C. ELKAN. 1994. Fitting a mixture model by expectation
maximization to discover motifs in biopolymers. Proceedings of the Second
International Conference on Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology. AAAI
Press: California. pp. 28-36.

153

BONAREK, P., H. DZIEDZICKA-WASYLEWSKA, A. GORECKI, K.
KURPIEWSKA, K. LEWINSKI, J. LOCH and A. POLIT. 2011. Two modes of
fatty acid binding to bovine beta-lactoglobulin-crystallographic and spectroscopic
studies. J.Mol.Recognit. 24:341-349.

BUSKE, F.A., B. BODEN, D.C. BAUER and T. L. BAILEY. 2010. Assigning roles to
DNA regulatory motifs using comparative genomics. Bioinformatics 26(7): 860-
866.

CHAN, EK., SH. NAGARAJ and A. REVERTER. 2010. The evolution of tropical
adaptation: comparing taurine and zebu cattle, Anim Genet, 41(5):467-77.

COSTA, A., N. LOPEZ-VILLALOBOS, N.W. SNEDDON, L. SHALLOO, M.
FRANZOI, M. DE MARCHI and M. PENASA. 2019. Milk lactose-Current
Status and future challenges in dairy cattle. J. Dairy Sci 102: 5883-5898.

CRONIN, M.A., M.D. MACNEIL, N. VU, V. LEESBURG, H.D. BLACKBURN and
J.N. DERR. 2013. Genetic Variation and Differentiation of Bison (Bison bison)
Subspecies and Cattle (Bos taurus) Breeds and Subspecies. Journal of Heredity
104(4): 500-509.

DORON-FAIGENBOIM, A., A. STERN, I. MAYROSE, E. BACHARACH, and T.
PUPKO. 2005. Selecton: a server for detecting evolutionary forces at a single
amino-acid site. Bioinformatics. 21(9): 2101-2103.

DRUMMOND, A.J. M.A. SUCHARD, D. XIE and A. RAMBAUT. 2012. Bayesian
Phylogenetics with BEAUti and the BEAST 1.7 Molecular Biology and Evolution
29(8): 1969-1973.

EDGAR, R.C. 2004. MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Research 32(5): 1792-97.

FARMANULLAH, S.M.H., A. LIANG, G. HUA, Z. UR REHMAN, H.S. TALPUR, M.
SALIM, S. AHMAD, A. ABULAITI, M. KHAN, M. SAFDAR, LU. KAKAR, Z.
AHMAD, M.Z. AHMAD, Y. TINGZHU, N.M. SCHREURS, I. BANO and L.
YANG. 2020. Adaptive molecular evolution of AKT3 gene for positive
diversifying selection in mammals. Biomed Research International 2020: 1-13.

GATESY, J. AND M.A. O'LEARY. 2001. Deciphering whale origins with molecules and
fossils. Tr Ecol Evol. 16:562-70.

GEORGES, J.Y.,R. GROSCOLAS, C. GUINET and J.P. ROBIN. 2001. Milking
strategy in subantarctic fur seals Arctocephalus tropicalis breeding on Amsterdam
Island: evidence from changes in milk composition. Physiological and
Biochemical Zoology 74: 548-559.

154

GLASER F., T. PUPKO, I. PAZ, R.E. BELL, D. BECHOR, E. MARTZ and BEN-TAL
N. 2003. ConSurf: Identification of Functional Regions in Proteins by Surface-
Mapping of Phylogenetic Information. Bioinformatics 19:163-164.

GOUY M., S. GUINDON and O. GASCUEL. 2010. SeaView version 4 : a multiplatform
graphical user interface for sequence alignment and phylogenetic tree
building. Molecular Biology and Evolution 27(2):221-224.

GUPTA, S., J.A. STAMATOYANNOPOLOUS, T. BAILEY and W.S. NOBLE. 2007.
Quantifying similarity between motifs. Genome Biology 8(2):R24.

HALL, B.G. 2018. Phylogenetic Trees Made Easy. 5" edition. New York, USA: Oxford
University Press. 351 p.

HOFFMAN, L.C. and D. CAWTHORN. 2014. Meat, animal, poultry and fish production
and management: exotic and other species. Encyclopedia of Meat Sciences
(Second Edition). M. Dikeman and C. Devine (eds.). New York: Academic Press.
pp. 190-198.

HOFMEYR, G.J.G. 2015. Arctocephalus tropicalis. The IUCN Red List of Threatened
Species 2015:e.T2062A45224547.

JAYARAJ, V., R. SUHANYA, M. VJAYASARATHY, P. ANANDAGOPU and E.
RAJASEKARAN. 2009. Role of large hydrophobic residues in
proteins. Bioinformation 3(9): 409-412.

JENSEN, R.G. and D.S. NEWBURG. 1995. Bovine milk lipids. Handbook of Milk
Composition 85(2): 295-350.

KONTOPIDIS, G., C. HOLT AND L. SAWYER. 2004. S-lactoglobulin: binding
properties, structure and function. J. Dairy Sci. 87: 785-796.

KOSAKOVSKY POND, S.L. and S.W. FROST. 2005. Datamonkey: Rapid detection of
selective pressure on individual sites of codon alignments. Bioinformatics
21:2531-2533.

KOSAKOVSKY POND, S.L., D. POSADA, M.B. GRAVENOR, C.H. WOELK and
S.D.W. FROST. 2006. GARD: a genetic algorithm for recombination detection.
Bioinformatics 22(24): 3096-3098.

KREITMAN, M. 2000. Methods to detect selection in populations with applications to
the human. Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics 1:539-559.

155

KUMAR, S. G. STECHER, M. LI, C. KNYAZ and K. TAMURA. 2018. MEGA X:
Molecular Evolutionary Genetics. Analysis across. computing
platforms. Molecular Biology and Evolution 35:1547-1549.

KUMAR, S., Q. TAO, S. WEAVER, M. SANDERFORD, M.A. CARABALLO-ORTIZ,
S. SHARMA, S.L.K. POND AND S. MIURA. 2021. An evolutionary portrait of
the progenitor SARS-CoV-2 and its dominant offshoots in COVID-19 pandemic.
Mol Biol Evol. 38(8):3046-3059.

LANDETE-CASTILLEJOS, T., A. GARCIA, J.A. GOMEZ and L. GALLEGO. 2003.
Lactation under food constraints in Iberian red deer Cervus elaphus hispanicus.
Wildlife Biology, 9: 131-139.

LOCH, J, A, A. POLIT, A. GORECKI, P. BONAREK, K. KURPIEWSKA, M.
DZIEDZICKA-WASYLEWSKA and K. LEWINSKI. 2011. Two modes of fatty
acid binding to bovine beta-lactoglobulin-crystallographic and spectroscopic
studies. J. Mol. Recognit. 24:341-349.

LUGO RAMOS, J.S., K.E. DELMORE and M. LIEDVOGEL. 2017. Candidate genes for
migration do not distinguish migratory and non-migratory birds. Journal of
Comparative Physiology 203(6-7): 383-397.

MANGUY, J. and D.C. SHEILDS. 2019. Implications of kappa-casein evolutionary
diversity for the self-assembly and aggregation of casein micelles. R. Soc. Open
Sci. 6:190939.

MOMOH, O.M., S.T. VINCENT and A. YAKUBU. 2015. In silico analysis of beta-
lactoglobulin gene in some selected mammalian species. Biotechnology in
Animal Husbandry 31(3): 327-338.

MURRELL, B., J.O. WERTHEIM, S. MOOLA, T. WEIGHILL, K. SCHEFFLER and
S.L. KOSAKOVSKY POND. 2012. Detecting Individual Sites Subject to
Episodic Diversifying Selection. PLoS Genetics 8(7): 1002764.

MURRELL, B. S. MOOLA, A. MABONA, T. WEIGHILL, D. SHEWARD, S.L
KOSAKOVSKY POND and K. SCHEFFER. 2013. FUBAR: A Fast,
Unconstrained Bayesian AppRoximation for Inferring Selection. Molecular
Biology and Evolution 30(5):1196-1205.

NIKAIDO, M., A.P. ROONEY and N. OKADA. 1999. Phylogenetic relationships among
cetartiodactyls based on insertions of short and long interspersed elements:
hippopotamuses are the closest extant relatives of whales. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA. 96:10261-6.

156

OFTEDAL OT. 1997. Lactation in whales and dolphins: evidence of divergence between
baleen- and toothed-species. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia 2(3):205-30.

OFTEDAL, 0. T. and SJ. IVERSON. 1995. Phylogenetic variation in the gross
composition of milks. In Handbook of Milk Composition. Jensen, R. (ed). New
York, NY: Academic Press. pp. 749-789.

OGDEN, T.H. AND M.S. ROSENBERG. 2006. Multiple. Sequence Alignment
Accuracy And Phylogenetic Inference. Syst. Biol 55: 314-328.

PRASAD, A.B., M.W. Allard and E.D. GREEN. 2008. Confirming the phylogeny of
mammals by use of large comparative sequence data sets. Molecular biology and
evolution, 25(9): 1795-1808.

REHMAN, S. T. FENG, S. WU, X. LUO, A. LEI, B. LUOBU, F. HASSAN. AND Q.
LIU. 2021. Comparative genomics, evolutionary and gene regulatory regions
analysis of Casein Gene Family in Bubalus bubalis. Frontiers in Genetics 12: 1-
ll.

REY-CAMPOS, M., B. NOVOA, A. PALLAVICINI, M. GERDOL and A. FIGUERAS.
2020. Comparative genomics reveals a significant sequence variability of mycitin
genes in Mytilus galloprovincialis. Biomolecules 2020(10): 943-961.

ROBINSON-RECHAVI, M. and D. GRAUR. 2002. Usage Optimalization of Unevenly
Sampled Data through the Combination of Quartet Trees: A Eutherian Draft
Phylogeny Based on 640 Nuclear and Mitochondrial Proteins. Israel Journal of
Zoology 47 (2002): 259-270.

ROY, D., A. YE, P.J. MOUGHAN, and H. SINGH. 2020. Composition, Structure, and
Digestive Dynamics of Milk From Different Species—A Review. Frontiers in
Nutrition 2020 (7). DOI=10.3389/fnut.2020.577759 :

SAWYER, L. 2021. 8-Lactoglobulin and Glycodelin: Two Sides of the Same Coin.
Frontiers in Physiology 12: 1-18.

SELA, I., H. ASHKENAZY, K. KATOH and T. PUPKO. 2015.GUIDANCE2: accurate
detection of unreliable alignment regions accounting for the uncertainty of
multiple parameters. Nucleic Acids Research 43 (Web Server issue): W7-W14.

SKIBIEL, A.L., LM. DOWNING, T.J. ORR and W.R. HOOD. 2013. The evolution of
the nutrient composition of mammalian milks. Journal of Animal Ecology
82:1254-1264.

STERN, A., A. DORON-FAIGENBOIM, E. EREZ, E. MARTZ, E. BACHARACH and
T. PUPKO. 2007. Selecton 2007: advanced models for detecting positive and

187

purifying selection using a Bayesian inference approach. Nucleic Acids Research.
35: W506-W511.

SUCHARD, M.A., P. LEMEY, G. BAELE, D.L. AYRES, A.J. DRUMMOND and A.
RAMBAUT. 2018. Bayesian phylogenetic and phylodynamic data integration
using BEAST 1.10. Virus Evolution 4(1): 16.

SUN, W., H. CHANG, Z.J. REN, Z.P. YANG, R.Q. GENG, S.X. LU, L. DU and K.
TSUNODA. 2004. Genetic differentiation between sheep and goats based on
microsatellite DNA. AsianAust. J. Anim. Sci. 17(5): 583-587.

THEWISSEN, J.G.M., L.N. COOPER and J.C. GEORGE. 2009. From Land to Water:
the Origin of Whales, Dolphins, and Porpoises. Evo Edu Outreach 2:272-288

THOMPSON, J.D., F. PLEWNIAK and O. POCH. 1999. A Comprehensive Comparison
of Multiple Sequence Alignment Programs. Nucleic Acids Res. 27:2682-2690

WANG, H.C., K. LI, E. SUSKO and A.J. ROGER. 2008. A class frequency mixture
model that adjusts for site-specific amino acid frequencies and improves inference
of protein phylogeny. BMC Evol Biol 8: 331.

WANG J, P. YOUKHARIBACHE, D. ZHANG, C.J. LANCZYCKI, R.C GEER, T.
MADE], L. PHAN, M. WARD, S. LU, G.H. MARCHLER, Y. WANG, S.H.
BRYANT, L.Y GEER and A. MARCHLER-BAUER. 2020. iCn3D, a Web-based
3D Viewer for Sharing 1D/2D/3D Representations of Biomolecular
Structures. Bioinformatics 36(1):131-135.

WANGDI, J. 2015. Milk quality from Yak and Zom milk in Bhutan. Livestock Research
for Rural Development 27:2.

WARD, T.J., L. HONEYCUTT and J.N. DERR. 1997. Nucleotide sequence evolution at
the «-casein locus: Evidence for positive selection within the Family Bovidae.
Genetics 147(4): 1863-1872.

WEAVER, S, S.D. SHANK, S.J. SPIELMAN, M. LI, S.V. MUSE and S.L.
KOSAKOVSKY POND. 2018. Datamonkey 2.0: A Modem Web Application for
Characterizing Selective and Other Evolutionary Processes. Mol Biol Evol.
35(3):773-777.

WEINER, G. 2003. The Yak. FAO RAP 18: 338.

ZHANG, S., F. CHEN and Y. ZHANG. 2018. Recent progress of porcine milk
components and mammary gland function. J Anim Sci Biotechnol. 9:77.

GENERAL SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Enhancing milk production and improving the quality of milk without increasing
the size of the herd are the foremost goals of selection in the dairy industry. Early
selection of young animals to be used as future breeding stock has become possible and
more efficient through the use of specific DNA markers. To develop meaningful
strategies for marker-assisted selection, it is paramount to determine the proportions of
genotypes and alleles of candidate markers and know the association of specific variants
of these candidate genes with favorable milk production and composition traits in the
population. Furthermore, a better understanding of candidate genes can be obtained by
studying their molecular evolution across milk-producing taxa as it shaped the diversity

in structure and function of these genes.

Firstly, the genotype profile of a herd of 286 HxJ cows was determined using
DNA extracted from hair follicles. The two genes were amplified separately via PCR
using primers based on previous papers by Mitra et al. (1998) and Rachagani et al.
(2006). The amplicons for CSN3 and BLG were digested with Hinfl and Bsnl,
respectively, to detect the D148A SNP in CSN3 and the VI18A SNP in BLG. PCR-
RFLP genotyping was successfully done on 283 individual cows for CSN3 and 275 cows
for BLG. Results show that all three genotypes for both loci existed in the population,
with the heterozygotes occurring most frequently in the population. The calculated gene
frequencies for the CSN3 A and B alleles were almost equal at 0.509 and 0.491,

respectively. Similarly, almost equal gene frequencies were recorded for BLG A (0.507)

159

and B (0.493) alleles. The genotypic frequencies of both loci also showed no significant
departure from the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Such balanced distributions for the two
alleles of both loci indicate the absence of fixation of either allele in the herd. This is
advantageous for the breeding program since more variability is available to select from,
and the breeder has more freedom to decide which genetic variant to select to produce

milk with the desired composition and quantity.

Next, the individual and joint effects of CSN3 and BLG genes on peak milk yield
(PMY), average daily milk yield (ADMY), fat content (FC) and yield (FY), protein
content (PC) and yield (PY), lactose content (LC) and yield (LY), and protein-to-fat ratio
(PER) were determined using two approaches, namely univariate ANOVA and multiple
linear regression (MLR). CSN3 A allele was proven to be significantly associated with
higher ADMY, FC, FY and LC while CSN3 B was associated with higher PC and PFR.
On the contrary, the results for BLG were not as conclusive as those for CSN3 since BLG
variants that were previously reported to have strong correlation were found to be not
associated to these traits at all. This may be due to inconsistencies in rearing conditions,
breed used, and data analysis methods used by different researchers. In our study, BLG
was observed to be associated only with two traits, namely ADMY and FY, with the BLG
B allele contributing to higher ADMY and FY. However, BLG B also exhibited some
tendency to increase PMY, PC, PY, and LY, but not significantly. As such, further
validation on the effect of BLG using more samples is necessary. Furthermore, the
interaction of the two loci was revealed to have an effect on PMY. When considered

individually, CSN3 and BLG did not show any association with PMY. However, when

160

taken jointly, cows with combined CSN3-BLG genotype of ABBB were observed to
have a considerable increase in PMY. Contrastingly, a lower PMY was observed among

cows with ABAA combined genotype.

Our results suggest that increasing the frequency of the CSN3 B allele would have
a positive effect on milk that is sold to cheese manufacturers. Since this allele has been
shown to enhance protein content and protein-to-fat ratio significantly, we can expect a
higher cheese yield from milk obtained from CSN3 BB cows since a high protein content
has been shown to be highly correlated with higher cheese yield (Verdier-Metz et al.,
2001). As the breeder selects for milk with high protein content, lactose content may
also be reduced since it has been shown in this study that CSN3 B was associated with
lower LC and LY. Alternatively, milk fat content can be improved by selecting for cows
that are homozygous for the CSN3 A variant. This would benefit herds that produce milk
needed to make soft and more flavorful cheese. As for milk yield, since CSN3 A and
BLG B have shown strong association with higher ADMY, these variants can be used as
markers to select for improving milk yield. Specifically, as revealed by the results of
multiple regression and univariate analyses, the goal of breeders should be to produce
more cows with the CSN3-BLG combined genotype of ABBB. Thus, these SNPs could
be used as potential markers to putatively identify enhanced genetic predisposition for

milk yield and quality among dairy crossbreds in the Philippines.

Although the results of these two approaches generally agree with each other,

MLR has the advantage of being able to explore simultaneously the effect of several

161

predictors of a particular milk trait. In this study, aside from the individual effects of
CSN3 and BLG genotypes, the interaction between these two loci were simultaneously
evaluated along with non-genotypic variables such as the breed composition, age at start
of calving, and calving number. It was observed that cows that are more Jersey had
lower values for all nine milk traits. Also, cows that calved in an older age or have
calved previously tend to have higher milk yield and fat content, but lower protein

content and protein-to-fat ratio.

In silico analyses of candidate gene can also add to the understanding of the
specific role of that gene in the whole biological process that generates the final trait.
Since the «-casein has already been well-studied in terms of its actual function and
evolution, B-lactoglobulin was considered here. The phylogenetic trees based on the
complete coding sequence and promoter region of BLG revealed groupings that validate
the present taxonomy of the 13 selected eutherian taxa. However, there was no clear
separation of the taxa according to milk nutrient composition since taxa with notably high

fat, protein or lactose contents did not group together.

Also, according to our results, selection analysis identified codon sites under
positive and negative selection. Codons D96, K100, S110, E112, P113, QUIS, V118,
128, A139, Al42 and F151, of the BLG gene were under positive diversifying
selection. Interestingly, one of the these is the SNP that was studied in the association

analysis, particularly V118. On the other hand, the position of purifying sites in the

162

mature protein supports the proposed function of BLG in the transport of important

molecules needed for the development of the neonate animal.

Finally, the 1000-bp region upstream from the start codon contained 10 conserved
motifs. Two of which appeared to be putative binding sites of a zinc finger transcription

factor that may possibly regulate transcription of the BLG gene.

In conclusion, these studies highlight the importance of examining candidate
genes to evaluate their usefulness as genetic markers for important economic traits such
as milk yield and quality. As has been pointed out by Raschia et al. (2018), selecting
genetic markers should combine information from various sources to support the
candidate status of these regions. Using PCR-RFLP genotyping and association analysis,
adequate variability in terms of the CSN3 and BLG markers was proven to exist among
the HxJ crossbreds, and that the CNS3 and BLG variants affect the yield and quality of
milk from HxJ crossbreds in the Philippines. Using phylogenetic analyses, the diversity
and evolution of the BLG gene across species were further described, leading to
inferences on the possible cause of variation in BLG gene expression among them and
the validation of the biological function of the gene product in the whole lactation and
reproduction process. Such information can prove useful in understanding the
association of the candidate gene with desired economic traits such as high milk yield and
enhanced quality in terms of fat, protein and lactose contents. Overall, these findings can
be applied in devising effective breeding procedures to improve milk yield and

composition of dairy cattle in the Philippines.

RECOMMENDATIONS

Further studies related to this research can be carried out in the future. It is
interesting to find out the association of CSN3 and BLG variants and other genomic
tegions with milk traits in specific stages of lactation (early, mid and late lactations) in
this crossbred population. Also, instead of total protein content, concentrations of specific
milk proteins can also be taken into account. Moreover, as suggested by Oliviera et al.
(2018), it will also be more accurate to use estimated EBVs (estimated breeding values)
based on test-day records since they take into account the genetic and environmental
effects for each specific time. More importantly, an investigation on the changes in gene
expression across genotypes and even lactation stages is also recommended to study

further the molecular role of these candidate genes on milk production.

As for the in silico analyses, since a major limitation was the availability of the
needed sequences from online databases, it is recommended to include gene sequences
for other BLG-producing taxa such as other ungulates, namely domesticated yak (Bos
grunniens), moose (Alces alces) and hippopotamus (Hippopotamus amphibius), as their
sequences become deposited to the database. Similarly, since the fattest known milk is
believed to be that of the hooded seal (Cystophora cristata), its BLG sequence should

also been considered.

Moreover, in a recent paper by Sawyer (2021), it was pointed out that among

members of the lipocalin family, BLG is most closely related to glycodelin (Gd), an

endometrial protein implicated in fertilization, successful implantation and survival of the
fetus and placenta during the first trimester of human pregnancy. Thus, further
investigation of the evolution of the BLG in relation to that of glycodelin (Gd) may be
carried out as this may shed light on the elusive functional role of BLG. Since genes with
similar selective signatures are more likely to share common function (Shapiro and Alm,
2008), it would be useful to explore sites under diversifying and purifying selection in the
Gd gene. Another approach is to examine the occurrence of BLG pseudogenes in
mammals. A pseudogene is a DNA sequence that resembles a known but cannot produce
a functional protein (Chandrasekaran and Betran, 2008). It usually starts as a new copy
of the gene that arose through duplication or retrotransposition. Then through mutation,
the new copy becomes inactive over the course of evolution. Kontopidis et al. (2004)
suggested that the BLG gene might have evolved from the Gd gene. That is, Gd reflects
the original function of BLG, but through gene duplication, the new copy somehow
became the present-day BLG. A study of pseudogenes can provide us with more

information as to validate this hypothesis.

Lastly, the promoter region was studied here by searching for possible cis-
regulatory motifs. To explore the possibility of epigenetic regulation, it can be further
analyzed by identifying CpG islands in the vicinity of the promoter through bioinformatic

approach.

LITERATURE CITED

AHMAD, H.L, L. GUIQIONG, X. JIANG, C. LIU, Y. CHONG and H. HUARONG.
2017. Adaptive molecular evolution of MCIR gene reveals the evidence for
positive diversifying selection in indigenous goat populations. Ecology and
Evolution 7:5170-5180.

AKYUZ, B., 0.K. AGAOGLU and O. ERTUGRUL. 2012. Genetic polymorphism of
kappa casein, growth hormone and prolactin genes in Turkish native cattle breeds.
International Journal of Dairy Technology 65:38-44.

ALBARELLA, S. M. SELVAGGI, E. D’ANZA, G. COSENZA, S. CAIRA, A.
SCALONI, A. FONTANA. V. PERETTI and F. CIOTOLA. 2020. Influence of
the casein composite genotype on milk quality and coagulation properties in the
endangered Agarolese cattle breed. Animals 10: 892.

ALEANDRI, R., L. BUTTAZZONI, J. SCHNEIDER, A. CAROLI and R. DAVOLI.
1990. The effects of milk protein polymorphisms on milk components and
cheese-producing ability. J. Dairy Sci. 73, 241-255.

ALEXANDER, L., J.G. HAYES, W. BAWDEN, A.F. STEWART and A.G.
MACKINLAY. 1993. Complete nucleotide sequence of the bovine B-
lactoglobulin gene Anim. Biotechnol 4:1.

ALIPANAH, M., L.A. KALASHNIKOVA and G.V. RODIONOV. 2008. Kappa-casein
and PRL-RSA I genotypic frequencies in two Russian cattle breeds. Arch. Zootec.
57: 131-138.

ANG, P. 2020. Dairy and Products Annual of the Philippines. United States Department
of Agricultural Foreign Agricultural Service Report RP2020-0074. pp. 10.
DAWES RJ. 2008. Breeds of Cattle. 2 ed. TRS Publishing Corp. Springfield,
Missouri. pp. 391.

ANGGRAENI, A., C. SUMANTRI, A. FARAJALLAH and E. ANDREAS. 2017.
Kappa-casein genotype frequencies in Holstein-Friesian dairy cattle in West Java
province. Med Pet. 33: 61-67.

ATASHI, H., A. ASAADI, and M. HOSTENS. 2021. Association between age at first
calving and lactation performance, lactation curve, calving interval, calf birth
weight and dystocia in Holstein dairy cows. PLoS One 16(1): €0244825

AULDIST, M., K. JOHNSTON, N. WHITE, W. FITZSIMONS AND M. BOLAND.
2004. A comparison of the composition, coagulation characteristics and
cheesemaking capacity of milk from Friesian and Jersey dairy cows. Journal Of
Dairy Research 71(1): 51-57.

166

AYRES, D.L., A. DARLING, D.J. ZWICKL, P. BEERLI, M.T. HOLDER, P.O. LEWIS,
J.P. HUELSENBECK, F. RONQUIST, D.L. SWOFFORD, M.P. CUMMINGS,
A. RAMBAUT and M.A. SUCHARD. 2012. BEAGLE: An Application
Programming Interface and High-Performance Computing Library for Statistical
Phylogenetics. Systematic Biology 61(1): 170-173.

AZEVEDO, A.L., C.S. NASCIMENTO, R.S. STEINBERG, M.R. CARVALHO, M.G.
PEIXOTO, R.L. TEODORO, R.S. VERNEQUE, S.E. GUIMARAES and M.A.
MACHADO. 2008. Genetic polymorphism of the kappa-casein gene in Brazilian
cattle. Genet Mol Res 7: 623-630. doi: 10.4238/vol7-3gmr428.

BAILEY, K.W., C.M. JONES and A.J. HEINRICHS. 2005. Economic retums to
Holstein and Jersey herds under multiple component pricing. Joumal of Dairy
Science 88(6): 2269-2280.

BAILEY, T.L. and C. ELKAN. 1994. Fitting a mixture model by expectation
maximization to discover motifs in biopolymers. Proceedings of the Second
International Conference on Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology. AAAI
Press: California. pp. 28-36.

BARBOSA, S.B.P., LLM. DE ARAUJO, M.F. MARTINS, E.C. DA SILVA, L.A
JACOPINI, A.M.V. BATISTA and M.V.B. DA SILVA. 2019. Genetic
association of variations in the kappa-casein and B-lactoglobulin genes with milk
traits in Girolando cattle. Rev. Bras. Saude Prod. Anim. 20:1-12.

BARTONOVA, P., I. VRTKOVA, K. KAPLANOVA and T. URBAN. 2012.
Association between CSN3 and BCO2 gene polymorphisms and milk
performance traits in the Czech Fleckvieh cattle breed. Genetics and Molecular
Research 1 1(2):1058-1063.

BENCSIK I., N. PACALA, J. STANCULET, A. TELEA and A. BENCSIK. 2007. The
influence of k-casein alleles on milk production and quality in a Holstein-Friesian
cow population. Sci Pap Anim Sci Biotech 40: 13-17.

BERRY, S.D., N. LOPEZ-VILLALOBOS, E.M. BEATTIE, S.R. DAVIS, L.F. ADAMS,
N.L. THOMAS, A.E. ANKERSMIT-UDY, A.M. STANFELD, K. LEHNERT,
H.E. WARD, J.A. ARIAS, R.J. SPLEMAN and R.G. SNELL. 2010. Mapping a
quantitative trait locus for the concentration of 8-lactoglobulin in milk and the
effect of B-lactoglobulin genetic variants on the composition of milk from
Holstein-Friesian x Jersey crossbred cows. New Zealand Veterinary Journal
58(1):1-5.

BEUZEN, N.D., M.J. STEER and K.C. CHANG. 2000. Molecular markers and their use
in animal breeding. Ver J. 160: 42-52.

167

BHAT, M.R., T.A. DAR and L.R. SINGH. 2016. Casein proteins: structural and
functional aspects. Gigli 1. (Ed.), Milk Proteins - From Structure to Biological
Properties and Health Aspects. InTechOpen: London. pp. 3-18.

BONAREK, P., H. DZIEDZICKA-WASYLEWSKA, A. GORECKI, K.
KURPIEWSKA, K. LEWINSKI, J. LOCH and A. POLIT. 2011. Two modes of
fatty acid binding to bovine beta-lactoglobulin-crystallographic and spectroscopic
studies. J.Mol.Recognit. 24:341-349.

BOONKUM, W., I. MISZTAL, M. DUANGJINDA, V. PATTARAJINDA, S.
TUMWASORN and J. SANPOTE. 2011. Genetic effects of heat stress on milk
yield of Thai Holstein crossbreds. J. Dairy Sci. 94: 487-492.

BOTSTEIN D., R.L. WHITE, M. SKOLNICK and R.W. DAVIS. 1980. Construction of
a genetic linkage map in man using restriction fragment length polymorphisms.
Am J Hum Genet 32: 314-331.

BOVENHUIS, H. J.A. Van Arendonk JA and S. Korver. 1992 Associations between milk
protein polymorphisms and milk production traits, Journal of Dairy Science 75:
2549-2559.

BROWNLOW, S., H.H. MORAIS CABRAL, R. COOPER, D.R. FLOWER, S.J.
YEWDALL, I. POLIKARPOV, A.C. NORTH and L. SAWYER. 1997. Bovine
beta-lactoglobulin at 1.8 A resolution- still an enigmatic lipocalin. Structure
5:481-95.

BUSKE, F.A., B. BODEN, D.C. BAUER and T. L. BAILEY. 2010. Assigning roles to
DNA regulatory motifs using comparative genomics. Bioinformatics 26(7): 860-
866.

BYLUND G. 2015. Dairy Processing Handbook. 2™ ed. Tetra Pak Processing Systems
AB: United Kingdom. 436 p. Corpus ID: 134907854.

CAO Z.P., Z. WANG, X.Y. WANG and H. LI. 2007. Association of Spotl4a gene
polymorphisms with body weight in the chicken. Poultry Science 86(9): 1873-
1880.

CAROLI, A., S. CHESSA, P. BOLLA, E. BUDELLI and G.C.GANDINI. 2009. Genetic
structure of milk protein polymorphisms and effects on milk production traits in a
local dairy cattle. Journal of Animal Breeding and Genetics 121: 119-127.

CASSELL, B. 2007. Mechanisms of inbreeding depression and heterosis for profitable
dairying. Proc. 4th Biennial W. E. Petersen Symposium, University of Minnesota,
St. Paul. University of Minnesota Press, St. Paul. pp. 1-6.

168

CASSELL, B. and J. MCALLISTER. 2009. Dairy crossbreeding research: Results from
current projects. Virginia Cooperative Extension. pp. 404-094.

CHAN, E.K., S.H. NAGARAJ and A. REVERTER. 2010. The evolution of tropical
adaptation: comparing taurine and zebu cattle. Anim Genet. 41(5):467-77.

CHANDRASEKARAN ,C.and E.BETRAN. 2008. Origins of new genes and
pseudogenes. Nature Education 1(1):181.

COFFEY, E.L., B. HORAN, R.D. EVANS and D.P. BERRY. 2016. Milk production
and fertility performance of Holstein, Friesian, and Jersey purebred cows and
their respective crosses in seasonal-calving commercial farms. J. Dairy Sci.
99:5681~5689,

COSTA, A., N. LOPEZ-VILLALOBOS, N.W. SNEDDON, L. SHALLOO, M.
FRANZOI, M. DE MARCHI and M. PENASA. 2019. Milk lactose-Current
Status and future challenges in dairy cattle. J. Dairy Sci 102: 5883-5898.

COSTA, A., N. LOPEZ-VILLALOBOS, N.W. SNEDDON, L. SHALLOO, M.
FRANZOI, M. DE MARCHI and M. PENASA. 2019. Milk lactose-Current
Status and future challenges in dairy cattle. J. Dairy Sci 102: 5883-5898.

CRONIN, M.A., M.D. MACNEIL, N. VU, V. LEESBURG, H.D. BLACKBURN and
JN. DERR. 2013. Genetic Variation and Differentiation of Bison (Bison bison)
Subspecies and Cattle (Bos taurus) Breeds and Subspecies. Journal of Heredity
104(4): 500-509.

CZERNIAWSKA-PIATKOWSKA, E., M. SZEWCZUK, A. OLSZEWSKA and E
CHOCILOWICZ. 2011. Association between beta-lactoglobulin (LGB)
polymorphismand yield and composition of milk of holstein-friesian cows
imported from Sweden. Acta Sci. Pol., Zootechnica 10 (1) 2011, 9-18.

DA CRUZ, A.S., D.C. SILVA, L.B. MINASI, L.K.D.F. TEIXEIRA, F.M. RODRIGUES,
CC. DA SILVA, AS. DO CARMO, M.V.G.B. DA SILVA, Y.T.
UTSUNOMIYA, J.F. GARCIA and A.D. DA CRUZ. 2021. Single-Nucleotide
Polymorphism variations associated with specific genes putatively identified
enhanced genetic predisposition for 305-day milk yield in the Girolando
crossbred . Frontiers in Genetics 11:1720.

DAVOODI S.H., R. SHAHBAZI R, S. ESMAEILI, S. SOHRABVANDI, A.M.
MORTAZAVIAN, S. JAZAYERI and A. TASLIMI. 2016. Health-related
aspects of milk proteins. Iran J Pharm Res. 2016 Summer;15(3):573-591.

DAWES RJ. 2008. Breeds of Cattle. 2" ed. TRS Publishing Corp.: Missouri. pp. 391.

169

DEB, R. U. SINGH, S. KUMAR, R. SINGH, G. SENGAR AND A. SHARMA. 2014.
Genetic polymorphism and association of kappa-casein gene with milk production
traits among Frieswal (HF x Sahiwal) cross breed of Indian origin. Iranian
Journal of Veterinary Research, Shiraz University 15(4): 406-406.

DEKKERS, J.C.M. 2012. Application of Genomics Tools to Animal Breeding Current
Genomics 13: 207-212.

DINKA, H., and A. MILKESA. 2020. Unfolding SARS-CoV-2 viral genome to
understand its gene expression regulation. Infection, genetics and evolution.
Joumal of Molecular Epidemiology And Evolutionary Genetics In Infectious
Diseases 84: 104386.

DOGRU, U., M. OZDEMIR and S. ERCISLI. 2011. Genetic polymorphism in Kappa-
Casein gene detected by PCR-RFLP in cattle. Journal of Applied Animal
Research 33(1): 65-68.

DORON-FAIGENBOIM, A., A. STERN, I. MAYROSE, E. BACHARACH, and T.
PUPKO. 2005. Selecton: a server for detecting evolutionary forces at a single
amino-acid site. Bioinformatics. 21(9): 2101-2103.

DRUMMOND, A.J. M.A. SUCHARD, D. XIE and A. RAMBAUT. 2012. Bayesian
Phylogenetics with BEAUti and the BEAST 1.7 Molecular Biology and Evolution
29(8): 1969-1973.

DUIFHUIS-RIVERA, T., C. LEMUS-FLORES, M.A. AYALA-VALDOVINOS, D.R.
SANCHEZ-CHIPRES, J. GALINDO, GARCIA, K. MEJIA-MARTINEZ and E.
GONZALES-COVARRUBIAS. 2014. Polymorphisms in beta and kappa casein
are not associated with milk production in two highly technified populations of
Holstein cattle in Mexico. J. Anim. Plant & Animal Sciences 24(5): 1316-1321

EDGAR, R.C. 2004. MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Research 32(5): 1792-97.

EENENNAAM A. and J.F. MEDRANO. 1991. Milk protein polymorphisms in
California dairy cattle. J. Dairy Sci. 74: 1730-1742.

EL-GAWAD, M.A.M.A. and N.S. AHMED. 2011. Cheese yield as affected by some
parameters: Review. Acta Sci. Pol., Technol. Aliment. 10(2):131-153.

ETTEMA, J. AND J. SANTOS. 2004. Impact of Age at First Calving on Lactation,
Reproduction, Health, and Income in First-Parity Holstein on Commercial Farms.
Journal of Dairy Science 87: 2730-2742.

170

FALCONER, D.S. and T-F.C. MACKAY. 1996. Introduction to Quantitative Genetics,
4th ed.; Longman Group Ltd.: Essex, UK.

FARMANULLAH, S.M.H., A. LIANG, G. HUA, Z. UR REHMAN, H.S. TALPUR, M.
SALIM, S. AHMAD, A. ABULAITI, M. KHAN, M. SAFDAR, I.U. KAKAR, Z.
AHMAD, M.Z. AHMAD, Y. TINGZHU, N.M. SCHREURS, I. BANO and L.
YANG. 2020. Adaptive molecular evolution of AKT3 gene for positive
diversifying selection in mammals. Biomed Research International 2020: 1-13.

FARRELL, H.M., R. JIMENEZ-FLORES, G.T. BLECK, E.M. BROWN, J.E. BUTLER,
L.K. CREAMER, C.L. HICKS, C.M. HOLLAR, K.F. NG-KWAI-HANG AND
H.E. SWAISGOOD. 2004. Nomenclature of the proteins of cows’ milk-sixth
revision. Journal of Dairy Science 87: 1641-1674.

FELENCZAK, A., Z. GIL, K, ADAMCZYK, P. ZAPLETAL and J. FRELICH. 2008.
Polymorphism of milk «-casein with regard to milk yield and reproductive traits
of Simmental cows, J Agrobiology 25: 201-207.

FERRETTI L., P. LEONE and V. SGARAMELLA. 1990. Long range restriction analysis
of the bovine casein genes. Nucleic Acids Research 18, 6829-6833.

FOLCH, J.M., A. COLL and A. SANCHEZ. 1993. Cloning and sequencing of the cDNA
encoding goat beta-lactoglobulin. J Anim Sci J 71(10): 2832.

FOX, P.F., T. UNIACKE-LOWE, P.L.H. MCSWEENEY and J.A. O’MAHONY. 2015.
Dairy chemistry and biochemistry. 2nd ed. Switzerland: Springer International
Publishing. 598 pp.

FRANZOI, M., C.L. MANUELIAN, M. PENASA and M. DE MARCHI. 2020. Effects
of somatic cell score on milk yield and mid-infrared predicted composition and
technological traits of Brown Swiss, Holstein Friesian, and Simmental cattle
breeds. Journal of Dairy Science 103(1): 791-804.

FREYER, G., Z. LUI, G. ERHARDHT and L. PANICKE. 1999. Casein polymorphism
and relation between milk production traits. J. Anim. Breed. Genet. 116(1999):
87-97.

FULLER, F.H., J.C. BEGHIN, M. BOLANG, B.A. BABCOCK and W. FOSTER. 2006.
Global Prospects for Dairy in Argentina and Chile: Evidence from Field Visits
and Model Simulations. MATRIC Briefing Paper 06-MBP 11 August 2006
Midwest Agribusiness Trade and Research Information Center Iowa State
University Ames, lowa 50011-1070 www.matric.iastate.edu.

GATESY, J. AND M.A. O'LEARY. 2001. Deciphering whale origins with molecules and
fossils. Tr Ecol Evol. 16:562-70.

71

GAUNT, S. N. 1980. Genetic variation in the yields and contents of milk constituents.
Int. Dairy Fed. Bull. Doc. 125:73.

GEARY, U., N. LOPEZ-VILLALOBOS, D.J. GARRICK and L. SHALLOO. 2010.
Development and application of a processing model for the Irish dairy industry
Journal of Dairy Science 93(11): 5091-5100.

GEORGES, J.Y.,R. GROSCOLAS, C. GUINET and J.P. ROBIN. 2001. Milking
strategy in subantarctic fur seals Arctocephalus tropicalis breeding on Amsterdam
Island: evidence from changes in milk composition. Physiological and
Biochemical Zoology 74: 548-559.

GIVENS, I. and K. SHINGFIELD. 2003. Improving the nutritional quality of milk. Dairy
Processing: Improving Quality. 515-531. 10.1533/9781855737075.4.515.

GLASER F., T. PUPKO, I. PAZ, R.E. BELL, D. BECHOR, E. MARTZ and BEN-TAL
N. 2003. ConSurf: Identification of Functional Regions in Proteins by Surface-
Mapping of Phylogenetic Information. Bioinformatics 19:163-164.

GLAZKO V.L, LN. ANDREICHENKO, S.N. KOVALCHUK, T.T. GLAZKO and G.Y.
KOSOVZKY. 2016. Candidate Genes for Control of Cattle Milk Production
Traits. Russian Agricultural Sciences 42(6): 458-464.

GOFF, H.D., A. HILL and M.A. FERRER. 2021. Dairy Science and Technology E-
book. Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial NoDerivatives, University
of Guelph, Canada, _hittps://books.lib.uoguelph.ca/dairyscienceand
technologyebook/.

GONZALES, D.R.R., RR.C.S. YAMBAO, N.O. VILLA, C.B. DELA VINA, M.G.Q.
DIAZ and R.S.A. VEGA. 2018. Association Analysis of Leptin Gene Single
Nucleotide Polymorphisms with Some Production Traits in Pigs (Sus scrofa L.).
Philipp Agric Scientist 101(2):111-118.

GOREWIT, R.C. 1988. Lactation Biology and Methods of Increasing Efficiency. In
Designing Foods: Animal Product Options in the Marketplace Committee on
Technological Options to Improve the Nutritional Attributes of Animal Products.
Washington DC: Board on Agriculture National Research Council National
Academy Press. pp. 124-130.

GOUY M., S. GUINDON and O. GASCUEL. 2010. SeaView version 4 : a multiplatform
graphical user interface for sequence alignment and phylogenetic tree
building. Molecular Biology and Evolution 27(2):221-224.

172

GRADINARJU, A.C., D.E. ILIE and S. CREANGA.2013. Milk protein genetic variants
in Romanian Spotted, Holstein Friesian and Montbéliarde cows and some
correlations with milk parameters. Res J Biotech 8: 3-9.

GUINEE, T.P., EO. MULHOLLAND, J. KELLY and D.J.O. CALLAGHAN. 2007.
Effect of protein-to-fat ratio on the composition, manufacturing efficiency and
yield of cheddar cheese. J. Dairy Sci. 90:110-123.

GUPTA, S., J.A. STAMATOYANNOPOLOUS, T. BAILEY and W.S. NOBLE. 2007.
Quantifying similarity between motifs. Genome Biology 8(2):R24.

GUPTA, V. and H. REUTER. 1993. Firmness and melting quality of processed cheese
foods with added whey protein concentrates. Lait 73: 381-388.

GURSES, M., H. YUCE, E.O. ETEM and B. PATIR. 2016. Polymorphisms of kappa-
casein gene and their effects on milk production traits in Holstein, Jersey and
Brown Swiss cattle. Animal Production Science doi: 10.1071/AN15131.

HAILE-MARIAM, M. and J.E. PRYCE. 2017. Genetic parameters for lactose and its
correlation with other milk production traits and fitness traits in pasture-based
production systems. J. Dairy Sci. 100:3754-3766.

HALL, B.G. 2013. Building Phylogenetic Trees from Molecular Data with MEGA.
Molecular Biology and Evolution 30(5):1229-1235.

HALL, B.G. 2018. Phylogenetic Trees Made Easy. 5" edition. New York, USA: Oxford
University Press. 351 p.

HILL, A. and M.A. FERRER. 2021. Cheese Making Technology E-book. Creative
Commons Attribution NonCommercial NoDerivatives. University of Guelph,
Canada. _https://books.lib.uoguelph.ca/cheesemakingtechnologyebook/chapter
/raw-milk-quality/

HOFFMAN, L.C. and D. CAWTHORN. 2014. Meat, animal, poultry and fish production
and management: exotic and other species. Encyclopedia of Meat Sciences
(Second Edition). M. Dikeman and C. Devine (eds.). New York: Academic Press.
pp. 190-198.

HOFMEYR, G.J.G. 2015. Arctocephalus tropicalis. The IUCN Red List of Threatened
Species 2015:¢.T2062A45224547.

HRISTOV P., D. TEOFANOVA, I. MEHANDZHIYSKI, L. ZAGORCHEV and G.
RADOSLAVOV. 2012. Application of Milk Proteins Genetic Polymorphism for
Selection and Breeding of Dairy Cows in Bulgaria. In N. Chaiyabutr (Ed.), Milk

173

Production—Advanced Genetic Traits, Cellular Mechanism, Animal Management
and Health. London: InTech. http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/50758,

HUANG W., F. PENAGARICANO, K.R. AHMAD, J.A. LUCEY, K.A. WEIGEL and
H. KHATIB. 2012. Association between milk protein gene variants and protein
composition traits in dairy cattle. J Dairy Sci 95: 440-449.

HUTJENS, M.F. 2002. Dairy Farm Management Systems. In H. Roginski (Ed.),
Encyclopedia of Dairy Sciences. New York: Elsevier. pp. 693-699,
https://doi.org/10.1016/B0-12-227235-8/00125-5.

IBM CORP. 2019. IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, Version 26.0. Armonk, NY:
/ANIBM Corp.

IKONEN, T, M. OJALA and O. RUOTTINEN. 1999. Associations between milk protein
polymorphism and first lactation milk production traits in Finnish Ayrshire cows.
Joumal of Dairy Science 82: 1026-1033.

ILIE, D.E., A. MAGDIN, A. SALAJEANU, R.I. NEAMT and I. VINTILA. 2009.
Influence of CSN 3 marker on milk composition in Romanian Brown and
Romanian Simmental cattle from SCDCB Arad. Sci Pap Anim Sci Biotech 42:
54-57.

IRANI, R., V. UNNIKRISHNAN, C.N. DHARAIYA and B. SINGH. 2012. Factors
affecting syneresis in yoghurt: A review. Indian J. Dairy and Biosci 23:1-9.

JACOB, E. and Z. PUHAN. 1992. Technological properties of milk as influenced by
genetic polymorphism of milk proteins - A Review. Int. Dairy Journal 2: 157-
178.

JAWASREH, K., A. AL MAREEN and P. AAD. 2019. Effect and interaction of B-
Lactoglobulin, Kappa Casein, and Prolactin Genes on milk production and
composition of Awassi sheep. Animals 9:1-14.

JAYARAJ, V., R. SUHANYA, M. VJAYASARATHY, P. ANANDAGOPU and E.
RAJASEKARAN. 2009. Role of large hydrophobic residues in
proteins. Bioinformation 3(9): 409-412.

JENNESS, R. and C. HOLT. 1987. Casein and lactose concentrations in milk of 31
species are negatively correlated. Experimentia 43: 1015-1018.

JENNESS, R. and S. PATTON. 2018. Principles of Dairy Chemistry. Scientific
International (Pvt) Ltd.: India. pp. 230-245.

174

JENSEN, R.G. and D.S. NEWBURG. 1995. Bovine milk lipids. Handbook of Milk
Composition 85(2): 295-350.

JU, Z., J. HUANG, Q. LI, H. WANG, J. ZHONG and C. WANG. 2011. The
polymorphisms of x-casein gene and their associations with milk production traits
and expression analysis in Chinese Holstein cattle. African Journal of
Biotechnology 10(62): 13368-13375.

KAPELINSKAIA, T.V., T.M. TKACH, LK. SMIRNOV and S.I. GORODETSKII. 1989.
The Bos taurus casein genes. Isolation and characterization of the kappa-casein
gene. Genetika 25(1):15-23.

KELLEHER, M. M., P. R. AMER, L. SHALLOO, R. D. EVANS, T. J. BYRNE, F.
BUCKLEY and D. P. BERRY. 2015. Development of an index to rank dairy
females on expected lifetime profit. J. Dairy Sci. 98:4225-4239.

KIPLAGAT, S.K., LIMO, M.K. and LS. KOSGEY. 2012. Genetic Improvement of
Livestock for Milk Production. _ https://www.intechopen.com/books/milk-
production-advanced-genetic-traits-cellular-mechanism-animal-management-and-
health/genetic-improvement-of-livestock-for-milk-production DOI:
10.5772/50761.

KONTOPIDIS, G., C. HOLT and L. SAWYER. 2004. 8-Lactoglobulin: Binding
properties, structure and function. J. Dairy Sci. 87: 785-796.

KONTOPIDIS, G., C. HOLT AND L. SAWYER. 2004. B-lactoglobulin: binding
properties, structure and function. J. Dairy Sci, 87: 785-796.

KOONAWOOTRITTRIRON, S., M.A. ELZO and T. THONGPRAPI. 2009. Genetic
trends in a Holstein x other breeds multibreed dairy population in Central
Thailand, Livest. Sci. 122:186-192.

KOOPAEI, H.K. and A.E. KOSHKOIYEH. 2014. SNPs Genotyping Technologies and Their
Applications in Farm Animals Breeding Programs: Review. Brazilian Archives Of
Biology and Technology 57(1): 87-95.

KOSAKOVSKY POND, S.L. and S.W. FROST. 2005. Datamonkey: Rapid detection of
selective pressure on individual sites of codon alignments. Bioinformatics
21:2531-2533.

KOSAKOVSKY POND, S.L., D. POSADA, M.B. GRAVENOR, C.H. WOELK and
$.D.W. FROST. 2006. GARD: a genetic algorithm for recombination detection.
Bioinformatics 22(24): 3096-3098.

KREITMAN, M. 2000. Methods to detect selection in populations with applications to
the human. Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics 1:539-559.

175

KUCEROVA, J., A. MATEJICEK, A.M. JANDUROVA, P. SORENSEN, E.
NEMCOVA. M. STIPKOVA, T. KOTT., J. BOUSKA and J. FRELICH. 2006.
Milk protein genes CSNIS1, CSN2, CSN3, LGB and their relation to genetic
values of milk production parameters in Czech Fleckvieh. Czech. J. Anim. Sci.
51(6): 241-247.

KUMAR, S. G. STECHER, M. LI, C. KNYAZ and K. TAMURA. 2018. MEGA X:
Molecular Evolutionary Genetics. Analysis across computing
platforms. Molecular Biology and Evolution 35:1547-1549.

KUMAR, S., Q. TAO, S. WEAVER, M. SANDERFORD, M.A. CARABALLO-ORTIZ,
S. SHARMA, S.L.K. POND AND S. MIURA. 2021. An evolutionary portrait of
the progenitor SARS-CoV-2 and its dominant offshoots in COVID-19 pandemic.
Mol Biol Evol. 38(8):3046-3059.

LANDETE-CASTILLEJOS, T., A. GARCIA, J.A. GOMEZ and L. GALLEGO. 2003.
Lactation under food constraints in Iberian red deer Cervus elaphus hispanicus.
Wildlife Biology, 9: 131-139.

LARA, M.A.C., L.T. GAMA, G. BUFARAH, J.R.B. SERENO, E.M.L. CELEGATO and
U.P. ABREU. 2002. Genetic polymorphisms at the k-casein locus in Pantaneiro
cattle. Arch Zootec 51: 99-105.

LOCH, J., A. A. POLIT, A. GORECKI, P. BONAREK, K. KURPIEWSKA, M.
DZIEDZICKA-WASYLEWSKA and K. LEWINSKI. 2011. Two modes of fatty
acid binding to bovine beta-lactoglobulin-crystallographic and spectroscopic
studies. J. Mol. Recognit. 24:341-349.

LOPEZ-VILLALOBOS, N., D. J. GARRICK, H. T. BLAIR and C. W. HOLMES. 2000.
Possible effects of 25 years of selection and crossbreeding on the genetic merit
and productivity of New Zealand dairy cattle. J. Dairy Sci. 83:154-163.

LUGO RAMOS, J.S., KE. DELMORE and M. LIEDVOGEL. 2017. Candidate genes for
migration do not distinguish migratory and non-migratory birds. Jounal of
Comparative Physiology 203(6-7): 383-397.

LUNDEN A., M. NILSSON and L. JANSON. 1997. Marked Effect of beta-lactoglobulin
polymorphism on the ratio of casein to total protein in milk. J. Dairy Sci. 80,
2996.

MAHMOOD, K., D.H. HOJLAND, T. ASP and M. KRISTENSEN. 2016. Transcriptome
Analysis of an Insecticide Resistant Housefly Strain: Insights about SNPs and
Regulatory Elements in Cytochrome P450 Genes. PLOS ONE 11(3): e0151434.

176

MANGUY, J. and D.C. SHIELDS. 2019. Implications of kappa-casein evolutionary
diversity for the self-assembly and aggregation of casein micelles. R. Soc. Open
Sci. 6: 190939.

MATEJICEK, A., J. MATEJICKOVA, M. S CAROLI, TIPKOVA, A. HANUS, V.
GENCUROVA, J. MYSELOVA, E. NEMCOVA, T. KOTT, J. SEFROVA, M.
KREJCOVA, S. MELCOVA, I. HOLZELOVA, J. BOUSKA and J. FRELICH.
2008. Joint effects of CSN3 and LGB genes in milk quality and coagulation
properties in Czech Fleckvieh. Czech J. Anim. Sci. 53(6):246-252.

MEHMANNAVAZ, Y., C. AMIRINIA, M. BONYADI AND R. TORSHIZI. 2009.
Effects of bovine prolactin gene polymorphism within exon 4 on milk related
traits and genetic trends in Iranian Holstein bulls. African J. of Biotechnology 8:
10.4314/ajb.v8i19.65169.

MIGLIOR, F, S. LOKER and R.D. SHANKS. 2012. Dairy Cattle Breeding. In: Meyers
R.A. (eds) Encyclopedia of Sustainability Science and Technology. Springer,
New York, NY. 623 p.

MIR, S.S., O. ULLAH and R. SHEIKH. 2014. Genetic polymorphism of milk protein
variants and their association studies with milk yield in Sahiwal cattle. African
Journal of Biotechnology Vol. 13(4): 555-565.

MITRA, A. P. SCHLEE, I. KRAUSE, J. LUSCH, T. WERNER, CR.
BALAKRISHNAN and F. PIRCHNER. 1998. Kappa-casein Polymorphisms in
Indian Dairy Cattle and Buffalo: A New Genetic Variant in Buffalo. Animal
Biotechnology 9(2): 81-87.

MIYATA, T. T. YASUNAGA and T. NISHIDA. 1980. Nucleotide sequence divergence
and functional constraint in mRNA evolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 77:7328-
7332.

MOMOH, O.M., S.T. VINCENT and A. YAKUBU. 2015. In silico analysis of beta-
lactoglobulin gene in some selected mammalian species. Biotechnology in
Animal Husbandry 31(3): 327-338.

MUIN, M.A. and A. SUPRITANTOMO. 2012. Allelic frequency of kappa-casein locus
(Asp148/Ala) in Fl: Simmental (Bos taurus) x Ongole Grade (Bos indicus).
Media Peternakan 2012: 157-162.

MURRELL, B. S. MOOLA, A. MABONA, T. WEIGHILL, D. SHEWARD, S.L.
KOSAKOVSKY POND and K. SCHEFFER. 2013. FUBAR: A Fast,
Unconstrained Bayesian AppRoximation for Inferring Selection. Molecular
Biology and Evolution 30(5):1196-1205.

7

MURRELL, B., J.0. WERTHEIM, S. MOOLA, T. WEIGHILL, K. SCHEFFLER and
S.L. KOSAKOVSKY POND. 2012. Detecting Individual Sites Subject to
Episodic Diversifying Selection. PLoS Genetics 8(7): €1002764.

NATIONAL DAIRY AUTHORITY. 2014. NDA Programs. Accessed 20 November
2021 < https://nda.da.gov.ph/index.php/en/programs>.

NATIONAL DAIRY AUTHORITY. 2019. National Dairy Authority Growing Together
in Dairy 2019 Annual Report. Accessed 20 November 2021
(https://nda.da.gov.ph/images/2020/DEC/2019_AR_12162020.pdf>

NEAMT, R.O., G. SAPLACAN, S. ACATINCAI, L.T. CZISTER, D. GAVOJDIAN and
D.E. ILIE. 2017. The influence of CSN3 and LGB polymorphisms on milk
production and chemical composition in Romanian Simmental cattle. Acta
Biochimica Polonica 64(3):493-497.

NG-KWAI HANG, K. F., J.F. HAYES and J.E. MOXLEY. 1984. Association of genetic
variants of casein and milk serum proteins with milk, fat, and protein production
by dairy cattle. Journal of Dairy Science, 67:835-840.

NICKERSON, S.C. and R.M. AKERS. 2011. Mammary Gland | Anatomy. In: Fuquay
JW, Fox PF and McSweeney PLH (eds.), Encyclopedia of Dairy Sciences,
Second Edition, vol. 3, San Diego: Academic Press. pp. 328-337.

NIKAIDO, M., A.P. ROONEY and N. OKADA. 1999. Phylogenetic relationships among
cetartiodactyls based on insertions of short and long interspersed elements:
hippopotamuses are the closest extant relatives of whales. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA. 96:10261-6.

OFTEDAL OT. 1997. Lactation in whales and dolphins: evidence of divergence between
baleen- and toothed-species. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia 2(3):205-30.

OFTEDAL, 0. T. and SJ. IVERSON. 1995. Phylogenetic variation in the gross
composition of milks. In Handbook of Milk Composition. Jensen, R. (ed). New
York, NY: Academic Press. pp. 749-789.

OGDEN, T.H. AND M.S. ROSENBERG. 2006. Multiple Sequence Alignment
Accuracy And Phylogenetic Inference. Syst. Biol 55: 314-328.

OGOREVC J., T. KUNEJ, A. RAZPET and P. DOVC. 2009. Database of cattle
candidate genes and genetic markers for milk production and mastitis. Animal
Genetics 40:832-851.

178

OJALA,M., T.R.FAMULA and J.F.MEDRANO. 1997. Effects of milk protein
genotypes on the variation for milk production traits of Holstein and Jersey cows
in California. J. Dairy Sci. 80: 1776-1785.

OLDENBROEK, K. and L. VAN DER WAAIJ. 2014. Animal breeding and genetics for
BSc students. Centre for Genetic Resources and Animal Breeding and Genomics
Group, Wageningen University and Research Centre, the Netherlands. 254 pp.

OLIVERIA, HLR., F.F. SILVA, L.F. BRITO, J. JAMROZIK, D.A.L. LOURECO and
F.$, SCHENKEL. 2018, Genome-wide association study for milk, fat and protein
yields in different lactation stages in Canadian Holstein and Jersey cattle.
Proceedings of the World Congress on Genetics Applied to Livestock Production,
11.601: 1-5.

OLTENACU, P.A. and D.M. BROOM. 2010. The impact of genetic selection for
increased milk yield on the welfare of dairy cows. Anim. Welfare 19(S):39-49.

OTT, L. and M. LONGNECKER. 2008. An Introduction to Statistical Methods and Data
Analysis. Australia: Cengage Learning. 1296 p.

PATEL, R.J., J.B. CHAUHAN, K.N. SINGH, and K.J. SONI. 2007. Allelic frequency of
Kappa Casein and Beta-Lactoglobulin in Indian Crossbred (Bos taurus x Bos
indicus) dairy bulls, Turk. J. Vet. Anim. Sci 31(6): 339-402.

PEAKALL, R. and P.E. SMOUSE. 2012. GenAIEx 6.5: genetic analysis in Excel.
Population genetic software for teaching = and _—research-an
update. Bioinformatics 28: 2537-2539.

PETROVSKA, S., D. JONKUS, J. ZAGORSKA and I. CIPROVICA. 2017. The
influence of kappa-casein and beta-lactoglobulin genotypes on milk coagulation
properties in Latvia dairy breed. Research for Agricultural Development 2(2017):
74-80.

PHILIPPINE STATISTICS AUTHORITY. 2021. Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Database: Dairy: Volume of Production by Quarter, 1981-2021. Accessed 20
November 2021, < hitps://openstat.psa.gov.ph/
PXWeb/pxweb/en/DB/DB_2E_LP/0052E4FPDY0.px/table/tableViewLayout!/
2xid=bdf9d8da-96fl-4100-ae09-1 8cb3eaeb3 13>

PRASAD, A.B., M.W. Allard and E.D. GREEN. 2008. Confirming the phylogeny of
mammals by use of large comparative sequence data sets. Molecular biology and
evolution, 25(9): 1795-1808

PRAZERES, A. R., F. CARVALHO, and J. RIVAS. 2012. Cheese whey management: A
review. J. Environ. Manage. 110:48-68.

179

RACHAGANI S. and I. D. GUPTA. 2008. Bovine kappa-casein gene polymorphism a
its association with milk production traits. Genet. Mol. Biol. 31:893-897.

RACHAGANI, S., I.D. GUPTA, N. GUPTA and S.G. GUPTA. 2006. Genotyping of B-
Lactoglobulin Gene by PCR-RFLP in Sahiwal and Tharparkar Cattle Breeds.
BMC Genetics 7:31.

RANI, R. C.N. DHARAIYA, V. UNNIKRISHNAN and B. SINGH. 2012. Factors
affecting seneresis from youghurt for preparation of Chakka. Indian J. Dairy Sci
65(2): 135-140.

RASCHIA M.A., J.P. NANI, D.O. MAIZON, M.J. BERIBE, A.F. AMADIO, and M.A.
POLI. 2018. Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms in candidate genes associated with
milk yield in Argentinian Holstein and Holstein x Jersey cows. Journal of Animal
Science and Technology 60:31.

REHMAN, S. T. FENG, S. WU, X. LUO, A. LEI, B, LUOBU, F. HASSAN. AND Q.
LIU, 2021. Comparative genomics, evolutionary and gene regulatory regions
analysis of Casein Gene Family in Bubalus bubalis. Frontiers in Genetics 12: 1-
IL.

REINHARDT T.A., J.D. LIPPOLIS, B.J. NONNECKE and R.E SACCO. 2012. Bovine
milk exosome proteome. Journal of proteome research, 75(5):1486-92.

REN, D.X., S. MIAO, Y. CHEN, C. ZOU, X. LIANG and J. LIU. 2011, Genotyping of
x-casein and B-lactoglobulin genes in Chinese Holstein, Jersey and water buffalo
by PCR-RFLP. J. Genet. 90: el-e5.

REY-CAMPOS, M., B. NOVOA, A. PALLAVICINI, M. GERDOL and A. FIGUERAS.
2020. Comparative genomics reveals a significant sequence variability of mycitin
genes in Mytilus galloprovincialis. Biomolecules 2020(10): 943-961.

RITSAWAI P., S. KOONAWOOTRITTRIRON, D. JATTAWA, T. SUWANASOPEE,
and M.A. ELZO. 2014. Fraction of cattle breeds and their influence on milk
production of Thai dairy cattle. Proceeding of the 52th Kasetsart University
Annual Conference. Bangkok, Thailand. pp. 25-32.

ROBINSON-RECHAVI, M. and D. GRAUR. 2002. Usage Optimalization of Unevenly
Sampled Data through the Combination of Quartet Trees: A Eutherian Draft
Phylogeny Based on 640 Nuclear and Mitochondrial Proteins. Israel Journal of
Zoology 47 (2002): 259-270.

RON, M., 0. YOFFE, E. EZRA, J. F. MEDRANO and J. I. WELLER. 1994.
Determination of effects of milk protein genotype on production traits of Israeli
Holsteins. J. Dairy Sci. 77:1106-1113.

180

ROSS, S.M. 2017. Introductory Statistics. 4"" Ed. New York: Elsevier. pp. 797-800.

ROY, D., A. YE, P.J. MOUGHAN, and H. SINGH. 2020. Composition, Structure, and
Digestive Dynamics of Milk From Different Species—A Review. Frontiers in
Nutrition 2020 (7). DOI=10.3389/fnut.2020.577759 :

SABOUR, M., C. LI, A. LEE and A. MCALLISTER. 1996. Association Between Milk
Protein Genetic Variants and Genetic Values of Canadian Holstein Bulls for Milk
Yield Traits1. J Dairy Sci 79: 1050-1056.

SAWYER, L. 2021. B-Lactoglobulin and Glycodelin: Two Sides of the Same Coin.
Frontiers in Physiology 12: 1-18.

SCHLEE, P AND O. ROTTMANN. 1992. Bovine kappa-casein: determination of alleles
A and B by polymerase chain reaction and RFLP analysis using plucked hair as a
source of DNA. Arch. Tierz. 35: 347-349.

SCOTT, R. 1998. Cheese making practice. New York: Kluwer Academics. pp. 277-361.

SEANGIJUN, A., S. KOONAWOOTRITTRIRON and M.A. ELZO. 2009.
Characterization of lactation pattems and milk yield in a multibreed dairy cattle
population in the Central Thailand. Kasetsart J. (Nat. Sci.) 43: 74-82.

SEIDEL, GE. 2010. Brief introduction to whole-genome selection in cattle using single
nucleotide polymorphisms. Report Fert Develop. 22(1):138-44.

SELA, I., H. ASHKENAZY, K. KATOH and T. PUPKO. 2015.GUIDANCE2: accurate
detection of unreliable alignment regions accounting for the uncertainty of
multiple parameters. Nucleic Acids Research 43 (Web Server issue): W7-W 14.

SHAIDULLIN, R., G. SHARAFUTDINOV, A. MOSKVICHEVA, T. FAIZOV and Y.
YULDASHBAEV. 2020. Inheritance of allelic variants of the kappa-casein gene
by cows. BIO Web of Conferences 17:59.

SHAPIRO, B.J. and E.J. ALM. 2008. Comparing pattems of natural selection across
species using selective signatures. PLoS Genetics 42: ¢23.

SHETTY, S., R.K. PATEL, K.J.SONI, K.M. SINGH and J.B. CHAUHAN. 2006. Allelic
frequency of x-casein and 8-lactoglobulin in Jersey cattle. Ind. J. Vet. Res., 15:
15-21.

SINGH, U., R. DEB, S. KUMAR, R. SINGH, G. SENGAR and A. SHARMA. 2014.
Association of prolactin and beta-lactoglobulin genes with milk production traits
and somatic cell count among Indian Frieswal (HF x Sahiwal) cows. Biomarkers
and Genomic Medicine 7 (1):38-42.

181

SITKOWSKA, B., W. NEJA and E. WISNIEWSKA. 2008. Relations between kappa-
casein polymorphism (CSN3) and milk performance traits in heifer cows. J Cent
Eur Agric 9: 641-644.

SKIBIEL, A.L., LM. DOWNING, T.J. ORR and W.R. HOOD. 2013. The evolution of
the nutrient composition of mammalian milks. Journal of Animal Ecology
82:1254-1264.

SMOUSE, P. E., S.C. BANKS, and R. PEAKALL. 2017. Converting quadratic entropy
to diversity: Both animals and alleles are diverse, but some are more diverse than
others. PLOS ONE 12: €0185499.

SQRENSEN, M.K., E. NORBERG, J. PEDERSEN and L.G. CHRISTENSEN. 2008.
Invited Review: Crossbreeding in Dairy Cattle: A Danish Perspective. Journal of
Dairy Science 91(11):4116-4128.

SOYUDAL B., S. ARDICLI, H. SAMLI, D. DINCEL and F. BALCI. 2019. Association
of polymorphisms in the CSN2, CSN3, LGB and LALBA genes with milk
production traits in Holstein cows raised in Turkey, Journal of the Hellenic
Veterinary Medical Society 69(4): 1271-1282.

STERN, A., A. DORON-FAIGENBOIM, E. EREZ, E. MARTZ, E. BACHARACH and
T. PUPKO, 2007. Selecton 2007: advanced models for detecting positive and
purifying selection using a Bayesian inference approach. Nucleic Acids Research.
35: W506-WS11

STOCCO, G., C. CIPOLAT-GOTET, T. BOBBO, A. CECCHINATO, and G.
BITTANTE. 2017. Breed of cow and herd productivity affect milk composition
and modeling of coagulation, curd firming, and syneresis. J. Dairy Sci. 100:129—
145.

STRUCKEN, E.M., Y.C.S.M. LAURENSON and G.A. BROCKMANN. 2015. Go with
the flow-biology and genetics of the lactation cycle. Frontiers in Genetics 6:118.

STRZALKOWSKA, N., K. JOSEF, Z. LECH and R. ZOFIA. 2002. Effects of kappa-
casein and beta-lactoglobulin loci polymorphism, cows age, stage of lactation and
somatic cell count on daily milk yield and milk composition in Polish Black and
White cattle. Anim Sci Pap Rep 20: 21-35.

SUCHARD, M.A., P. LEMEY, G. BAELE, D.L. AYRES, A.J. DRUMMOND and A.
RAMBAUT. 2018. Bayesian phylogenetic and phylodynamic data integration
using BEAST 1.10. Virus Evolution 4(1): 16.

182

SUN, W., H. CHANG, Z.J. REN, Z.P. YANG, R.Q. GENG, S.X. LU, L. DU and K.
TSUNODA. 2004. Genetic differentiation between sheep and goats based on
microsatellite DNA. AsianAust. J. Anim. Sci. 17(5): 583-587.

SUSMIATI, T., P.P. PUTRO, SARMIN , C.M. AIRIN, HARTININGSIH and P.B.
SATRIA. 2017. Polymorphisms in Genes Encoding Kappa Casein Milk Protein in
Dairy Cattle. Intemational Journal of Dairy Science, 12: 282-288.

THEWISSEN, J.G.M., L.N. COOPER and J.C. GEORGE. 2009. From Land to Water:
the Origin of Whales, Dolphins, and Porpoises. Evo Edu Outreach 2:272-288.

THOMPSON, J.D., F. PLEWNIAK and 0. POCH. 1999. A Comprehensive Comparison
of Multiple Sequence Alignment Programs. Nucleic Acids Res. 27:2682-2690.

THORN, D. C., H. ECROYD, J.A CARVER AND C. HOLT. 2015. Casein structures in
the context of unfolded proteins. International Dairy Journal, 46 2-11.

TIERNEY, M.L. AND G.K. REASON.1986. Continuing development of a tropical dairy
breed. Proceedings of the Australian Society of Animal Production 16: 4-12.

TSIARAS, A.M., G.G. BARGOULI, G. BANOS and C.M. BOSCOS. 2005. Effect of
Kappa-Casein and Beta-Lactoglobulin loci on milk production traits and
reproductive performance of Holstein cows. J. Dairy Sci. 88: 327-335.

UYANIK, G.K. AND N. GULER. 2013. A study on multiple linear regression analysis.
Procedia-Social Behavioral Sciences 106:234-240.

VAN DEN BERG, G., J.T.M. ESCHER, P.J. DE KONING and H. BOVENHUIS. 1992.
Genetic polymorphism of x-casein and B-lactoglobulin in relation to milk
composition and processing properties. Neth. Milk Dairy J. 46:145-168.

VAN RADEN, P.M. 2004. Invited review: selection on net merit to improve lifetime
profit. J. Dairy Sci. 87: 3125-3131.

VEGA R.S.A., R.M.C. CASTILLO, N.N.B. BARRIENTOS,M.M.L. AUTRIZ, B.W.
CHO, C.B. DELA VINA and N.O. VILLA. 2018. Leptin (T3469C) and Estrogen
Receptor (T1665G) Gene Polymorphisms and Their Associations to Backfat
Thickness and Reproductive Traits of Large White Pigs (Sus scrofa L.) Philippine
Journal of Science 147(2): 293-300.

VERDIER-METZ, |., J.B. COULON and P. PRADEL. 2001. Relationship between milk
fat and protein contents and cheese yield. Animal Research, EDP Sciences50
(5):365-371

183

WALSTRA, P., T. J. GEURTS, A. NOOMEN, A. JELLEMA, and M. A. J. S. VAN
OEKEL. 1999. Dairy Technology, Principles of Milk Properties and
Processes. New York:Marcel Dekker, Inc. pp. 727.

WANG J, P. YOUKHARIBACHE, D. ZHANG, C.J. LANCZYCKI, R.C GEER, T.
MADEJ, L. PHAN, M. WARD, S. LU, G.H. MARCHLER, Y. WANG, S.H.
BRYANT, L.Y GEER and A. MARCHLER-BAUER. 2020. iCn3D, a Web-based
3D Viewer for Sharing 1D/2D/3D Representations of Biomolecular
Structures. Bioinformatics 36(1):131-135.

WANG, H.C., K. LL, E. SUSKO and A.J. ROGER. 2008. A class frequency mixture
model that adjusts for site-specific amino acid frequencies and improves inference
of protein phylogeny. BMC Evol Biol 8: 331.

WANGDI, J. 2015. Milk quality from Yak and Zom milk in Bhutan. Livestock Research
for Rural Development 27:2.

WARD, T.J., L. HONEYCUTT and J.N. DERR. 1997. Nucleotide sequence evolution at
the k-casein locus: Evidence for positive selection within the Family Bovidae.
Genetics 147(4): 1863-1872.

WEAVER, S, S.D. SHANK, S.J. SPIELMAN, M. LI, S.V. MUSE and S.L.
KOSAKOVSKY POND. 2018. Datamonkey 2.0: A Modern Web Application for
Characterizing Selective and Other Evolutionary Processes. Mol Biol Evol.
35(3):773-777.

WEIGEL, K.A. and K.A. BARLASS. 2003. Results of a producer survey regarding
crossbreeding on US dairy farms. J. of Dairy Sci. 86(12):4148-54.

WEINER, G. 2003. The Yak. FAO RAP 18: 338.

WIGANS, G.R. and N. GENGLER. 2011. Genetics] Selection: Evaluation and
MethodsIn: Encyclopedia of Dairy Sciences (Second Edition) Editor(s): John W.
Fuquay, Academic Press, _pp. 649-655, ISBN 9780123744074,
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-374407-4.00206-5.

WONGPOM, B., S. KOONAWOOTRITTRIRON and M.A. ELZO. 2017. Milk yield, fat
yield and fat percentage associations in a Thai multibreed dairy production,
Agriculture and Natural Resources 51: 218-222.

YUE X.P., Q. FANG, X. ZHANG, C.C. MAO, X.Y. LAN, H. CHEN and C.Z. LEI.
2013. Effects of CSN/S2 Genotypes on Economic Traits in Chinese Dairy Goats.
Asian-Australas J Anim Sci. 26(7): 911-915.

184

ZAGLOOL, A.W., A. AWAD, LES. EL ARABY and K.M. EL-BAYOMI. 2016.
Association of 8-Lactoglobulin gene polymorphisms with milk yield, fat and
protein in Holstein-Friesian cattle, World Vet J 6(3): 117-122.

ZAMBRANO-BURBANO G.L., Y.M. ERASO-CABRERA, C.E. SOLARTE-PADILLA
and C. Y. ROSERO-GALINDO. 2012. Relationship between Kappa Casein
genes (CSN3) and industrial yield in Holstein cows in Narino-Colombia. Milk
Protein. London: IntechOpen. pp. 261-282.

ZEPEDA-BATISTA, J.L., B. ALARCON-ZUNIGA, A. RUIZ-FLORES, R. NUNEZ-
DOMINGUEZ and R. RAMIRZ-VALVERDE. 2015. Polymorphism of three
milk protein genes in Mexican Jersey cattle. Electronic Journal of Biotechnology
18(2015):1-4.

ZHANG, S., F. CHEN and Y. ZHANG. 2018. Recent progress of porcine milk
components and mammary gland function. J Anim Sci Biotechnol. 9:77.

ZHENG, X. Z. JU, J. WANG, Q. LL, J. HUANG, A. ZHANG, J. ZHONG and C.
WANG. 2011. Single nucleotide polymorphisms, haplotypes and combined
genotypes of LAP3 gene in bovine and their association with milk production
traits. Mol. Biol. Rep. 38: 4053-4061.

APPENDIX Table 4.1. Correlation coefficients between breed composition (J>H coded as 1;

185

H

coded as 0), calving number and age at start of calving with each of the
nine milk traits.

MILK TRAIT ‘BREED $I.) CALVING 3G. ‘AGEAT 3G.
COMPOSITION * NUMBER® START OF
CALVING:
Peak Milk Yield 021+ 0.000 | 0.046 0470 | 0087 0.173
‘Average Daily Milk Yield | -0.139 0.029 | -0.045 0.487 | 0.062 0331
Fat Content 0018 0.79 | 0.108 0.091 | o19se 0.002
Protein Content 0.187¢* 0.003 | -o.216+" 0.001 | 0237+" 0.000
Lactose COntent 0.054 0.403 | 0.006 0930 | -0.009 0.887
Fat Yield 0.119 0.063 | -0.018 073 | o101 oa
Protein Yield 61" 0.012 | -0.086 ost | 0026 0.683
Lactose Vielé 037 0.032 | -0.034 0395 | 0.060 0351
Proteinto-Fat Ratio 0.105 0.102} -0.194%¢ 0.002 | -0.291+¢ 0.000

* Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).
Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).

* Point bi

rial corelation coefficient
» Spearman rank correlation coefficient
« Pearson correlation coefficient

APPENDIX Table 4.2. Spearman and Pearson correlation coefficients between age at start of
calving and calving number.

PARAMETERS. ‘SPEARMAN PEARSON
CORRELATION CORRELATION.

Correlation Coefficient ogia** o.840"*

Sig. (2-tailed) 0.000 0.000

n 228 228

* Correlation is sign

fant at the 0.05 level (2taled)-
Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-aled).

APPENDIX Table 4.3. Correlation coefficients of the nine milk traits in HxJ crossbred cattle.

PMY ADMY. FC PC FY PY LY PRR
PMY 0712 0.042 -0.011 0.704 0.695 0.701 -0.065
ADMY = 0.712 -0.080 0.024 0977 0.984 0.030
FC 0.042 -0.080 0.056 0.118 -0.083 0.791
PC 0.011 0.024 0.086 0.023 0.184 0.551
Lc 0.016 0.047 0429-0611 0.022 -0.046 .019
FY 0.704 «0.977.118 0.023. -0.022 0.959 0.138
PY 0.695 0.984 -0.083 0.184 -0.046 0.959 0.129
LY 0.701 0.985 0.111 0.020 0.125 0.959 0.957 0.031
PFR 0.065 0.030 —--0.791__0.551__-0.019 __-0.138 0.129 __0.031

Pay = pak mee FY mya TC enon conere "BREFDC~ bel conporon
SADMY nance yi yield BCs pce comet Ly staan yc AAGESTART= age staan of caing

Fe= cone

PY acini

PER print raio

CALV easing amber

APPENDIX Table 4.4. Regression model for peak milk yield (adjusted R? = 0.111).

8 SE P-VALUE VIF
(Constant) 18.547 1.518 0.000
CSN344 2.327 1.079 0.032" 1,543
CSN348 4.058 1.437 0.005** 4535
BLGaa 2.975 1a4ls 0.037% 3.463
BLGxe 0.378 1.230 0.759 3.304
CSN3A8x BLGaa 5.183 1.875 0.006** 4.126
CSN340x BLGas 3.167 1.665 0.058 4.245
BREEDC 4.054 0.936 .000%* 1.225
AGESTART O13 0.058 o.osi* 4.182
CALV 0.846 0.856 0.324 3,892,
‘significant at p<0.05 significant at p<0.01
regression coefficient SE ~ standard error VIF — variance inflation factor
BREEDC - breed composition AGESTART—age at start ofcalving CAL calving number

186

APPENDIX Table 4.5. Regression model for average daily milk yield (adjusted R? = 0.046).

8 SE P-VALUE VIF
(Constant) 10.770 0.874 0.000

CSN3aa 1.279 0.682 0.062 1,480
CSN340 0.812, 0.514 0.116 1,390
BLGaa 0.639 0.596 0.285 1474
BLGas -1.016 0.534 0.058 1.496
BREEDC -1.749 0.604 .004* 1.222
CALV 0.727 0.545 0.184 3.783
AGESTART 0.065 0.037 0.078 4.061

significant at p<0.05
‘8 regression coefficient VIF ~ variance inflation factor
BREEDC - breed composition AGESTART~age at startofcalving CALV—calving number

APPENDIX Table 4.6. Regression model for milk fat content (adjusted R? = 0.087).

8 SE P-VALUE VIF

(Constant) 1.445 0.013, 0.000
BREEDC 0.026 0.010 0.013* 1.113
AGESTART 0.001 0.000 0.013" 1.097
0.027 0.012 0.024* 1.423

01s 0.009 0.097 1361
significant at prO0S icant at p<O.0T

regression coefficient SE ~standard error VIF ~ variance inflation factor
BREEDC - breed composition AGESTART — age at star of calving


APPENDIX Table 4.7. Regression model for milk fat yield (adjusted R? = 0.055).

8 SE P-VALUE VIF
(Constant) 0.445 0.039 0.000
CSN3a4 0.075 0.030 0.013* 1.506
CSN3A8 0.050 0.030 0.097 2.440
BLGaa .034 0.026 0.192 1.459
BLGas -0.021 0.031 0.505 2.693
CSN3a8x BLGae -0.039 0.039 0319 2.923
BREEDC -0.068 0.025 0.008%* 1.123
AGESTART 0.001 0.001 0.104 1.100
“significant at p~O.05 iheant at peO.O1
regression coefficient SE ~ standard error VIF ~ variance inflation factor

BREEDC —breed composition AGESTART ~ age at stat of calving

APPENDIX Table 4.8. Regression model for milk protein content (adjusted R? = 0.342).

8 SE P-VALUE VIF
(Constant) 1.136 0.010 0.000
CSN344 0.083 0.009 0.000* 1.423
CSN3A0 0.043 0.007 0.000** 1361
BREEDC 0.004 0.008 0.632 1413
AGESTART 0.001 0.000 0.003** 1.097

significant at p~O.05
8 regression coefficient

BREEDC - breed composition AGESTART —age at start of calving

APPENDIX Table 4.9. Regression model for milk protein yield (adjusted R? = 0.025).

VIF = variance inflation factor

8 SE P-VALUE VIF
(Constant) 0.417 0.034 0.000
CSN3A4 0.017 0.026 0.516 1.506
CSN3a0 0.033 0.026 0.206 2.440
BLGaa -0.030 0.023 0.193, 1.459
BLGas 0.021 0.027 0.447 2.693
CSN3aax BLGas 0.034 0.034 0315 2.923
BREEDC 0.055 0.022 o.o14* 1.123
AGESTART 0.001 0.388 1.100

VIF = variance inflation factor
BREEDC breed composiion AGESTART-age at star of calving

187

188

APPENDIX Table 4.10. Regression model for lactose content (adjusted R? = 0.022).

a SE P-VALUE VIF
(Constant) 4617 0.018 0.000

CSN3 a4 0.070 0.029 0.017" 1351
CSN348 0.051 0.023 0.025* 1351

significant at p<00s
8 ~ regression coefficient

ignificant at p-OOT
SE - standard error

VIF — variance inflation factor

APPENDIX Table 4.11. Regression model for milk lactose yield (adjusted R? = 0.038).

68 SE P-VALUE VIF
(Constant) 0.516 0.040 0.000
CSN3 a4 0.063, 0.032 0.052 1.478
CSN3a8 0.037 0.024 0.131 1,390
BLGaa -0.028 0.028 0315 1.459
BLGap 0.042 0.025 0.096 1.496
BREEDC -0.070 0.027 o.o1t 1.116
AGESTART 0.001 0.001 0.239 1.100

“significant at p<0.05
‘regression coefficient
BREEDC - breed composition AGESTART - age at start of calving

VIF — variance inflation fa

APPENDIX Table 4.12. Regression model for milk protein-to-fat ratio (adjusted R? = 0.255).
8 SI

E P-VALUE VIF

(Constant) 0.072 0.012 0.000

CSN3a4 0.075 0.010 0.000%* 1.478
CSN3A0 0.018 0.007 0.020* 1,390
BLGas 0.002 0.009 0.786 1.459
BLGas 0.006 0.008 o.44t 1.496
BREEDC 0.016 0.008 0.061 1116
AGESTART 0.000 0.000" 1.100

B~ regression coefficient

BREEDC - breed composition AGESTART —age at star of calving

VIF — variance inflation factor


189

APPENDIX Table 5.1. Ka/Ks ratios for each amino acid site in BLG, as calculated by Selecton,

‘SITE | AMINO | KaKs | CONFIDENCE ‘SITE | AMINO | KaKs | CONFIDENCE
ACID INTERVAL ACID INTERVAL
T M_| 0064 | [0.0013,0.45) 38 L 12 (0.24,2.1)
2 K O92 22 EJ A__| 0.062 | [0.001305]
3 c 016 | (0.0013,2.1) 0 M__| 054 1.05.27
a L Oi | (0.0013,0.84] a a 033 | (001821)
3 LC O15] _(0.0013,2.1 2 A 03 (00182)
6 L 061 10.052.) 3 s or | (00013211
7 a 082 (0.05.21) a D__|[ 0078 | (0.0013.0.45)
8 T os | (003.207 8 T 02 Poa
9 A O21 | (0.014.083) 6 S| 0079 | (0001321)
10 L or | (0.0013.083) a7 r O12 | (0.00132.1)
Tr T 12 sz B L O15 | (0.001321)
i € on | (0.00132. 8 D__| 0078 | [0.0013,045)
B G__[ 035 [ (0014084) 30 a 055 012.2)
is ES it 2 ST g T T20
iy Qf ois | (0003.21 Bs s 09 10.052.)
16 A_| 0064 | [0.0013,0.45] 33 x O77 (0.12.21)
17 L T (0452.1) 34 P 012 | (0.0013,084)
18 T 1 O82) 35 Ti ois | (0001321)
9 Vv 05 (005.217 36 R on 10.052.)
20 T O71 221) 37 v__[ 03s | (001421)
2 Q 087 12207 38 ¥ 0358 10.052.)
2 T 037 | (0014217 39 ¥ om | foor2n
Fy M_ [07 220 Ga E 037 220
EB K TI (45207 Gl E 095 (2821)
23 c 099 (08421) GB] L ois | (00013,2.17
26 T ois | (00013.2.1) & K 046 | (001421
27 D__| 0079 | [0.0013,0.45) a P O11 | (0.0013,084)
28 T 08 (0242.1) 6 T__| 0055 | (0.0013,024)
29 g O17 | (0001321) 66 P Ont | (0.013.084)
30 K__| 099 (0452.17 a E O77 p20
3T V__ [0085 | [0.0013,045) Gy G | oa | (001421)
32 A__| oat | (0001331) @ D 097 520
33 c Oat | (0.0013,0.83) 70 L 015 | (0.0013,2.17
H T 068 pa 7 E [0082 | (0.0013.0.45]
35 W_[ 028 | fo.00132.1 R T__| oor | (0.0013,028)
36 ¥__ [093 [O22 3 L it D520
7 5 027 | _(00r421) Zl LT 01s _[ (0.001321)


APPENDIX Table 5.1. Continued...

SITE | AMINO | KaKs | CONFIDENCE SITE | AMINO | Kas | CONFIDENCE
ACT ACID INTERVAL
75 Q o7 ms | ¥ [oat | [0.0013,0.847
76 K T tie | K 17 (84201
7 W T m7 | _«K o7 (0.12.21)
78 E 043 | _0.0142.1] me | ¥ | 049 | [ooia2a)
6 N_[os7 [__ (02.20) ns [ L 043 | (001421)
80 D 14 T2a7 mo | 053 | (0014.23)
a E it 2a) ma | v_ | oso | foas2a)
2 c oa _[ (0.0013,2.) mo 016 | (0.001321)
3 a i 104521) ms | M_ | 029 | [ooia2a)
a g 0.76 im | — 098 (520)
5 K T t2 ms [| N | oa7 | (00521)
86 K 076 6s 17 (0452
7 T ost (0.05.21) m7 | a_ | 098 (0242.1)
Ey T 13 [O22 | — Ts (084,21)
9 A__| 022 | (0001321) m9 |? 086 (CXEE]
90 E 098 0452.1) rn oat | (0014.2.1]
2 T ois | (0.001321) mf @ 17 1045.11
Ey K_ | 099 | _ [os42i) 132 s 065 [0122.1]
om T 097 _|__ (0452.1) es 083 [oz
35 P 039 | _10.0013,2.1) ma [Vv T fi
36 a__ [oi [0003277 ms | ¢ 1s | (0.0013,2.1)
7 ¥_[ 07s | (01220) m6 | Q 013 | (0.001321)
8 F oni | (0.0013,083) By [¢ 089 [0242.0
8 K__| 032 | [oois2a) eo 015 | (0.0013.2.1]
100 T oF (00: io |v | 033 | [oora2a)
ror | D | 097 | (045,21) 140 [| _R__| 0062 | [0.0013,0.5)
we | A | 06 (012.21) Tal [| T _| 0055 | [0.0013,024)
oe 068 | __ (0.0521) 1m |? T [os2m
1a [ T (045,23) wl it (024,21)
ws | E | om | [oors2i) 1H |v | 0068 | [0.0013,0.45)
ios | 06 (o122.1 145 | _D__| 0082 | [0.0013,0.45)
ior | K_ | 068 146 [| D 13 (os20)
os a BK wf ie 078 (012.2)
1 [| _L 095 (024,21) ws [ A_ | ost (012.20)
m0 |v | os | (01220) wf] os, [0.05,2.1]
mo. 016 | [0.001321 096 | __ (0242.1)
Ti | D_ | 027 | [o01s08a) isi [| K_ [028 | (0001321)
mm | 7 033 | foor2t im] 0.12 | _(0.0013,084)
ma [| D__| 0078 [ (0.00130. iss | D T 520

190

APPENDIX Table 5.1. Continued...

SITE | AMINO | Ka/ks | CONFIDENCE

ACID INTERVAL

154 K 0:99 (0.24.2.1]

1S5 A__[ 0.061 | [0.0013.0.24]

156 L 034 | (001421)

1357 K 09 (0242.1)

158 cs 16 [0.45.2.1]

159 L 0.15 | (0.0013.2.1]

160 P 0.55 10.05.2.1]

161 M T (0.84.2.1]

162 H 0.96

163 T 0.89

164 R 0.62

165 L 0.34

166 s 12

167 F 1 (0242.1)

168 N 0.89 (0242.1)

169 P 099 [0842.1]

170 T oat

17 @ 091

T L 0.76

173 E T

174 E 0.95

175 gz 0.93 (0242.1)

176 ¢ 0.15 | _(0.0013.2.1]

177 H T

178 T 078 (0.12.21)

191

APPENDIX Table 5.2. MEME results by Datamonkey.*

192

SITE PARTI ] A 7 P ¥ P TRT | P-VALUE
(MATUREBLG | TION

T 216 137 T 333 0 o 067
i 884 | 2.96 i 136 0 0. 0.67
H 0 0 0 039 i 048 0.43
H 0 0 0 0.62, r 0.82, 035
r 0 o 0 0.98, r O74 037
r 428 | 027 i 642, 0 0. 067
r 0 0 DOr 027 099 0.03 0.62
r 323 19 1 2187 0 0. 0.67
i 325 | 0.85 i 7.88 0 0. 0.67
r 0. 0 T 0 0 0. 1

r 18.96 0 1 Ra 0 0. oe
r o 0 0 LIS 1 116 029
r Bat 0 n S17 0 o 0.67
T o 0 0 0.66; n 042 0.45
r 0 0 n 0 0 0 T

i 7.06 0 i B99 0 0 Oe
r 0 0 i 0 0 0 L

r ais_| 057 H 627 0 0 OG
T 0 0 H 0 0 0 i

T 0 0 076 62 024 Lt 03,
i 0 0 0 035 i 0.48 0.43
H 0 0 205 124 097 131 024
H 14, o H 2.22, 0 0 0.67
i 0 o 0 026 i 0.02 0.63
H 0 0 85, 3.45 as 0.62 04
i 0 0 0 031 1 0.42 Das
H 3.96 o H 3.95 0 0 0.67
H 0 0 i o 0 0 L

H 0 0 0 029) 1 025 ost
L 0 0 i 0. 0 0 H

r 3.22 0 i 482 0 0 a
r 0 0 H o 0 0 L

r IR 0 H 2.76 0 0 a
i 0 0 0 0.66, H 0.89, 034
L 0 0 042 2.61 ned 0.87 034
L 262 | 024 H 3.93 0 0 0.67
iia 0 0. (5c ET 337 0.09)
n 135 0 a 2.03, 0 0 0.67
n 0 0 H 0 0 0 L

r a8 _| 028 r O72 0 0 ae
n 0 0 0 037 n 048 0.43
n 3.06 | 04a 1 13.59 0 0. 0.67
1 187 | 032, ro 3.52 0.06 “0.13 O67
r 0 0. 053 084 0.47 025 O51
r 0 0 0 0.74 i 0.49) 0.43
r 0. 0 L 0 0 0. 1

i 215 | 0st r 323 0 0. a
r 0 0 r 0 0 0. 1

i LT 0 r 265 0 0. a
n ISL 0 i 2.26 0 0. 0.67
n 0 0 Oss 2.07 047 0.62 04
r 0 0 O88 424 0.12 0.68 038
H o 0. 0.62, 451 038 12 028
n 0 0. i 0 0 0. n

r 0 0 i 0 0 0. r

r 0 0 i 0 0 0. r

r Sal 1a i 311 0. 0. a
r 0 0 L 0 0. 0. L


APPENDIX Table 5.2. Continued.

193

SITE (MATURE

PARTE ] A a P ¥ P CRT] P-VALUE
BLG) TION
59 i Toss [042 T 1567 0 o oor
0 n 057 | 029 H 0.85) 0 0. 0.67
61 T 0.44 | 0.02 0 128. T 2.05 06
Q T 533] 0.3 i 7.99 0 0 0.67
a zi 2.65 03, n 3.98 0 o 067
cy 2 707 185, H 106 0 0. 0.67
S Z 053 | 004 0 Las L O81 036
66 2 036 0 1 053 0 0. 0.67
Gl z 026 | 0.02 0 06 L 05 043
8 2 0 0 067 19 033 08 036
a z 0 0 0 Los L 131 027,
70 zi 34 016 0.89. 4.46 on 0.01 064
7 2 395 [031 i $92 0 0 0.67
7 a 178 | 0-84 i 2.67 0 0. 067
7. 2 023, 0 r 035 0 0. 0.67
74 i 03 2.07 0 04 1 0.02 0.63
75 z 0.62 0 1 0.93 0 0. 0.67
76 A 075 0 i 112, 0 0 0.67
7 2 0 0 0 059) n 053 0.42
78 2 0 0 O01 097 099 Lal 025
79 Z 0.25 0 i 037 0 0 0.67
80. 2 11.68 0 H 1752 0 0 0.67
SI a 0 0 0 045 L Tor 0.32
32 2 0 0 i 0 0 0 1
83 2 0 0 0 O15 H 023 032
84 2 0 0 0 033, H 06 04
85 2 296 | 037 H 44d 0 0 0.67
86 2 2.62 0. O77 328 023 O01 0.64
87 2 89 | 03 1 134 0 0 0.67
38 2 11623 | 08 L 174.34 0 0 0.67
89) 2 328 0 092 B02 0.08 0.03 0.62
901 2 142_| 0.44 L 2.13 0 o 0.67
on 2 178 | 031, L 26 0 0. 0.67
92, 2 O71 057 L 1.06, 0 0. 0.67
33 2 2.66 | 0.37 L 3.99 0 0. 0.67
34 2 0 0. 0 043, L Tos 03,
95 2 327 0. L 491 0 o 0.67
96 2 0 0. 09s 60.37 05) a oor
7 2 241 0. 09 377 mm 0.04 061
98 z 0 0 L 0 0 0. 1
39) z 0 0. r 0 0 0 r
100, zi Tr 0 029 16 O71 0.09, ied
101 z 0. 0 0 05 n 0.52, 0.42,
10 2 12.71 02 n 19.07 0 0 0.67
103 2 0 0 or 0.28 0.99) Lot 031
104 2 0 0 oss 178. O17, 0.62, 04
105, 2 0 0 0 057 1 om 036
106 2 a7 0 r 625 0 0 067
107 2 0.01 0 am 0.82 a21 D0 0.59
108; A 13.93_[ 035 n 20.89) 0. 0 067
109, z 0 0. OF 1.84 03 1ST 023
10) 2 322 | ose i 4.83 0. 0 0.467
HW 2 325 [0.73 096, 1424 04 0.03 0.62
nz 2 17 054 H 255 o 0 067
113, 2 0 0 0 2.08: 1 232 0.14
ir 2 Tie | 0.16 093 20.59 oe 137, 02
us zi 0 0 0.01 O18. 0.99) 022 052
16. A 335 Ls 1 532 0 0 067


APPENDIX Table 5.2. Continued.

194

SITE (MATURE | PARTI

x a P ¥ P TRT | P-VALUE
BLG) TION

7, 2 o 0 o 038 T 039 046
nie Gen al 0. [cL soon ae TaEE OT
119) 3 333 Tao 0. 0 0.67
120, 3 0 0 0. 0 L
121 3 0 0 0. 0 r
122 3 0 0 1 043 045
123 3 0 0 o 0 i
124 3 0 0 1 ma O38
13s 3 o 0 o 0 L
136. 3 oO 0 0. 0 r
127, 3 0.77_—| 0.04 0 0.65
128 Bien (oat me 0.08
129 3 La 0 0 0.67
1307 3 3.62 o 0 0.67
131 3 0 0 O91 034
Bz fl 0 0 0 0.49) 043,
133 al 0 0 0 15 024
134 3 0 0 0 024 OL
135, 3 0 0 2.01 025 0
136 3 0 0 L 0 i
137, 3 3B. 0 n 0 07
13 3 0 0 0 0.95, 033
139) a o 0. om 2370 wai a8 04
140 3 0 0. L 0 0 o 1
Tah 3 0 0. ost 0.63 047 red asl
1a 3 0 0. 0 0.43 1 02 05,
133 5 a n 138 0 0 067
1a Fl 0 o r 0 0 0 1
145; 3 374 | 021 r 361 0 0. Oe
146 3 0 0. 0 0.61 0 078 036
147 3 191 07 n 2.87 0 0. 0.67
a8 3 0 0 0 0.63 0 026 0s
139, 3 0 0 0 0.24 r 053 0.42
130, 3 Tost_[ 028 n 15.76 o 0 0.67
151 A 0 0 Cor 182 0.96 244 Od
13, 3 1a 122 T 26, 7 o a
153 3 079 | 048 9 11.86 0.09 os 034
154 3 145 0S 1 2.17 0. 0 0.67
155, 3 116 | 035, r 174 0. 0 0.67
156, 3 0 0 o 059 n 0.69) 038
157, 3 251 0 os 9.79) Oz 122 0.28
138. 3 43. 09 1 6.45 0. 0 0.67
159) ai 284.71 0.17 096, 22.31 04 0 0.67
160 ai 134] 029 n 2.02 0 0 0.67
161 3 0. 0 i o 0 0 L
162 3 232 _| 072 i Ean 0 0 a

* Shaded entries represent sites under positive selection.

APPENDIX Table 5.3. FEL results by Datamonkey.*

195

CODON [ALPHA | BETA] ALPHA=BETA | LRT P-_] DNS | DNIDS | DNIDS ] CLASS
(MATURE VALUE | LB MLE | UB
BLG)
Tas [13s 7458 | 0.133 [07088 | 0166 | 0636 [1761 | Neutral
2 [ses |_2.912 3.609 [0.939 | 0.4902 [0.119 [0339 | 0.857 | Neutral
3 of 0383, 0.3 [0.473 [0.4314 [1,464.69 | 10,000 | —10,000_| Neutral
4 ‘0 0.6097 10.498 [0.792 | 0.3333 | 3,827.13 [10,000 | —10,000_| Neutral
5 o[ 0947 ‘0.787 [0.72 | 0.4314 | 3,827.27 | 10,000 | 10,000 | — Neutral
6] a3 [0263 ‘0.718, [ 5.037 [0.0196 [0.003 | 0.061 0.283 | Purifying
7 of 027 (0.266 [0.029 | 0.5098 | 1464.55 | 10,000 | 10,000 | — Neutral
3] e665 | 1.527 1.786 | 1041] 0.2981 | 0.081 | 0.176 | 048 | Neutral
9 [521s | o82t Lisi | 1443 | 0.3529 | 0.026 | 0.158 | 0.555 | Neutral
10 0 0 0 0 T 0. 0 (0| Tnvariable
1 OT 0 0284 | 5956 | 0.0196 0. Of 0.04 | Purifying
12 of 1133. 092s [1147 | 0.2549 [$271.39 | 10,000 | 10,000 | — Neutral
13) 3378, 0 (0.423 | 4.686 | 0.0196 0. 0] 0.283 | Puritvin
14 o| 0683 os7s [0.412 | 0.5686 | 3827.14 | 10,000 | 10,000 | Neutral
15 0. 0 0 o L 0 0 ‘0-|Tnvariable
To 686, 0 952 | iaais | 0.0196 0. 00083 | Puritying
17 0 0 0 o L 0. 0. ‘0 nvariable
1s] 402 [Ose Tira [3918 | 0.0588 [0.022 | 038 [0467 | Purifying
19 0 0 0 0. L 0 0. 0 | nvariable
20 o[ 0781 0496 [045 | on7s | 33721 | 10,000 [10,000 [~ Neweal
2 0 | 0339, 0.279 [0.467 [0.3725 | 1,464.68 | 10,000 | 10,000_| Neutral
22 of 1142, (0.749 [1.503 | 0.2157 [3827.28 | 10,000 | 10,000_| Neuteal
23 | 1a33, 0 0239) 3.498 [0.0588 0 0 0418 | Purifying
24 of 0354 0257 | 0.024 | 0.6667 | 1.46454 | 10,000 | 10,000 — Neuteal
25 oO [0304 ‘0247 [0399 | 0.1961 | 1464.61 | 10,000 | 10,000_| Neutral
26 0 [0304 (0.246 [0.409 | 0.4706 [1,464.61 | 10,000 | 10,000_| Neutra
27 [S505 0 0.449 [10.894] 0.0196 0 Of 0.07 | Purifying
28 0 0 0 0. 0 0 0 (0-|Invariable
29 o | 030s 026 | 0356 | oasia | 1.a6a60_| 10,000 | 10,000 | Neutral
30, 0 0 0 0. r 0 0 (0 Tnvariable
31 [3287 0. O74 | 5223 | 0.0392 0 0 03 | Purifying
32 0 0. 0 0. L 0 0 0 | Invariable
33 | 3547 0. 0289: | 7846 | 0.0196 0 Of 0017 | Purifying
34 of 065s 10.526 | 0.869 | 0.2549 | 3.89715 | 10,000 | 10,000 | — Neutral
35 of 1193 1088 | 0.655 | 0.3882 [5.27139 | 10,000 | 10,000 [Neutral
36 [der 0234 10,665. [ 4.381] 0.03927] 0.005] 0.0897 0.41 | Purifying
37 o| 14s; ‘oat | 1.289 | 02745 | 5271.39 | 10,000 | 10,000 | Neutral
38 [1353 0 (0.262, | 3.226 | 0.0588 0 Of 047 | Puritving
39 0 0 0 0. n 0 0 (0-[ invariable
-40-[ 0438 [033 ‘aos | 0225 | 007s | 002s | 0503 | 2318 | — Neutral
a1 of 0368, ‘028s | 0.472 | 0.4902 | 1,464.68 | 10,000 | 10,000_| Neutral
a2 01s 0426, 1158] 523] 0.0588 0.003 | 0.047 [0.22 [Purifying
43. [2.326 | 0.405 ‘ost [1.128 | 0.1961 oor | 0.174 | 0.866 | Neutral
44 of 0363 10.326 [0219 | 0.5204 | 1,464.67 | 10,000 | 10,000_| Neutral
45 ‘o[ 0741 0.652 | 0.485 [0.6471 | 3,827.19 | 10,000 | 10,000 | — Neutral
46, 0 0 0 0 r 0 0 0[ Tnvariable
47 [2.003 [0.533 O701 oot | 0274s [0093 | 0361 [0875 | Newtral
48, 0 0 0 0 L 0 0 0] Tnvariable
49-1826 0 022 [on 010302, 0 00972 | Purifying
50 | 1353 0 0.261 327 | 00784 0 Of 047 | Puritying
il of 0773, ‘0.687 | 0.458 | 0.3333 | 3,827.20 | 10,000 | 10,000 | ~ Neutral
52 0 [ 0777 (0229 | 0.373 | 0.3137 | 1,468.57 | 10,000 | 10,000 | — Neutral
3 of 108 ‘985 | 0.619 | 0.4706 | 527137 | 10,000 | 10,000 | Neutral
34 0 o o 0 H 0 0 (0-| “Tnvariable
35, 0 0 0. 0 i 0 0 (0-[“Invariable
36 0 0 0. 0 L 0 0 (0-[Invariable
37 | 3786 [1443 To79 | _omis | ost 099 [0381 | 1.162 | Neutral


APPENDIX Table 5.3. Continued...

196

CODON] ALPHA ] BETA] ALPHA TRT P- | DNDS | DNIDS ] DNDS | CLASS
(MATURE vatue} up | MLE | UB
BLO)

Bg a o D 0 T o o 0 | Tnvariable
59. vo217 | 0407, 1235-5568 | 0.0196] 01002 | 008 | 0r188 | Purifvin
60 | 0554 | 0276, osm | 0.225 | 0.6275 | 0028 | 0.498 | 2.367 | Neutral
el] 0593 | 1262, L198 | 0.03 | 0.8824 | 0.468 [2.13 | 5.905 | Neutral
2 [5253 [0331 O88 | 4.156 | 0.0784] _0.004 | 0.063 [0.303 | Purifying
3 | 28973 | 0.235 0.765 | 16.174 | 0.0196 | 0.001 | 0.008 | 0028 | Purifying
a | 8246 [1375 2042 | 3.64 [0.1373 [0.068 | 0.167 | 0.409 | Neutral
S| 1.034 | 1.986, L719 | 0.456 | 0.6471 | 0.745 1.92 {5.104 | Neutral
661| 0.278 0 0.074 | 2.61 | 00196 0 0 [0.712 | Purifying
or] 021 | 0639) aaa | 1137 | 02745 [0883 | 3.144 | 9.854 [Neutral
of of 0378 0333 | 0.521 | 0.4902 [3,826.88 | 10,000_| 10,000 [Neutral
69 ‘a [0.926 ox2 [1322 | 0.2157 | 7.26031 | 10,000 | 10,000-[— Neutral
70-| 3567 | 0563 0757 {2.113 |_02745 | 0085 | 0.158 | 0.472 [Neutral
T4537 [0251 (0.477 | 3.952] 0.0588] 0.009 | 0.055. 0.191 | Purifying
72 [2.746 | 0565 (0.956 | 1.164 | 03922 | 0.086 | 0.206 | 0.715 | Neutral
73038, 0. 0.146] 3.809 | 0.0392 0 0 [0.502 | Puritying
74 | 0.494 | 0.499 0.498, ‘0| 0980 [0237 Tor | 3.107 | — Neutral
750.85 0 (0295. 7338 | 0.0196 0 00245] Punityin
76 | 0.781 0 0224 | 7274 | 00196 0 0 [ 0258 | Purifying
7 ‘of 0491 0.446 | 0.52 | 0.5098 |-5271,02 | 10,000 | 10,000_| — Neutral
7s o 128 1023 [2.213 | 0.1569 [7,260.42 | 10,000 | 10,000 | Neutral
79-0493 0 0.167] 4.005 | 0.0588 0 Of 0523 | Purifying
30[ 11.754 0 058 | 19.697 | 0.0196, 0 Of 0.02 | Purifying
SI ‘0 | 0379. 0.285 | 1.052 |__0.4314 | 3,826.82 | 10,000 | 10,000 Neutral
82 0. 0 0 0 1 0 0 (0-|Tnvariable
83 ‘0 | 0336 221 | 0438 | 05098 | 3.82650 | 10,000 | 10,000" — Neutral
e4 0; oat ‘0.893 | 0.3529 | 5,270.96 | 10,000 | 10,000 | — Neutral
a5] ales 0238 0576] 6.732] 0.0196 | 0.009 | 0.057 [0.198 | Purifying
86 | 1389 | 0.502 (0727 | 1320 | 03137 | 0075 | 0316 | 0.926 | — Neutral
‘87 | 1.094 | 0.577 (0793 | 0.428 | 0.6667 | 0.086 | 0.528 | 1.808. | Neutral
88 | 82.607 | 0.763 1.768 [13.645 | 0.0196 | 0.003] 0.009"| 0.025 | Purifying
89 | 1704 | 0.148 0.266] 1.833 | 0.1569 | 0.005 | 0.087 | 0.421 | Neutral
90 | 2.838 | 0.659 712 [0731 | 03725 [0078 | 0232 | 0.595 [Neutral
91] 1365 | 0.248 (0338 | 1.161 | 03599 [0.029 | 0.181 0,63 | Neutral
92 | 1.436 | 0427 0.63 | 1.293 | 0.2745 [0.069 | 0297 | 0.946 | Neutral
932.816 | 0485 0.676 2.942| 0.098, 0038] 0.158 [0.437 | Purifying
94 0 | 0339. (0.264 | 1.035 | 0.3725 | 3,826.78 | 10,000 | 10,000 | Neutral
95 | 386 0 057 [8.554 | 0.0392 0 0 0.106 | Purifying
96, o| 0129 0.117] 0.19 | 0.4314 | 1,468.01 [10,000 | 10,000_[— Neutral
97 | 5.020" 0.109 05297] 11.825] 0.0196] 0.0017] 0.022-| 0.102 | Punfying
98, 0 0 0 0. H 0 0 (0 Tnvariable
99) 0 0 0 0. r 0 0 (0 | Tovariable
Too |1377 | 1183 Tas | _0004 | 0902 [0300 | 0.926 [3138 [Neutral
101 oO] 056 si4 | 0.66 | 0.4706 | 6186.21 | 10,000 | 10,000 [Neutral
Tox | 13.695 [OST 0301 | 5.0551] 0.0392 | 0.001] 0.012 | 0.054 | Puntving
103, of 0217, 0.134 [0917 | 0.1765 | 1,464.42 | 10,000 [10,000 | Neutral
108 of 0.149. 0.127 | 0.319 | 0.3333 | 1,464.17 | 10,000 | 10,000 | Neutral
Los o| _04ss ‘0401 | 0.747 | 0.4314 | 5271.04 | 10,000 | 10,000 | Neutral
106 | 1613 0 ‘0.094 [5.004 | 0.0196 0 0 [ 0.124 | Puritying
107 o| 0.108, ‘0.106 [0.037 | 0.5686 | 1,463.83 | 10,000 | 10,000_| Neutral
10s | 2.755 [0268 0.617 5.199, | 0.0392 [0.015 | 0.096 | 0334 | Puritying
109) of 0sss 0.489 | 0.94 | 0.4314 | 6186.22 | 10,000 | 10,000 | Neus
to| eras [0.359 0.803 | 2.289 | 02187 | 0.003 | 0.058 | 2.72 | Neutra
i [3.425 [1325 1.68 | 0.461 | 0.6275 | 0.143 | 0.387 | 1.196 | Neutral
12 | 1.239 | 0.658, 0773 {0373 | 0.7255 {0.16 | 0532 | 1.458 | Neutral
iE Cs EE 1-358 2.6291] 010987] T7865. | 10.0007 [TT T0,000 | Diversityin
14. 1.66 [0.691 os | 0.779 | 03529 [0002] oate | 1.28 | Neutral


APPENDIX Table 5.3. Continued...

197

CODON | ALPHA | BETA ] ALPHA=BETA] LRT P] DNDS | DNIDS | DNIDS | CLASS
(MATURE vatue | LB MLE UB
BLG)

15 o> 1a 33 ‘Oaa | 05094 [146415 | 10,000 10,000 | Nevial
tig |_271s | _1.083 162 [0311 {0.6275 [0.144 | 0399 | 1.032 | Neutral
117, of 0.343 O31] 0.448 | 0.549 | 3270.85 | 10,000 | 10,000. | Neutral

sg 901 4.0277 0.05 IG. 186.535] TIVO, 0007] 10,000 | Diversifying
no [3.021 | 1.409 L637 04] 06275 | o1s8 | 0.466 116 [Neutral
120. 0 o 0 0 0 0 0 (0-[Tnvariable
12 0 0 0 0. r 0 0 0 | Invariable
122 of} _omis ara [0421 | omnis | 3.82696 | 10,000 | 10,000. — Neutral
123 0 0 0 o T o 0 0 | Invariabie
124 0. 8. as | 0414 [03520 | 146431 [10,000 | 10,000 Neutral
125; 0. 0 0 0 n o 0 0-[Invariable
126 0. 0 0 0 r 0. 0 (0-[“Invariabie
127 | 0763 O74 0743 [0901-09608 [0.148 097 | 3234 [Neutral
128 | _3379 | 1.016 1282 [0.778 [03333 | 0084 [0301 | 0.976 [Neutral
1297] 1.105; 0 0.176) 3.485 [0,098 o o 038 | Purifying
130 | _3.047 0 017 | 5417 | 0.0196 0. O| 0.116 | Purifying
13 of 119 1329 | 0812 |_o.4118 | 681024 [10,000 | 10,000 {Neutral
132 of 0472 oai7 [0.482 | 0.5098 {3.82697 [10,000 | 10,000 | Neutral
133 of 073 (0.556 [1.433 | 0.1373 [5.27123 [10,000 | 10,000-{ Neutral
134 oO] 038s (033 | 0.361 | 0.6471 [3,826.82 | 10,000 | 10,000 | Neutral
13s o[ 0236 0.196 [0243 | 0.5298 {1,464.45 [10,000 | 10,000_| Neutral
136. 0 o 0 0. L 0. 0 (0-| fnvariable
137 | 15762, 0. a5 [10583 | 00196 0. 0] 0024" | Purifying
13 of _0m23 0.732 | 0.965 | 0.3725 | 618639 | 10,000 | 10,000 | Neutral
139) of 0597 (0.6120 [24850 0.07847 [76,186.27 [10,0007] 10,000") Diversifying
140. 0 no 0 o L o Oo 0| Invariable
141 (0 [- 0355 Dror [0384 [03333 [1.46432 [10,000 | 10,000 | Neutral
142 of 0413 0372 ‘041 | 0.549 [3826.91 | 10,000 | 10,000 | Neutral
143 |__1o12 | 0.663, 0.76 [0.181 | 0.7481 {0.137 | 0.685 | 1.927 | Neutral
1a 0 0 0 0 r 0 o 0] invariable
tas | 5035 | 0193 972 [on | 00196 | C002 | 084 0.158 | Purifying
146. of 0574 10.506 | 0.745 | 0.3725 | 5271.16 | 10,000 | 10,000 | Neutral
147 |__2.078 | 0.708 0.856 | 0.618 | 0.4706 | 0.081 | 0.339 | 0,989 | Neutral
138. of 616. 0.594) (03 | 0.6275 [3271.20 | 10,000 | 10,000 | Neutral
149) of 0.199) 0.176 | 0515 | 0.2157 |_1,464.47 | 10,000 | 10,000_| Neutral
150] 8926 | 0259 1036 | 8.684 [0.0196 _ 0.002 [0.029 J 0.139-|  Purtyin
151 of 1684 1317 | 2244 | 0.1176 [681027 [10,000 [10,000 [Neutral
1s | 1599 [134 1189 0.04 | 0.8431 [0209 [ 0.709 [1.899 | Neutral
153 [2.115 [L061 1.116 | 0.046 | 0.8235 [0.135 [0502 | 1332 [Neutral
sa [2.551 | 0.475 0.893 | 2.651 | 0.1373, 0.03 | 0.186 | 0.619 | Neutral
13s [1076 [0332 0.429) 0.67 | 0.3922, (0.05 [0308 | 1.041 [Neutral
156, of 03562, 10.473 | 0.675 | 0.5098 | 3,827.09 | 10,000 | 10,000 [Neutral
1357 | _2.733 | 1486. 1.882 | 0314 | 0.6863 | 0.146, 054 [1.754 Neutral
158 | 3.852 | 0.836, 1.199 | 1.679 | 02157 [0085 [0.217 |__0.635 [Neutral
159 | 16.085, 0.64) ass 2.372 | 0.0784 | 0.009 0.04] 0.125" | Puritvin
160 | 117s | 0.276 ass | 095s | 03137 | 0.013 | 0235 | 1.088 | Neutral
16 0 0 0 o r 0 0 (0 | invariable
16x |__3317 | 0.675 Tan [2021 | 0373 | 0.069 [0201 [0.859 | Neutral
163 of 0767 sso | 1.445 | 0.1765 | 5271.26 | 10,000 | 10,000 [Neutral

“Light-shaded entries indicate sites under negative selection. Datk-shaded entries indicate sites under postive selection.


APPENDIX Table 5.4. FUBAR results by Datamonkey.*

198

‘SHTE(MATUREBLG) | PARTITION | A T TA_[ PROB[AH] | PROB[ACH] | BAVESFACTOR[ACB]
1 1 368 | 2.14 | 1583 | 04es O4I8 0.982,
z L 19.445 [5.522 | 13.923 | 0.804 0.062, 0.09

i 0.722 [0.743] 0.021 [0353 0.585; 193
i ‘o.716_[ 0.971] 0255 | 0.285 0.684 2.962
T L424 [1232 [0.192 | 0.284, 0.652 2.565;
r 7.13 [0712 [6.4187] 0.925 0.053) 0.077
T 3.233 [0.663] -2571_| 0.526 0.42, 0.99,
r 11.454 [ 2.701 | -8.752_| 0.665, 023 0.408;
r 7.171 | 1202| 5.969 | 0.734 0.204 0351
n 0s42_[ 0.477 | -0.065 | 0.491 0.2 1.083
r 13.785 [0407 -13.368 0.927 (0.057 0.083
H 0935 [1.677 | 0.742 [0.174 0.765 4414
r 10.927-| 0.477 | -10.457 [0.921 0.061 0.089)
n L972] 1 | 0972} 0352 0.586 1.939
T 0.672 | 0436 | -0.246 | 056 0375 0.819
r 15.603 | 0418 | -1S.185 | 0.999 0 0

T 0.668 [0385 | -0.283 | 0.589 0345 ‘O-731
r 9.269 [1.037] 8.232 [0.965 0.015) (0021
i 4807 | 0.4646 | 436 | 0.682 0.269) 0.504
n 195 [1.096 | 0.854 | 0.332 0.606 2.099
i ‘o.68_| 0.703 | 0.023 | 0.358 0579 Ts84
i 0.765_[_1.677_|_0.712_| 0.203 0.737 3.822
r 2219 | 0.409_|-1.81 | 0.891 0.141 0235
i 3.619 | 0.654 | 2.965] 0.542 0.406 0.934
T 0,699 [ 0.689 | 0.01 | 0371 0367 1791
1 0,678 | 0.687 | 0,009] 0.365 0572 183
r 15.376 | 0372 | -15.004 [0.991 0.006) 0.005
H 1,862 0404 | -1.458_| 0.638 0.305) 0.599
H 1.283_[ 0.678 | -0.565 | 0.429 O51 1424
i ‘065 | 0396 | 0.255 | 0.576 0338 0.761
H 3278 |05s18 | -476 | 0.924 0.055; 0.079
H 0s42_[-0.477_| 0.065 [0.491 0.442 1083
i 19.747 [0.41 | -19.331 | 0.949 ‘004 0.057
H 0.703 [1.016 | 0313 | 0.244 0.696 3.128
L 2338 [1817 | 0.52 | 0.255 0.675) 2.846,
i 4944 [0.683] 4.261 [0924 0.052, 0.076
H 0.7 {1.484 | 0.707 | 0.165 0.776 4.739
H 17160421 -1.295 | 0.806 0.153 0247
i 0542 [0477 | 0.065 | 0.491 0.42. 1083
H 0914 [0.654 | 0.26 | 0.56. 0368, 0.796
H 0.703 | ~0.736 | 0.032 [0.353 0.585; 1,925
i 15.845 [0.831 | -15.014 | 0.969 0.019 10.027
L 3.168 | 0818 | 2.348 | 0.679 0.26, 0.481
n 2.183 [0.726 | -1.457_| 0.455 0.486 1.295
L 18i_[ 1.067 | 0.744 [0331 0.606 2.107
r 0.542_|_0.477_| -0.065 | 0.491, 0.44 1.083
i 4287 |_0.944 | -3343 | 0.697 0242 0.437
r (0.651 | 0.404 | -0247_| 0571 0364 0.781
r (0396 | -19s4_| 0.834 0.31 0.206
i (0421_|-1.727_ | 0.813 0.148 0.237,
1 Losz | 0.346 0592 1985
n 0.677 | 0.006 | 0371, (0567 179
r 162 [0.14 | 0252 0.68, 2.908;
n 0.47_|-0.065_| 0.491 0.442 1.083
r ‘041 | -1.746_[ 0.643, (0301 0.588,
r 0.386_|--0.978 0.635, 0.305; 0.601
i 2.149” [4.594 [0.748 0.128 0.202
L (0.477_[ -0.065_[ 0.491 0.442 1.083
r (08257 [18.036 [0.97 002 0.028;


Table 5.4. Continued...

199

FARTIHION | —A 7 EA | PROB[ASH] | PROB[ACH] | BAVESFACTORIAGH]
L Tox_[-0713 | 034 | 0553 0.374 0817
H 2.655_|_1.754_|--0.901_| 0.301, 0.626 2.287
i 14.061] 0.755 [13,307 [0.961 0.026 0.037
z 7.754 |_0717_| -7.037_| 0.892 0.081 0.121
2 Taast [3.61 | 9.281 | 0.887 0.014 0.019
zi Lis [257 | 139 | 0.104 0.786 5.025
zi 0.04 [0241] 0.453_[ 0.834 0.125 0.195;
2 ‘0.641_{~0.908 | 0.267 | 0.268 0.656 2.606)
2 2.007 {0.757 | _-1.25 | 0.397 0.545 Lod.
2 F301] 1.695_|_0394_| 0.163 0.773 4.659
2 7.905_| 0.905 _|__-7 0.765 0.19, 0.321
2 11325 | 071s | 10.61 0.942 0.042 0.06,
2 3.816 | 1616 | 22 | 0.631 026. 0.48.
2 (0.642 [0261] 0.38 | 0.802 0.152 0.246
2 0735_{_ 0.75 | 0.014_| 0.415 (0507 140s
A L00s_| 0.269 | -0.736_| 0.876 0.095 O14
z 1099 | 0.2527 | 0.847 [0.914 0.062 0.091
A 2is1_[0942 | 1.188 [0337 0.608 2.086,
2 Lo7s_[ 1.573 | 0.498 [0.155 0.786 5.022,
A 0.635 _{ 0275] 0.36 | 0.781 017 028
zi 22.321 | 0271] 22.05 L 0. 0
2 0579 [0.776 | 0.196 | 0271 0.67 2781
A 1675 | 0.268 [1.406 0.714 0.225 0397
2 1083 | 0.527_| 0526 | 0.486 0.852 113.
2 0.774 [0.696 | 0.078 | 0.339 06 2.054)
2 6.721 | 0.766 | 5.955 | 0.883 0.086 0.128
2 5.153 | 0816 | 4336 | 0.866 0.095; 0.144
2 1464 [0.676 | 0.788 | 0.692 0.241 0.434
2 34.103 [1.282] 32.822 | 0997 (0.001 0.001
2 10.822 [0.573 | -10.249 | 0.892 0.085, 0.127
A 2.808 | 0-841 | -1.965 | 0.62. 0314 0.626
2 273 [0731 | 1.998 | 0.694 0.25 0.456
2 Lisi_| 0938 | 0243 | 0.42 0.496 1344
2 323 | 0737 | 4493 | 0.886 0.084) 0.125
2 0.531_[ 0.766 | 0235 | 0.256 0.686 2.993
2 6877 | 0399] -6.479_| 0.978 0.015) 0.02
A 1.733 [0531_| 1.202 [OSI 0.429, 1.028
2 6.865 | 0544] 6.322 | 0.989 0.007, 10.009,
2 1.677 | 0.273 O71 0.229 0.406;
2 1674032 0.674 0.265 0.494,
100, 2 2.554 | 2.501 0331 0514 1447
OL 2 193 [0.885 0332 061 2.138,
102 2 T344 [0.595 0.902, 0.078 0.116
103, 2 0.437 | 0.684, 0.284 0.657 2.618,
104 2 0.677] 0.561 0.425; 0512 1.432
105; 2 1.234 | 0.866 0.294) 0.647 251
106, 2 7.628 | 0242, 0.949) 0.037, 0.053
107 2 2.985 | 0.499) 0.603, 0343 0715
108 2 23.889 [0.727 0.998; 0.001 0.001
109) 2 1.012 [0.858 0.28 0.661 2.663)
110) 2 6582 | 1351 0.708 (0241 0.435;
nm 2 6.009 | 1.674 0749) 0.168 0.266,
112, 2 2.861 | 0.919, 0.721 0.208, 0359)
1B QTR. 157 fs. 954 (0.0487 [0.9060 [3.224
M4 ri 3373 | 0.824 O84 0.109 0.167
U5, 2 1.999 | 0.552 Osis (0.429 1.028
116 2 5206 [3237 oi5 044 1.076
nz 2 L165 | 0.666 0397 0543 1.625
nm 3 sit [1559 0.108 0.833 7.962,


Table 5.4. Continued...

200

SITE (MATURE BUG) | PARTON [x a EA | PROB[ATH] | PROBIACH] | BAYESFACTORIACH
119 a 448_[ soe | 1.460.431 0.42. 0.992,
120. 3 1633 |0279 | 1.358 | 0.712 0.238 0.404,
121 3 1.935] 0375 | 1.56] 0.652. 029. 0557
122 3 1663_| 0.786] -0.877_| 0.373 0.568 L197
123, 3 0.46 | 0.408 [0.055 [0.498 0.43, 1.03
124 3 o.s61_|_0.587 | 0.026 | 0.382 0.555 1.702
125; 3 0.67] 0272 | 0.398 | 0.68. 0.253 065
126 3 0548 | 0398 | -025 | 0.009 0.299 0.584
127 3 1.596 [108 [0.516 [0.438 0.474 1233
128 3 781_[ 1812 | 5.998 [0.649 0259 0.478
129) 3 1537036 | 1.177 0.821 0.14 0223,
130) 3 8.041] 0338] 7.703] 0.932 0.06 0.087
BL 3 2.232 | 2.637 | 0.405 | 0.165 0.761 4255)
132 3 1.672_|0821_| -0851_[ 0371 OST TSI
133 3 0.622 | 1212 [059 0.168 0.777 4.768,
134 3 116s_[0.765_[-04 [0384 0555 1.708
135 3 1.506 | 0.695 | -o.881_| 0.462. 0478 1.254
136 3 0.413 | 0309] -0.105_| 0.51 0368 0.797
137 3 24-467 | 0.3227] 24.1457] 0.993 0.005; 0.007,
as sl 1744 | 1478 | -0.266 | 0.229. 0.705; 3.276
139. 3 0.462 | 1.146 [0.688 | 0.114 (0842 7.289)
140. 3 0545 | 0309 | -0236 | 0.616 0313 0.622,
141 3 (0.566 | 0.645 [0.079 | 0.35, 0.587 1.948
1a 3 1977 | o8i1 | 1.166 | 0.385 0.356 1713
Ta 3 Lora | 1.237 | -0.437_| 0.483 0398 0.902,
14a a 0.46 | 0.405 | 00085 0.498, 0.43 1.03,
1a 3 9.71] 0.6287 [9.082 0.995. 0.008 0.005)
146. zi 863 | 0.961 | 0.097 | 0.257 0.682, 2.935;
a7 3 3391 | 117s] 2217 | 0568 0347 0.727)
1a 3 2478 | 1.007_[-1.471_| 0.356 0585 1928
149, 3 0.616 | 0.698 [0.012 | 0.375 0.562 1.754
150, 3 19.264 [0.695 | 18.569 | 0.995 0.002, 1.003

ms sy SOG AT B49
152, 3 3353 | 2083 | -131 | 0356 0545 1.636
153, 3 423 | 2088 | 2.142 | 0398 0.594 1997
154, a 3024 | 0.88 [2.144 0.717 0212 0369)
155; 3 2581 | 0.752] -1.829_| 0.601, 0332 0.68
156; 3 L079 | 0808 | -0.181_| 0.305 0.635 2316
157, 3 “4385 [3.216 | 1.169 | 0.445 0378 0.83
138, 3 12.489 [71488-11007] 0.91 0.038 0.054
159) 3 13.625 | 0816 | -12.809 | 0.839. 0.13 0.204,
1601 2 72566 | 0.683 | -1.883 | 071 0.234 0219)
16L 3 1633 | 0279 | 1.354 | 0.712 (0228 0.404)
162 3 oni 122 | S401 | 091 0.032 0.045;

*Light-shaded entries indicate sites under negative selection. Dark-shaded entries indicate sites under postive selection.

