CONCHOLOGICAL FEATURES OF GOLDEN APPLE SNAIL (Pomacea canaliculata {Lamarck, 1822]) IN SELECTED RICE FIELDS OF DAVAO CITY

PAUL DAVE C. PANZO

UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHEASTERN PHILIPPINES

MASTER OF SCIENCE IN BIOLOGY

June 2022

ABSTRACT

A study to determine the conchological features of golden apple snails (Pomacea
canaliculata [Lamarck, 1822]) was conducted in selected rice fields of Davao City. Five
sites were selected as sampling areas: Buhangin, Tugbok, Calinan, Baguio, and Marilog.
Sampling was done between January and February 2022. The method used to collect
golden apple snails was the handpicking method, with a 30 mm lower limit on size for
samples collected to exclude juveniles. A total of 23 specimens were randomly collected
from each site. The physicochemical parameters measured were within normal ranges and
suitable for the growth of rice and P. canaliculata. The correlation between the variables
was determined using Bayesian correlation analysis. Among the relationships studied, shell
width-salinity, aperture length-salinity, number of whorls-salinity, shell dry weight~
salinity, shell length-salinity, shell length-temperature, shell width-temperature, and
number of whorls-temperature reported a positive correlation with BF₊₀ values greater than
3.000, indicating that there is substantial evidence in favor of the alternative hypothesis
that there is an association between the variables. The increased activity of the golden apple
snail as the temperature rises, as well as its high salinity tolerance, are suggested to be
contributing factors to the positive correlations. It is recommended that a more extensive
correlation study of P. canaliculata in the Davao Region be conducted using Bayesian statistics.

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
Background of the study

Aquatic invertebrates that populate the soil-floodwater ecosystem of wetland rice
fields are considered significant as nutrient recyclers, rice pests, biological control agents,
food items, and vectors of human and animal diseases. One of the most common and
serious type of invasive organisms is the golden apple snail (Pomacea canaliculata
[Lamarck, 1822]). The voracious herbivore can devastate rice seedlings, resulting in rice
production losses of up to 40% (Bambaradeniya & Amerasinghe, 2004). Golden apple
snails do, however, have several well-known advantages. The snail's high protein content
makes it a suitable addition to the rural poor's low-protein diet (Food and Agriculture
Organization [FAO], 1998). Moreover, local farmers in Southeast Asia used this invasive
snail to control weeds in rice fields (Tiirke et al., 2012).

Macroinvertebrates are frequently used as markers of various environmental
conditions. They are reliable indicators because they spend most of their lives in water, are
easy to gather, and have different levels of pollution tolerance (Ueno, 2013). P.
canaliculata is considered ecologically important, persistent, and possesses biomonitor
characteristics: (a) they are large enough to provide enough material for analyses, (b) they
are easy to handle, collect, and culture, (c) they live long, (d) they are abundant, (e) they
are sedentary, (f) they can survive for long periods without food, and (g) they can be found
in almost any freshwater ecosystem in many countries (Pefia et al., 2017). Knowing all
these necessitate a thorough investigation for ecological management and its potential as a

biomarker.

Plant growth, crop nutrition management, and soil and water management all
benefit from physicochemical examination of soil and water in agriculture. To properly
evaluate and manage deficiencies and improve rice production, physicochemical
conditions are taken into account when implementing organic cultivation practices (Harun
et al., 2020). The study on the correlation between physicochemical parameters and shell
morphology of golden apple snails (P. canaliculata) in selected rice fields of Davao City
will generate information for the farm owners and the farmers about the potential of these
organisms as bioindicators, based on shell morphology, of various environmental
parameters. Moreover, agriculturists can use this data to manage the rice crop's nutrient
input during cultivation.
Objectives of the study

The study examined the conchological features of golden apple snails (P.
canaliculata) in selected rice fields of Davao City. Specifically, it:

1. determined shell morphometric data (shell dry weight, shell length, shell width,
width of the aperture, length of the aperture, band width per shell, number of bands,
and number of whorls) of collected P. canaliculata;

2. determined the physicochemical parameters (depth, temperature, pH, salinity,
dissolved oxygen (DO), total dissolved solids (TDS), total hardness, and nitrate
concentration) of selected rice paddies of Davao City; and

3. determined statistical correlation between physicochemical parameters of selected

rice paddies and shell morphology of collected samples.

Significance of the study

There is a gap of information on studies in the rice fields of Davao City concerning
P. canaliculata. Thus, this study provides preliminary data about its potential as a
bioindicator of environmental fluctuations in rice fields. Moreover, it provided information
for the Department of Agriculture-Regional Office XI and the City Agriculturist Office
about the present condition of the city’s rice field areas. The results of the study also serve
as an important reference for evaluating future soil and water quality changes as well as
providing new insights on how to develop farming techniques and maintain biodiversity
(Amaoudov et al., 2015). Furthermore, the use of macroinvertebrates as indicator
organisms can provide the community awareness to reconsider what is truly "ecological"
and so-called “eco-friendly” farming from the viewpoint of biodiversity conservation
(Ueno, 2013). It is the priority of the Harmonized National Research and Development
Agenda-Agriculture, Aquatic and Natural Resources sector to develop soil health, nutrient
and water management, and to develop eco-friendly diagnostic kits, techniques, and
strategies for agriculture (Department of Science and Technology [DOST], 2017).
Scope and Limitation of the Study

The study investigated the correlation between physicochemical parameters of
water and conchological features of golden apple snails (P. canaliculata) in selected rice
fields of Davao City. Other physicochemical parameters of water and conchological
features of golden apple snails not specified in the objectives are beyond the scope of this
study. Furthermore, other extrinsic factors that could influence the conchological features

of P. canaliculata were not discussed in this research.

CHAPTER II
REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE
Shell morphology of Pomacea canaliculata

Pomacea canaliculata (Lamarck, 1822), or commonly known as golden apple
snail, was introduced in Taiwan and the Philippines in the early 1980s from Florida and
Latin America by private snail farmers with the goal of exporting it to Europe. Since it is
easy to raise and can successfully breed in warm tropical freshwaters, it thrived and adapted
well in the country. Unfortunately, the exportation venture was not a success, and although
they were initially expensive, their market value eventually dropped. Golden apple snails
that had escaped or been discarded rapidly spread in streams and irrigation canals. When
they arrived in the rice fields, they found an ideal environment, eating on young succulent
plants such as newly transplanted rice crops and weeds at night and dawn. The snails
quickly became a severe pest in many regions of cultivated rice land in Asia, with only a
few natural enemies to keep them in check. Their rapid development and reproduction
(females lay up to 500 eggs once a week) results in population levels that can wipe out
entire rice crops (FAO, 1998; Joshi et al., 2017). This organism is one of the 100 world’s
worst invasive alien species, according to the International Union for Conservation of
Nature (IUCN) in 2021.

Gastropods are primarily identified by their shell. The entire shell is termed the
conch and is normally composed of several layers, one to several minerals like calcium
carbonate in the form of aragonite or calcite, and one outermost (periostracum) layer
composed mostly or entirely of organic material and usually pigmented. The shell is

basically a coiled tube around a central pillar, termed an axis. One complete coil or tum is

called a whorl. The first one or two whorls are created before the snail egg hatches and are
termed embryonic or nuclear whorls that collectively make up the protoconch. Coiling and
surface morphology of embryonic whorls differ from those that follows and are termed as
postembryonic or teleoconch whorls (Frest & Johannes, 1999). Shell features are often
adaptive in relation to habitat, locomotion, feeding, and defense from predators.
Gastropods invest large amounts of energy in specializing and strengthening the shell
(Salgeback, 2006).

Pomacea canaliculata is characterized by its large-sized shell (up to 75 mm in
height), deeply channeled suture, rounded aperture, wide and deep umbilicus, and shell
color that varies from bright green to orange-brown with reddish spiral bands. The interior
of the shell is yellowish with a suffusion of purple and marked with strong spiral bands
(Ponder et al., 2016). Through the process of biomineralization, P. canaliculata shells are
formed by calcium carbonate and other trace minerals found in the environment. Shell
material is layered by a series of strips with cells that run along the outer fold and the
extended mantle of the epithelium. This process starts at the mantle and on the lip and coils
in forward form. Most of the coiling is right-handed although there are examples of left-
handed coiling in some cases. In most cases, growth rings (transverse stria) are observed
that translate to an approximate year of growth, however climate and other factors can
impact this process (Marin et al., 2012). According to Jubaedah et al. (2018), the golden
apple snail shell is made up of 91.62% calcium oxide and 1.66% magnesium oxide.

The band pattern is highly variable among individuals from the same population of
P. canaliculata. This variation involves color, intensity, number (up to 30 bands) and width

of bands. The pigment of the bands in P. canaliculata is deposited in the periostracum

though this is not common among gastropods, in which the pigments are formed by
specialized cells in the mantle margin and deposited in the outer calcareous layer or
periostracum. In P. canaliculata, the bands are included within the calcareous shell matrix,
as proven by acid dissolution of the shell, which left only a homogeneously brownish-
colored periostracum. On the other hand, the chemical digestion of the periostracum only
fades the general shell coloration, leaving the bands unaltered. The band pattern difference
shows ontogenetic and ecophenotypic mechanisms. The color strength of the bands in P.
canaliculata increases during post-hatching development and the shells of hatchlings have
no bands (Estebenet et al., 2006). Whelan (2021) proposed that, in order for observations
to be replicable by other studies, shell morphological features should be measured using
geometric morphometrics or other quantifiable approaches rather than subjective and

ambiguous descriptions.

Number bands

2 Number
ot whorls

Figure 1. Shell characters of P. canaliculata (Rama Rao et al., 2018; Galan et al.,
2015; Conchological Society of Great Britain and Ireland, 2021)

Environmental factors affecting gastropod shell morphology

Conchological characters in gastropods are primarily useful in identifying
taxonomic groups. However, there are also findings that show these traits have observable
relationships with environmental variables. Water parameters such as ammonia, nitrite,
nitrate, pH, hardness, alkalinity, and temperature are known to be essential for gastropod

growth and development. Gastropods should be kept in systems with low levels of

ammonia, nitrite, and nitrate (less than 10 ppm), a neutral pH, and moderate alkalinity and
hardness. Since this is a key source of calcium and magnesium for developing gastropods,
hardness is also considered a crucial physicochemical parameter (Zachariah & Mitchell,
2009).

There have been observations that reveal conchological features have direct
correlations with environmental conditions, affecting the organism's development and
resulting in a better understanding of a species. For instance, a study on the Roman snail
(Helix pomatia) showed that heavy metal accumulation in the hepatopancreas could affect
shell height, relative shell height and whorl number (Nica et al., 2012). Similarly, a study
on the shell morphology of micro-land snails (genus Plectostoma) revealed several aspects
of the predator-prey interactions between the Atopos slug and Plectostoma snails in the
limestone habitats of Borneo. Despite having several distinct anti-predation traits, such as
protruding radial ribs and distorted coiling of the shell, Plectostoma snails have low
resistance against predation by the slug with its two predatory strategies (shell-apertural
entry and shell-drilling). Lastly, the effectiveness of the snail’s anti-predation traits is
probably limited by trade-offs imposed by ontogenetic constraints (Liew & Schilthuizen,
2014).

Anderson et al. (2007) reported that differences in shell size among populations of
the gastropod Oreohelix cooperi are strongly related to mean annual temperature (and the
highly correlated variable elevation) and population density (measured as shell density). In
addition, shell size varies among populations, despite an apparent lack of population
genetic differentiation. As mean annual temperature and shell density affect adult shell

size, they also indirectly affect reproductive behavior. The results suggested that a large

portion of the life history variation in O. cooperi is environmentally induced. Results in the
study conducted on giant African land snail (Achatina fulica) showed how the different
populations varied. Variability between the populations was observed to be due to
variations in meristic measurements and analysis of shell shapes within each of the
populations. While similarities were observed, the differences between the populations
were attributed to the existence of individuals that are distinct for the populations where
they were collected. Population differences cannot be attributed to geographical distance
alone but could also be due to differences in habitats. Variations in the availability of food
plants and other ecological conditions in the collection areas plus genetic predisposition to
variable selection pressures may have contributed to the great potential of survival and
adaptation of this species thus its invasiveness (Madjos & Demayo, 2018).

Furthermore, Schilthuizen et al. (2006) studied Opisthostoma concinnum on
scattered limestone outcrops within a small area of lowland rainforest in Borneo using shell
morphometrics, mitochondrial and nuclear DNA sequences, and marks of predation to find
the factors involved in allopatric divergence. It was found that a striking geographic
divergence exists in shell morphology, which is partly associated with neutral genetic
divergence. Geomorphic differentiation in the behavior of the snails’ invertebrate predator
and evidence of an evolutionary interaction between aspects of shell shape and predator
behavior was also found. The study showed that adaptation to biotic aspects of the
environment may have a more significant part in allopatric speciation than previously
suspected. A study on genetic variation of the shell morphology in Acanthina monodon in
habitats with different wave exposure conditions showed that shell morphology is an

adaptive trait with an important genetic basis and a plastic potential (Solas et al., 2013).


The genetic and environmental factors affecting shell shape in the freshwater snail
Semisulcospira reiniana at Takahashi in Kyoto, central Japan, were studied by means of a
rearing experiment and field observations, Phenotypic modulation by the environment may
cause a large amount of shell variation in many gastropod species, taking account of both
a high plasticity in shell formation and environmental heterogeneity (Urabe, 1998).
According to Cuadrado (2015), gastropod species are among the most biologically
used bioindicators to assess the quality of any water impoundment. A bioindicator should
have the following characteristics: (1) can accumulate high levels of pollutants without
dying; (2) lives in a sessile style, thus accurately representing local pollution; (3) is
abundant and widely distributed to allow for repeated sampling and comparison; (4) lives
long enough to allow for age comparisons. (5) can provide a good target tissue or cell for
future microcosmic research; (6) easy sampling and cultivation in the lab; (7) keeps alive
in water; (8) occupies a key level in the food chain; and (9) a well-observed dose-effect
connection. As a major feature of any biomarker, it is critical that the expected interactions
can be linked to a specific endpoint (molecular, physiological, or morphological) and then
proved to be repeatable across studies and sites (Michalak & Chojnacka, 2014; Nikinmaa,
2014). A study on the edible marine snail (Buccinanops globulosus) concluded that the
shell shape could be used in environmental monitoring programs to analyze the tributyltin
(TBT) coastal pollution through collection of shells on the intertidal (Primost et al., 2015).
Gastropods are primarily distinguished by their shells. Shells protect the organism, are used
to classify and identify species, and are intricately tied to many aspects of gastropod

biology and development (Whelan, 2021).

Shell morphological variations in Pomacea canaliculata

Phenotypic plasticity refers to the ability of many gastropod species to change their
physiology, behavior, morphology, and/or development in response to environmental cues
(Whelan, 2021). When a genotype is exposed to varied environmental conditions, it can
display a variety of phenotypes (Fox et al., 2019). Various studies have found phenotypic
variations among P. canaliculata populations which were linked to differences in
environmental factors. A study on distances of morphological shell shape patterns of P.
canaliculata from Japan and the Philippines revealed that P. canaliculata shells vary in
shape and that geography contributes to shaping the structure of the populations. Using
correlation analysis based on distances, it was found that geographic distance was a factor
that contributed to the differences in the shell shape when viewed from all aspects (i.c.,
apertural, dorsal, and whorl; Moneva et al., 2012).

Furthermore, in a study on phenotypic variation in populations of P. canaliculata
using morphometric parameters, it was observed that significant differences in the body
shape of collected samples exist among three different rice fields in Mindanao Island,
Philippines. Variations in the shells of P. canaliculata snails were attributed to the
cumulative environmental effects on different shell views (aperture, dorsal, and whorls).
The study was able to determine that geologic distance is a factor of phenotypic variations
(Madjos et al., 2015). Mahilum and Demayo (2014) conducted a study on sexual
dimorphism in shell shape of P. canaliculata in three lakes of Mindanao, Philippines (Lake
Lanao, Lake Dapao, and Lake Wood). Geometric morphometric analysis made in the shell
of P. canaliculata found variations in shape of dorsal and ventral portions of the shell

between male and female individuals based on landmark-based analysis. The study,


therefore demonstrated the effectiveness of geometric morphometric methods in describing
morphological variation. The uncontrollable variation existing in P. canaliculata could
have been affected by its successful selection and acclimation to various types of
environments. In a study conducted by Darrigran et al. (2011), it was suggested that
variations in annual temperature and precipitation in northern Patagonia, caused by global
climatic changes, is possibly beneficial for the settlement of populations of P. canaliculata
in the new area, where precipitation is increased to reach values similar to those in the
southernmost area of distribution of this species.

A study conducted on the histological responses of P. canaliculata to copper paved
the way to its possible role as a biomarker for copper contamination. Results showed that
age and copper concentration had an effect on the feeding rate, while copper concentration
and days of exposure to copper had an effect on the growth of snails. Uptake rate,
bioaccumulation and biotransference factors, and assimilation efficiency implicated that P.
canaliculata was a good copper accumulator. Copper accumulation was visible even at low
concentrations, but there was a behavioral regulation at lethal concentrations (Pefia et al.,
2017). A study conducted by Attademo et al. (2018) on metabolic stress and shell thinning
of P. canaliculata in rice agroecosystems of Argentina concluded that the insecticides
bifenthrin and imidacloprid had a possible effect on the shell thickness of the snails. In
addition, exposure to pesticides resulted in neurotoxic resistance and oxidative stress in P.
canaliculata, which is probably responsible for the alteration in its shell development. Shell
variation in P. canaliculata populations supplied not just information about the species but
also insights that could be used to develop effective management strategies and boost

conservation efforts for other gastropod species. Therefore, comparative studies among


freshwater gastropod lineages should be explored, especially those that examine the
adaptive potential of shell variation. Furthermore, genomic tools should also be used to
further our knowledge of phenotypic plasticity (Whelan, 2021).

Rice agroecosystem

Asia accounts for over 90% of the world’s production of rice and almost 90% of
the world’s rice land areas. The greatest levels of productivity are found in irrigated rice
fields, the most intensified production system. Approximately 45% of the rice area in
Southeast Asia is irrigated, with the largest areas being found in Indonesia, Vietnam,
Philippines, and Thailand. In the irrigated rice ecosystem, the rice fields have assured water
supply for one or more crops a year. Irrigated lands cover over half of the world’s rice
lands and produce about 75% of the world’s rice supply (Redfem et al., 2012). Rice fields
are economically important and ecologically valuable. Rice is the most important staple
crop in the Philippines that ensures food security and alleviates poverty.

The progress of Davao City is primarily invested to agriculture. The City
Government of Davao identified agriculture as one of the ten priority investment areas
indicated in the Davao City Investment Incentive Code. Grain production is one of the
monitored and inventoried crops, as part of the 2012-2021 Sustainable Agriculture
Development Plan of the City Agriculturist Office. Currently, 1,599 farmers are involved
in the cultivation of rice in Davao City and according to the Japan Infrastructure
Cooperation Agency (JICA), the estimated employment in the agriculture sector by 2054
will be 43,547 (Davao City Investment Promotion Center [DCIPC], 2016; City

Agriculturist Office, 2021).


Davao City is an agriculture center with an agricultural area consisting of 51,009
ha, 21% of its overall land area. However, the Davao City Agriculturist Office reported a
decrease in rice production, mainly caused by urbanization and damaged irrigation
systems. At present, there is a total of 1,415.24 ha rice fields dispersed in six districts, only
63% from the reported total rice field area in 2016. Calinan district has the largest irrigated
Tice field area with a total of 392.22 ha. The Tugbok clay, Calinan district's soil
composition, is suitable for agriculture due to its rich nutrient content and capacity to retain
plenty of moisture required for a healthy plant growth (DCIPC, 2016; City Agriculturist
Office, 2021). Advancements and development are being made to improve quality and
yield of rice crops in the country (Bordey et al., 2016). Furthermore, in response to growing
concerns about environmental contamination caused by the use of chemical fertilizers,
various initiatives have been launched to replace chemical fertilizers with organic
fertilizers (Harun et al., 2020).

‘A wide range of plant and animal species exist in rice fields. Rice fields are among
the biggest ecosystems that can be found in the tropics. They accumulate large amounts of
water, become a source of groundwater, and help keep the environment healthy by
lowering temperature and reducing pollution (Halwart & Gupta, 2004). Rice
agroecosystem is subject to a variety of anthropogenic activities that can differ significantly
within a country and can have consequences on macroinvertebrate composition. They are
primarily due to the source and the consistency of water supply, soil permeability, and
diverse environmental factors. It must not be disregarded that the natural water cycle in
rice fields is altered because paddies are flooded during the rice growing period and dry up

in harvesting period. The absence of water in rice field during this period is unfavorable to


the development of many species, including the golden apple snail. Water level variations
can affect the survival of species with longer life cycles (Bazzanti et al., 2003; Caramujo
& Boavida, 2010). Water in rice fields is also subject to rapid physical and chemical
changes, which can affect existing flora and fauna (Panizzon et al. 2012). For instance,
thermal fluctuations can directly affect various morphological and physiological traits of
rice plants. A study reported the influence of agronomic practices on water level,
temperature, dissolved oxygen, pH, conductivity, phosphate and nitrate of water in a
tropical rice field ecosystem. As a result, they concluded that rice agroecosystem is a very
complex environment and all small modifications can have direct effects on its

macroinvertebrate communities (Al-shami et al., 2010).

CHAPTER III
MATERIALS AND METHODS

Entry protocol

Before the conduct of the study, necessary communications, legal actions, and
requirements were established. Communication with the Department of Agriculture-
Regional Office XI and the Davao City Agriculturist Office was made to ask for permission
and assistance in the conduct of this research. A formal letter of intent was also sent to each
district agriculturist or agriculture officer. Accordingly, the barangay office of each district
was contacted, and a formal letter of intent signed by the researcher and research adviser
was given to the respective owners of the rice fields. The schedule, method of collection,
and purpose of the study were explained to the owners. The comments, responses, and
recommendations set out by the concerned authorities and individuals are documented and
attached in the appendices of this paper (Appendix D).
Study area

The study was conducted in selected rice fields of Davao City (Figure 2),
geographically situated in the southeastern part of Mindanao, that lies 7.1907° N and
125.4553° E. Davao City has a total land area of 244,400 ha and 1,415.24 ha of rice field
areas are distributed in six districts: Buhangin, Paquibato, Tugbok, Calinan, Baguio, and
Marilog. Figure 3 shows the rice field distribution of each district. Calinan district has the
largest irrigated rice field area consisting of 392.22 ha, about 2% of its total land expanse.
Meanwhile, Marilog district has the largest actual physical rice field area with 599.75 ha,
about 42.4% of the city’s total rice field area. The study was located in five agricultural

districts planted entirely of rice. The common varieties of rice planted in the study sites are


NSIC RC 214 (TUBIGAN 16), NSIC RC 224 (TUBIGAN 19), NSIC RC 238 (TUBIGAN
21), NSIC RC 9 (APO), and NSIC RC 11 (CANLAON). The planting month and harvest
period differ in every district, but all cultivate rice five times every two years. The study
sites are all treated with inorganic fertilizers, primarily Ammonium phosphate 16-20-0,
Urea 46-0-0, and ATLAS PERFECT GRO 14-14-14. The most common pesticides used
are, Lorsban 3E, Decis, Dithane M-45, and Malathion. The soil is warm, muddy or
submerged in freshwater, suitable for the growth of rice. The area coverage of each

sampling site was recorded using the Global Positioning System (GPS) receiver.


>
(Google Maps, 2021) (Google Maps, 2021)
Figure 2. Sampling site at Davao City

mBuhangin mPaquibato ~ Tugbok Calinan =Baguio = Marilog

Figure 3. Distribution of rice field areas in Davao City (City Agriculturist Office,
2021)

Collection and examination of specimen

Buhangin, Tugbok, Calinan, Baguio, and Marilog are the five districts that were
sampled. The sampling visits took place between January and February 2022. Collection
of P. canaliculata was accomplished using the handpicking method (Dillon, 2006; West
Virginia Department of Environmental Protection [WVDEP], 2018). A total of 23
specimens were randomly collected from each site. The lower limit of size for samples
collected was 30 mm to exclude juveniles (Cowie, 2005; Centre for Agriculture and
Bioscience International [CABI], 2019). Collected samples were placed in labeled plastic
zip-lock bags. Subsequently, the specimens were boiled for easier meat extraction and the
shells were cleaned. Collected samples were washed with tap water, dabbed dry, and then
preserved in 70% neutralized ethanol to prevent the calcium carbonate in the shells from
dissolving and were labeled with location and date of collection (Dillon, 2006; Rios-Jara
et al., 2009). Protective gloves were used throughout the collection, preparation, and
preservation procedures. Shell morphometric data include shell dry weight, shell length,
shell width, width of the aperture, length of the aperture, band width per shell, number of
bands, and number of whorls. Measurements were done to the nearest millimeter (mm).
Shell dry weight was recorded after the shells were dried in a desiccator. Figure 4 shows

the step-by-step procedure for data collection.

Collection of P. canaticulata
(23 individuals per site),

sment of physicochemical > i Cleaning and preservation of
mewsursparaneters and Boiling and meat extraction -—>} iis in 70% neutralized ethanol

collection of water sample for
further tests

v

Measurement of shell Statistical analysis of collected
‘morphometric data > data

Figure 4. Step-by-step procedure for data collection

Measurement of physicochemical parameters

Table 1 shows the geographical locations of the five sampling sites as well as the
collection schedules for physicochemical data, samples, and specimens. The data sheet for
physicochemical parameters also included information about the weather and rainfall
events that occurred during the sample and data collection. The rice fields’ water was
analyzed for physicochemical parameters, specifically depth, temperature, pH, salinity,
dissolved oxygen (DO), total dissolved solids (TDS), total hardness, and nitrate
concentration, using standard analytical methods. The water depth was measured using a
plastic ruler. The water temperature was measured on-site using an alcohol thermometer.
The pH and dissolved oxygen (DO) were measured using pH paper and a DO meter,
respectively. The measurements of each on-site variable were replicated three times, and
the mean values were recorded. Water samples were collected in 1-liter plastic bottles for
further tests. Salinity and total dissolved solids (TDS) were analyzed in the DOST RO-XI

Regional Standards and Testing Laboratory, while total hardness and nitrate concentrations



were measured and analyzed in the Davao Analytical Laboratories, Inc. Moreover,
laboratory analysis of water samples was also conducted in the DOST RO-XI Regional

Standards and Testing Laboratory to get a more accurate reading of the pH level.

Table 1. Geographical locations and schedule of collection of the five study sites

Study Site Geographical Location | Schedule of Collection
ee 7° ABN, 125° 33' E January 13, 2022
Tape oath SoS 7° 9'N, 125° 29'E January 20, 2022
Calman, Calinan Det PAIN, 125°27E| January 27, 2022
ae eae Se 7° 13'N, 125° 24' E February 3, 2022
Nee Dee 7° 1S'N, 125° 23' B February 10, 2022

Statistical analysis

To evaluate the relationship between the different variables, the collected data were
subjected to Bayesian Correlation Analysis. It is a statistical technique that can be used to
determine whether, and how strongly, two variables are related. In comparison to p values,
the Bayesian technique produces more intuitive conclusions and is less prone to
misinterpretation. Same with frequentist correlation, both parametric (Pearson’s) and non-
parametric (Kendall’s tau-b) correlation coefficients were reported. However, Bayes
factors (BF) and credible intervals replace p values and confidence intervals (Schisterman
et al., 2003; Nuzzo, 2017). Quintana and Williams (2018) emphasize that in the use of p
values, it is difficult to determine whether non-significance is due to data insensitivity or
evidence of no association between the two variables. While the p value is commonly used

in different research disciplines, the Bayes factor has a number of advantages, including.


the ability to draw a conclusion about the alternative hypothesis rather than only the null
hypothesis (Jarosz & Wiley, 2014).

The strength of the relationship between two variables is measured by Pearson's
correlation coefficient (r). The correlation coefficient formula is used to determine the
strength of a relationship between two sets of data. The formula produces a number
between -1 and 1, with 1 indicating a strong positive relationship, -1 indicating a strong
negative relationship, and 0 indicating no relationship at all. The correlation coefficient's
absolute value indicates the strength of the relationship. The stronger the relationship, the
higher the number (Echem, 2017). When the data has failed one or more of the assumptions
of this test, Kendall's tau-b correlation coefficient (tb) provides a nonparametric alternative
to Pearson's correlation coefficient (Miot, 2018).

Bayesian Correlation Analysis determines whether the data are more likely to occur
under the null hypothesis (Ho), which asserts that there is no linear relationship between
the two variables, or the alternative hypothesis (Hi), which asserts that there is an
association between the two variables. Afterward, Bayes' theorem is used to calculate the
posterior probability of both hypotheses after observing the data. The data were analyzed
using Jeffreys’ Amazing Statistics Program (JASP) software version 0.16.1, released

February 16, 2022 (Schisterman et al., 2003; Nuzzo, 2017).

CHAPTER IV
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Shell morphometrics of Pomacea canaliculata
There were 115 golden apple snails collected from the five study sites. Each
individual was identified morphologically using peer-reviewed journal articles (Cowie,
2005; Hayes et al., 2012). Figure 5 shows the shells of P. canaliculata collected from the
five study sites.

%2e
@ &

Figure 5. Apertural view of Pomacea canaliculata shells collected from the five
study sites. A, Buhangin; B, Tugbok; C, Calinan; D, Baguio; E, Marilog

Baguio district recorded the highest mean values for all measured conchological
characters. Lowest mean values for shell dry weight, shell length, shell width, aperture
width, and aperture length were recorded in Calinan district. Moreover, Tugbok district has

the lowest mean value for the number of bands, with 16.22. Marilog district had the lowest


mean values for band width per shell and number of whorls, with 0.83 mm and 4.09,
respectively. Table 2 shows the shell morphometric measurements of P. canaliculata

collected from the five sampling sites.

Table 2. Shell morphometrics of Pomacea canaliculata from the five study sites

Shady [Shel] Shl | Apenire [Ape] Band wih
wee | terzh | wan | “San | “inp” | eran” | Manterot | Nonberof
() (mm) (eam) (rom) (mam) (mm)

Buhangin 1.95 | 35.26 | 31.38] 17.18] 24.88 0.94} 17.30 4.27
Tugbok 2.04 |_34.98 | 30.45 18.11 24.08 1.06, 16.22 4.48
Calinan 1.40 | 31.42 | 27.31 16.08 | 21.46 1.02 17.61 4.14
Baguio 2.73 | 40.13 | 35.16] 19.84] 27.22 117, 18.35, 4.59
Marilog 1.77 | 33.10 | 28.25 16.60 | 22.75 0.83 17.65 4.09

Physicochemical parameters

The physicochemical parameters of water were measured using analytical methods.
A total of two I-liter samples were collected for each study site. During the conduct of the
study, the weather in Buhangin and Tugbok was sunny; the weather in Baguio District was
rainy; and the weather in Calinan and Baguio, meanwhile, was gloomy or cloudy. The
highest average water depth was recorded in Calinan district, with a depth of 6.75 cm,
while the lowest was observed in Marilog district, with an average depth of 2.20 cm. The
highest mean temperature was recorded in Baguio district, 27.70 °C. Marilog district has
the lowest mean temperature, with only 24.93 °C. The highest pH level was recorded in
Baguio district, with a value of 7.43, while the lowest was recorded in Buhangin district,
with a value of 6.83. The districts of Buhangin, Tugbok and Baguio measured similar
salinity values of 1 ppt. Also, the districts of Calinan and Marilog recorded similar salinity
values of 0 ppt. The highest dissolved oxygen (DO) level was observed in Baguio district,
with a value of 14.23 mg/L. Meanwhile, the lowest DO level was measured in Calinan

district, with a value of 5.31 mg/L. The highest measurement of total dissolved solids


(TDS) was recorded in Tugbok district, with a value of 230 ppm, while the lowest TDS
level was measured in Calinan district, with a value of only 39 ppm. The highest total
hardness level was measured in Marilog district, with a value of 152.0 mg CaCOs/L, while
the lowest was recorded in Calinan district, with a value of only 47.3 mg CaCOs/L. The
highest nitrate concentration level was measured in Calinan district, with a value of 1.80
mg/L, while the lowest was observed in Marilog district, with a value of only <0.50 mg/L.

Table 3 shows the measured physicochemical parameters of each study site.

Table 3. Physicochemical parameters of each study site

Toul

Dinoted Wen

(|S | mt | em” | our | Petar’ | eet” | een
Buhangin | 5.58 26.67 | 6.83 1 6.88 224 61.6 0.66
Tugbok _| 5.75 26.33 | 6.84 1 6.12 230 84.1 0.50
Calinan__| 6.75 26.00 | 7.36 0 5.31 39 47.3 1.80
Baguio 2.53 27.70 | 7.43 1 14.23 146 72.7 0.80.
Marilog | 2.20 24.93 | 6.86 0 8.01 127 152.0 <0.50

Bayesian correlation analysis

In Bayesian correlation analysis, two models are compared: the null hypothesis (Ho)
that there is no correlation between the two variables, i.e., p = 0, and the alternative
hypothesis (H:) that there is an association between the two variables, or p 4 0. Bayesian
inferencing tests how the observed data updates the prior distribution with the posterior
distribution. The classification scheme for analyzing Bayes factors proposed by Lee and
Wagenmakers in 2003 was used in this study (Lee & Wagenmakers, 2005). This
classification scheme, which has been adopted in JASP, generates descriptive labels for
interpreting a range of Bayes factors. Table 4 shows the interpretation scheme of the Bayes

factor.


Table 4. Interpretation of the Bayes factor (Jeffreys, 1961, as cited in Quintana &
Williams, 2018)

Bayes factors (BFie) Interpretation
> 100 Decisive evidence for Hi
30 = 100 Very strong evidence for Hi
10 = 30 Strong evidence for Hi
3 = 10 ‘Substantial evidence for Ht
1 = 3 ‘Anecdotal evidence for Hi
I No evidence
1B = 1 ‘Anecdotal evidence for Ho
V0 = 13 ‘Substantial evidence for Ho
130 = 1/10 Strong evidence for Ho
1/100 = 130 Very strong evidence for Ho
< 1/100 Decisive evidence for Ho

Descriptive analysis was done to check for data normality and the presence of
outliers. Temperature, dissolved oxygen (DO), total hardness, nitrate concentration, shell
dry weight, shell length, and number of bands were variables that showed deviation from
normality. Since the assumption of normality was not met, Kendall's tau-b (1b) correlation
analysis was used. Meanwhile, Pearson (r) correlation analysis was used for variables
where the assumption of normality was met (Miot, 2018).

Table Sa shows the Bayesian Kendall’s tau-b correlation matrix of shell features
and physicochemical parameters. The Bayes factor (BFio) reported anecdotal evidence in
favor of the alternative hypothesis for shell length, shell width, aperture length, number of
whorls, and temperature, with BFio values greater than 2.000. Also, the BFio values for
shell dry weight, shell length, and salinity are > 2.000, suggesting that there is anecdotal
evidence for a correlation. Meanwhile, shell dry weight, aperture width, band width per
shell, and temperature reported BF\o values of > 1.000, also suggesting anecdotal evidence
in favor of the alternative hypothesis. Moreover, it is 1.205 times more likely that pH and

the number of bands are related than not. Similarly, shell length, shell width, aperture


length, number of bands, and dissolved oxygen (DO) reported BFio values > 1.000. Lastly,
the BFio of shell dry weight and total dissolved solids (TDS) also suggests anecdotal

evidence in favor of the alternative hypothesis (BF 10 = 1.205).

Table Sa. Bayesian Kendall’s tau-b correlation matrix of shell features and

sicochemical
Tar

Dave Tout | Niwa
Depa | Tempers | gti | satniy | Dee | paces | Taal | Nim
Ouszen | Pissed | panes | comme
Swe any | Real Toon ooo | OTs o20| 0000
base BF wo 0.578. “0526 2.058 0578 0.526.
sve | Kev [2400 | g09 | 0200 | _o778 00009200
desety BEw 0.763. 2247 0.578 2.058 0526 0.578
sre | Kemals 0400 oom | 0200
ses! BFw 2.247 0.526 0578
pera | Kentals 020 | 0000
a) BFw 0.763, 0.578 0526
‘pene | Keni 0800 oom | 0200
length Br | oe 0506 | 0578
Tang Renals aon

width per | tau-b 000) 20)
Sa are re ose] 0
Number | Keml’s | 928 | oon a358 7700 oon | __o2t0
oe BFw. 0.763, 0.526 0615, 0.763, 0.526 0578
amber | Kemals osty 200 oom | 0200
Coe BFw 2.247 0.578 0.526 0578,

BE a> 2000 TE > 1.000

Table Sb shows the Bayesian Pearson correlation matrix of shell features and
physicochemical parameters. Band width per shell and pH reported a BFio value of 1.016,
indicating that the altemative model is 1.016 more favored than the null model, given the
data, Furthermore, shell width, aperture width, aperture length, number of whorls, and
salinity also have BFio values of > 1.000, suggesting that there is anecdotal evidence in
favor of the alternative model. Meanwhile, the Bayes factor values for the other paired
variables were less than 1.000. This means that there is anecdotal evidence supporting the

null hypothesis: that the paired variables are not correlated.


Table 5b. Bayesian Pearson correlation matrix of shell features and
hysicochemical parameters

Total
pH Salinity | Dissolved
Solids

Pearson's r 0275 0.464
Shell width Taro 0.583 0.701
Aperture | Pearson's r 0311 0.415
width BFio 0.598 0.660
Aperture | Pearson’sr | 0.173, [0.536
length BFio 0.552 0.778
Band width | Pearson's r 0.564 0.033
per shell 087 | 0.534
Number of 0.261 0.492
whorls 0.578 0.728

BF o> 1.000

Paired variables with BFio values that indicate anecdotal evidence in favor of the
altemative hypothesis that p # 0 were further analyzed using the directional correlation
hypothesis. Correlations between variables with BF1o > 1.000 were reported as having
positive Kendall's tau-b and Pearson's r values in the correlation matrix. Therefore,
correlations with a directional altemative hypothesis (correlated positively) were also done.
Tables 6a and 6b show the Bayesian one-sided pairwise correlation table, with an
alternative hypothesis that the correlation is greater than 0.

In the Bayesian Pearson one-sided pairwise correlation table (Table 6a), three
paired variables (shell width-salinity, aperture length-salinity, and number of whorls—
salinity) reported a BFo value greater than 3.000, which indicates that there is substantial
evidence in favor of the alternative hypothesis given the data. Not only does this provide
evidence for Hi relative to Ho, but the Bayes factor also conveys the magnitude of this
evidence. The remaining paired variables reported BF+o values that indicate anecdotal

evidence in favor of the alternative model.


Table 6a. Bayesian Pearson one-sided pairwise correlations of shell features and

physicochemical parameters
Pearson's r BF.o

Band width per shell — _| pH 0.667 1.730
Shell width =_| Salinity 0.811 3.043
Aperture width —_| Salinity 0.754 __ 2.347
Aperture length —_| Salinity 0.824 3.242
Number of whorls Salinity 0.842 3.603

BF > 3.000
Note. For all tests, the alternative hypothesis specifies that the correlation is positive.

In the Bayesian Kendall's tau one-sided pairwise correlation table, six paired

variables (shell length-temperature, shell width-temperature, aperture length-temperature,

number of whorls-temperature, shell dry weight-salinity, and shell length-salinity)

reported a BF. value greater than 3.000, which also indicates that there is substantial

evidence in favor of the alternative hypothesis given the data. Meanwhile, the rest of the

paired variables reported the same Bayes factor interpretation, indicating that there is

anecdotal evidence in support of the alternative positive correlation.

Table 6b. Bayesian Kendall's tau-b one-sided pairwise correlations of shell features

_ and phy ical parameters _
a BFo

Shell dry weight mperauure | SOO | 2.175 |
Shell length —__| Temperature 4.300
Shell width — | Temperature 4.300
Aperture width =| Temperature 2.175
Aperture length =| Temperature 4.300.
Band width per shell =| Temperature 2.175
Number of whorls = Temperature 4.300
Number of bands —_| pH 2.175
Shell dry weight = _| Salinity 3.918
Shell length =__| Salinity 3.918

ell length ___|=_| Dissolved Oxygen 2.175

ell _— issolved Oxygen 2.175
Aperture length = 2.175
Number of bands: = 2175
Shell dry weight 2.175.

‘oe > 3.000
or alll tests, the alternative hypothesis specifies that the correlation is positive.



A scatterplot visualization of shell width-salinity, aperture length-salinity, and
number of whorls-salinity suggests that there is a correlation between the variables (Figure
6A, D, and G). Moreover, the posterior-prior plot for shell width-salinity, aperture length-
salinity, and number of whorls-salinity (Figure 6B, E, and H), assuming a positive
correlation, shows that the data is fully distributed to the right of p = 0, with median values
of 0.608, 0.620, and 0.640, respectively. The credible interval range suggests that there is
95% confidence that the true value of p is located within these bounds. Since the Bayesian
framework uses the present data to determine the credible interval, such a conclusion is
valid (Quintana & Williams, 2018). The dashed line depicts the uniform prior distribution,
while the solid line depicts the data-based posterior distribution. At the 0.0 effect size, each
distribution has a gray dot. The Bayes factor is more supportive of the alternative
hypothesis if the dot on the prior distribution is higher than the dot on the posterior
distribution. The posterior-prior plot also reports BFso and BFo+ values, with the latter
being the inverse of the former.

Figure 6C, F, and I are illustrations of the effects of assigning a range of different
prior distributions; i.e., a Bayes factor robustness check. The robustness analysis allows
one to inspect what Bayes factor would be obtained if the alternative model were specified
differently. It shows the outcomes of specifying a range of different prior values from 0 to
2. JASP has a default prior width of 1.0. The Bayes factor should be stable if the results
are insensitive to changes in the prior width. The Bayes factors are relatively stable, except
for very small prior widths, confirming the analysis’ robustness. In a study conducted by
Galan et al. (2015) on golden apple snails in selected aquatic habitats (Central Mindanao

University campus and vicinities in Bukidnon, Philippines), no significant correlation was


found between aperture length-salinity and number of whorls-salinity. However, it is

difficult to determine whether the non-significance is due to data insensitivity or evidence

of no association between the two variables (Quintana & Williams, 2018).

— 0
t Evidence for H. Mosterate
A eee soci
10 ea 2 yell .

. ee rare {Evidence for, ‘song

dence tors ‘stong
"1 enoncs tr | awn

G Number of wher H Pearson's p I “Stretoned beta prot width «

Figure 6. Bayesian correlation analysis (Pearson’s p). A-C, Shell width-Salinity; D-F, Aperture
length-Salinity; G-1, Number of whorls-Salinity

A scatterplot visualization of shell length-temperature, shell width-temperature,
aperture length-temperature, and number of whorls-temperature also indicates that the

variables are related (Figure 7A, D, G, and J). Furthermore, the posterior-prior plots (Figure


7B, E, H, and K) also reported a Bayes factor that is in favor of the alternative positive
correlation, with all having a median value of 0.452. The Bayes factors are also relatively
stable, except for very small prior widths, confirming the analysis’ robustness (Figure 7C,
F, I, and L). Correlation between temperature and shell features has also been observed in
several studies. In a study conducted by Bondarev (2013), the main factor influencing the
formation of the thick-walled shell of Rapana venosa (Valenciennes, 1846) was the
amplitude of the temperature fluctuations in the locality. It was shown that a high
temperature gradient is one of the most important factors in forming a thick shell.
Moreover, a study on the morphological properties of gastropod shells, Nassarius nitidus
(Jeffreys, 1867) exhibited lower shell density and thickness and a higher porosity when the
pH was reduced at ambient temperature, but the combination of reduced pH and increased
temperature did not have a noticeable effect in comparison to the control. Meanwhile, the
shell of Columbella rustica (Linnaeus, 1758) was less dense, thinner, and more porous
under acidic and warm conditions, but when the temperature was increased under ambient
pH, the shells were thicker and denser than the control. However, under low pH and
ambient temperature, shells showed no differences compared to the control
(Chatzinikolaou et al., 2021). The study conducted by Tamburi et al. (2018) revealed that
in female P. canaliculata, the monotonic relationship with temperature resulted in narrower
shells in snails reared at lower temperatures and wider apertures, relative to the body whorl,
in snails reared at higher temperatures. Galan et al. (2015) observed no significant
correlation between shell length-temperature, aperture length-temperature, and number of
whorls-temperature in golden apple snails in selected aquatic habitats (Central Mindanao

University campus and vicinities in Bukidnon, Philippines). However, determining


whether the non-significance is due to data insensitivity or evidence of no relationship
between the two variables is difficult (Quintana & Williams, 2018).

The behavior of P. canaliculata in response to varied temperature ranges is one
factor that could explain the positive correlation. Temperature is a known indicator of P.
canaliculata activity. In a study conducted by Bae et al. (2021), it was observed that active
behaviors of P. canaliculata, such as lung ventilation and food consumption, increased
when the water temperature increased from 25 °C to 30 °C. Moreover, Heiler et al. (2008)
corroborated the findings in a study on the effect of temperature on P. canaliculata activity,
with water temperatures ranging from 20 °C to 32 °C. It was observed that activity, such
as feeding habits and crawling, increased as the temperature increased. Furthermore,
crawling velocity was also found to have a positive relationship with temperature. Seuffert
et al. (2010) also observed that when the temperature was between 10 and 30 °C, the time
spent active and feeding of P. canaliculata increased. Specifically, temperature
significantly increased the percentage of time spent feeding, peaking at 25°C and
decreasing at 30°C. The positive correlation between shell length-temperature, shell
width-temperature, aperture length-temperature, and number of whorls-temperature can

be attributed to increased active behaviors of the organism as temperature rises.


4 {pendence or, ‘ong
ze os [canis [ones

III teil erate ote

Tanks oF Temperate

Stetches beta prior with

7 Pevienee ory Yared
G farke thot i H  _endates T_stetched beta por with «
si ah Madians 0.452 oman BF 4.954 at x = 1.596
/| Se @ aaecs|SEee
- ia wel {fidence or He ‘tong
{  Einoe or pret
J Rarsscttunverotviors | K Karate Leeched beta per wth

Figure 7. Bayesian correlation analysis (Kendall's t). A-C, Shell length—Temperature; D-F, Shell
width—Temperature; G-I, Aperture length~Temperature; J-L, Number of whorls~Temperature

A scatterplot visualization of shell dry weight-salinity and shell length-salinity also

revealed that the variables were correlated (Figure 8A and D). The posterior-prior plots


(Figure 8B and E) also reported a Bayes factor that is in favor of the alternative positive
correlation, with all having a median value of 0.441. The Bayes factors are also relatively
stable, except for very small prior widths, confirming the analysis’ robustness (Figure 8C
and F). Several studies have also found a correlation between salinity and shell
characteristics. At the Acara River mangrove forest, Maia and Coutinho (2016) observed
that the shell height of Me/ampus coffeus was positively correlated with salinity. Moreover,
in a study on Littorina littorea (Linnaeus, 1758), shell size did not increase along the
salinity gradient, as was expected, but rather showed a clear size transition between two
salinity ranges, i.e., 10-20% and 21-30%. L. littorea reached its maximum size within a
salinity range of 21-30%. However, relative shell weight did not vary consistently with
salinity (De Wolf et al., 2001). Also, in a study on Indothais gradata (Jonas, 1846), shell
weight varied independently of the co-varying acidity, salinity, and calcium levels
experienced. In contrast, shell length and a semi-quantitative variable based on shell
sculpturing (shell erosion rank, SER) were significantly correlated with these water
chemistry variables (Marshall et al., 2008). Galan et al. (2015) found no significant
relationship between weight-salinity and shell length-salinity in golden apple snails in
selected aquatic habitats (Central Mindanao University campus and vicinities in Bukidnon,

Philippines). However, since the study used null hypothesis significance testing (NHST),

it is difficult to determine whether the lack of significance is due to data insensitivity or
evidence of no association between the two variables (Quintana & Williams, 2018).
P. canaliculata is considered to be well-adapted to living in rice paddies, taro

patches, and other similar habitats where aquatic crops are grown (Cowie, 2005). Fujio et

al. (1991) identified variations in salinity tolerance among three strains of P. canaliculata,


suggesting that the strains have different genotypes. According to Cowie (2002), P.
canaliculata is sufficiently tolerant of seawater just enough to be carried by currents from
one stream mouth to another, thus expanding its distribution. In a study conducted by Qin
et al. (2020), it was found that after a 30-day exposure, P. canaliculata was shown to be
able to tolerate salinity levels ranging from 0 to 6 psu (practical salinity unit) with a survival
rate of more than 72%. Moreover, the lethal time leading to 50% mortality decreased from
71 days at 0 psu to 27 days at 6 psu. P. canaliculata can feed and breed normally in
salinities ranging from 0 to 4 psu. Salt stress tolerance was also observed by Yang et al.
(2018), suggesting an invasive threat to estuaries. During a 1-month trial, it was observed
that P. canaliculata grew better at a 5 ppt salinity treatment than at other lower or higher
salinity treatments. P. canaliculata’s high salinity tolerance is suggested to be a factor in
the positive correlation between shell width-salinity, aperture length-salinity, number of

whorls-salinity, shell dry weight-salinity, and shell length-salinity.

Dena

B end C____seeienod beta pro with

Ranks of Shat length E Kendal’ F steed bots prior width

Figure 8. Bayesian correlation analysis (Kendall's t). A-C, Shell dry weight-Salinity; D-F, Shell

length-Salinity

CHAPTER V
SUMMARY, CONCLUSION, AND RECOMMENDATION
Summary

Calinan district had the highest average water depth and nitrate concentration level,
whereas Baguio district had the highest mean temperature, pH level, and dissolved oxygen
level (DO). Tugbok district had the highest total dissolved solids (TDS) measurement,
whereas Marilog district had the highest total hardness measurement. Similar salinity
readings were recorded in the districts of Buhangin, Tugbok, and Baguio. The districts of
Calinan and Marilog also recorded similar salinity values. In terms of shell morphometric
data, Baguio district had the highest mean values for all conchological characters that were
measured.

Bayesian directional (positively correlated) correlation analysis revealed that there
was a positive correlation for shell width-salinity, aperture length-salinity, and number of
whorls-salinity (r = 0.811, 0.824, and 0.842, respectively). These were accompanied by
Bayes factor values greater than 3.000, which indicate that there is substantial evidence in
favor of the alternative hypothesis given the data. Furthermore, BF+o values greater than
3.000 were also reported for shell length-temperature, shell width-temperature, number of
whorls-temperature, shell dry weight-salinity, and shell length-salinity (x = 0.800, 0.800,
0.775, and 0.775, respectively), indicating that there is substantial evidence in favor of the
alternative hypothesis given the data. Scatterplot visualization showed that the variables
were correlated. The posterior-prior plots also revealed a Bayes factor that is in favor of
the alternative positive correlation. The Bayes factors are also relatively stable, except for

very small prior widths, as confirmed by the Bayes factor robustness check.


‘Conclusion

In conclusion, the shell morphometric data of P. canaliculata and physicochemical
parameters of water in the selected rice fields of Davao City were determined. Baguio
district recorded the highest mean values for all measured conchological characters (shell
dry weight, shell length, shell width, width of the aperture, length of the aperture, band
width per shell, number of bands, and number of whorls). As for the physicochemical
parameters, the highest average water depth and nitrate concentration level were recorded
in Calinan district, while Baguio district had the highest mean temperature, pH level, and
dissolved oxygen (DO). The highest measurement of total dissolved solids (TDS) was
recorded in Tugbok district, while the total hardness level was measured in Marilog district.
The districts of Buhangin, Tugbok, and Baguio measured similar salinity values, whereas
the districts of Calinan and Marilog also recorded similar salinity values. Moreover, among
the relationships studied, shell width-salinity, aperture length-salinity, number of whorls-
salinity, shell dry weight-salinity, shell length-salinity, shell length-temperature, shell
width-temperature, and number of whorls—temperature reported a positive correlation with
BF yo values greater than 3.000, indicating that there is substantial evidence in favor of the
alternative hypothesis given the data. The golden apple snail's increased activity as
temperature rises and its high salinity tolerance are suggested factors for the positive
correlations.
Recommendation

Based on the findings of the study, the following are recommended:
1, that more individuals should be used in future correlation studies of P.

canaliculata;

e



. that further studies establishing correlation analysis should also incorporate sex

(as shells of males and females are morphologically distinct in many gastropod

species) and seasons (or quarterly documentation) as important variables;

. that geographical and chronological influences should also be considered,

especially if the study site is quite extensive;

}. that a more extensive correlation study of P. canaliculata in the Davao Region

be conducted;

. that there should be references on correlation analysis among species-specific

gastropod shells that use Bayesian statistics to analyze collected data; and

. that the data presented be further analyzed using multiple regression analysis

to test the relationship between a single dependent or outcome variable and

several independent or predictor variables.

REFERENCES

Al-shami, S. A., Che Salmah, M. R., Siti Azizah, M. N., & Abu Hassan, A. (2010). The
influence of routine agricultural activities on the quality of water in a tropical rice
field ecosystem. Applied Ecology and Environmental Research, &(1), 11-18.
Retrieved from http://www.aloki.hu/pdf/0801_011018.pdf

Anderson, T. K., Weaver, K. F., & Guralnick, R. P. (2007). Variation in adult shell
morphology and life-history traits in the land snail Oreohelix cooperi in relation
to biotic and abiotic factors. Journal of Molluscan Studies, 73(2), 129-137.
doi:10.1093/mollus/eym006

Amaoudoy, V., Sibayan, E. B., & Caguioa, R. C. (2015). Adaptation and Mitigation
Initiatives in Philippine Rice Cultivation. United Nations Development
Programme. Retrieved from
https://unfece.int/sites/default/files/amia_philippines.pdf

Bae, M.-J., Kim, E.-J., & Park, Y.-S, (2021). Comparison of invasive apple snail
(Pomacea canaliculata) behaviors in different water temperature gradients.
Water, 13(9), 1-12, doi:10.3390/w13091149

Bambaradeniya, C. N. B., & Amerasinghe, F. P. (2004). Biodiversity Associated with the
Rice Field Agroecosystem in Asian Countries: A Brief Review. International
Water Management Institute. Retrieved from
hittps://www.researchgate.net/publication/42765555_Biodiversity_Associated_wit
h_the_Rice_Field_Agro-ecosystem_in_Asian_Countries_A_Brief Review

Bazzanti, M., Della Bella, V., & Seminara. M. (2003). Factors Affecting
Macroinvertebrate Communities in Astatic Ponds in Central Italy. Journal of
Freshwater Ecology, 18(4), 537-548. doi:10.1080/02705060.2003.9663994

Bondarev, I. P. (2013). Ecomorphological analyses of marine mollusks’ shell thickness of
Rapana venosa (VALENCIENNES, 1846) (Gastropoda: Muricidae).
International Journal of Marine Science, 3(45), 368-388.
doi:10.5376/ijms.2013.03.0045

Bordey, F. H., Moya, P. F., Beltran J. C., & Dawe, D. C. (2016). Competitiveness of
Philippine Rice in Asia. International Rice Research Institute. Retrieved from
https://www. philrice.gov.ph/wp-
content/uploads/2016/08/Book_CPRA_22June2016_3.pdf

Caramujo, M. J., & Boavida, M. J. (2010). Biological diversity of copepods and
cladocerans in Mediterranean temporary ponds under periods of contrasting
rainfall. Journal of Limnology, 69(1), 64-15. doi:10.3274/3L10-69-1-06


Centre for Agriculture and Bioscience International (CABI). (2019). Pomacea
canaliculata (golden apple snail). Retrieved from Invasive Species Compendium:
https://www.cabi.org/isc/datasheet/68490#todescription

Chatzinikolaou, E., Keklikoglou, K., & Grigoriou, P. (2021). Morphological properties of
gastropod shells in a warmer and more acidic future ocean using 3D micro-
computed tomography. Frontiers in Marine Science, &(645660), 1-14.
doi:10.3389/fmars.2021.645660

City Agriculturist Office. (2021). 202! Production Monitoring Accomplishment Report
as of November, 2021. Davao City: City Agriculturist Office.

Conchological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. (2021, March 29). Counting shell
whorls, Retrieved April 14, 2022, from The Conchological Society:
https://conchsoc.org/aids_to_id/whorls.php

Cowie, R. H. (2002). Apple snails (Ampullariidae) as agricultural pests: their biology,
impacts and management. In G. M. Barker, Molluscs as Crop Pests (pp. 145-192).
New York: CABI Publishing.

Cowie, R. H. (2005). The Golden Apple Snail: Pomacea species including Pomacea
canaliculata (Lamarck, 1822) (Gastropoda: Ampullariidae). Honolulu, Hawaii,
USA: Center for Conservation Research and Training, University of Hawaii.

Cuadrado, J. T. (2015). Preliminary assessment of freshwater gastropods in the selected
rivers in Esperanza, Agusan del Sur, Philippines. The Journal of Zoology Studies,
2(4), 13-20. Retrieved from
https://www journalofzoology.com/volume2/v2i4/pdf/2. | pdf

Darrigran, G., Damborenea, C., & Tambussi, A. (2011). Pomacea canaliculata
(Mollusca, Gastropoda) in Patagonia: potential role of climatic change in its
dispersion and settlement. Brazilian Journal of Biology, 71(1), 8-13.
doi:10.1590/S1519-6984201 1000100004

Davao City Investment Promotion Center (DCIPC). (2016). Industry Profile
Agribusiness: Davao City. Davao City: Davao City Investment Promotion Center.

De Wolf, H., Blust, R., & Backeljau, T. (2001). Shell size variation in Littorina littorea in
the western Scheldt estuary. Journal of Shellfish Research, 20(1), 427-430.
Retrieved from
https://www.tesearchgate.net/publication/276027679_Shell_size_variation_in_Lit
torina_littorea_in_the_western_Scheldt_estuary

nr

Department of Science and Technology (DOST). (2017). Harmonized National Research
and Development Agenda. DOST. Retrieved from
http://dost.gov.ph/phocadownload/Downloads/Journals/Approved%20Harmonize
4%20National%20RD%20Agenda%20%202017-2022.pdf

Dillon, R. (2006). Chapter 21: Freshwater Gastropoda. In C. P. Sturm, The Mollusks: A
Guide to Their Study, Collection, and Preservation (pp. 251-259). Los Angeles
and Pittsburgh: American Malacological Society.

Echem, R. T. (2017). Morphometric relations of gastropod species: Nerita albicilla and
Patella nigra. World News of Natural Sciences, 7(1), 30-36. Retrieved from
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/319313843_Morphometric_Relations_o
f Gastropod_Species Nerita_albicilla_and_Patella_nigra

Estebenet, A. L., Martin, P. R., & Burela, S. (2006). Conchological variation in Pomacea
canaliculata and other South American Ampullariidae (Caenogastropoda,
Architaenioglossa). Biocell, 30(2), 329-335. Retrieved from
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/6817651_Conchological_variation_in_P
omacea_canaliculata_and_other_South_American_Ampullariidae_Caenogastropo
da_Architaenioglossa

Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). (1998, April 30). The golden apple snail in
the rice fields of Asia. Retrieved April 14, 2022, from FAO News & Highlights:
https://www.fao.org/News/1998/rifili-e.htm

Fox, R. J., Donelson, J. M., Schunter, C., Ravasi, T., & Gaitan-Espitia, J. D. (2019).
Beyond buying time: the role of plasticity in phenotypic adaptation to rapid
environmental change. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B,
374(20180174), 1-8. doi:10.1098/rstb.2018.0174

Frest, T., & Johannes, E. (1999). Field Guide to Survey and Manage Freshwater Mollusk
Species (1 ed.). Portland: USFWS Regional Ecosystem Office. Retrieved from
http://www.blm.gov/or/plans/surveyandmanage/files/0-aquatic_guide.pdf.

Fujio, Y., Kurihara, H., & von Brand, E. (1991). Differences metric traits among three
strains of apple snail, Pomacea canalicualta. Tohuku Journal of Agricultural
Research, 41(3-4), 61-68. Retrieved from
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/32878071_Differences_Metric_Traits_a
mong_Three_Strains_of Apple Snail_Pomacea_canaliculata

Galan, G. L., Porquis, H. C., & Bulasa, M. A. R. (2015). Shell band pattem of golden
apple snail (Pomacea cancaliculata, Lamarck) in selected aquatic habitats.
International Journal of Environmental Science and Development, 6(8), 625-628.
doi:10.7763/JESD.2015.V6.670


Google Maps. (2021). Davao City, Davao del Sur. Retrieved November 15, 2021, from
Google Maps:
https://www.google.com/maps/place/Davao+City,+Davaotdel+Sur/@7.2532789,
125.1708753,10z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m5!3m4! 1s0x32f96d9f5 19e327F.0xbS3a2458
979c573!8m2!3d7.190708!4d125.455341

Google Maps. (2021). Map of Mindanao, Philippines. Retrieved November 15, 2021,
from Google Maps:
https://www.google.com/maps/place/Mindanao/@7.6908896,122.0076668,7z/dat
a=!3m1!4b1 !4m5!3m4!1s0x3255e40590d9b7¢3:0xe7b91264ecd3efb4!8m2!3d8.4
9613!4d123.3034062

Halwart, M., & Gupta, M. V. (2004). Culture of fish in rice fields. FAO and The
WorldFish Center. Retrieved from http://www.fao.org/3/a-a0823e.pdf

Harun, N. S., Hanafiah, M. M., Nizam, N. U. M., & Rasool, A. (2020). Water and soil
physicochemical characteristics of different rice cultivation areas. Applied
Ecology and Environmental Research, 18(5), 6775-6791. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.15666/aeer/1805_67756791

Hayes, K. A., Cowie, R. H., Thiengo, S. C., & Strong, E. E. (2012). Comparing apples
with apples: clarifying the identities of two highly invasive Neotropical
Ampullariidae (Caenogastropoda). Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society,
166(4), 723-753. doi:10.1111}.1096-3642.2012.00867.x

Heiler, K. C. M., von Oheimb, P. V., Ekschmitt, K., & Albrecht, C. (2008). Studies on
the temperature dependence of activity and on the diurnal activity rhythm of the
invasive Pomacea canaliculata (Gastropoda: Ampullariidae). Mollusca, 26(1),
73-81. Retrieved from
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228479913_Studies_on_the_temperatur
e_dependence_of activity and_on_the_diumal_activity_rhythm_of the invasive
_Pomacea_canaliculata_Gastropoda_Ampullariidae

International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). (2021). Global Invasive Species
Database. Retrieved from Invasive Species Specialist Group (ISSG):
http://www iucngisd.org/gisd/100_worst.php

Jarosz, A. F., & Wiley, J. (2014). What are the odds? A practical guide to computing and
reporting Bayes factors. Journal of Problem Solving, 7(1), 2-9. doi:10.7771/1932-
6246.1167

Joshi, R. C., Cowie, R. H., & Sebastian, L. S. (2017). Biology and Management of
Invasive Apple Snails. Science City of Mufioz, Nueva Ecija, Philippines:
Philippine Rice Research Institute (PhilRice). Retrieved from
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/320560199_Biology_and_management_
of_invasive_apple_snails


Jubaedah, D., Wijayanti, M., Marsi, & Rizaldy, N. (2018). Utilization of golden apple
snail (Pomacea canaliculata) shells as liming materials for Pangasius sp culture
in swamp fish pond. 3S Web of Conferences, 68(04016), 1-6.
doi:10.1051/e3sconf/20186804016

Lee M. D., & Wagenmakers E.-J. (2005). Bayesian statistical inference in psychology:
comment on Trafimow (2003). Psychological Review, 112(3), 662-668.
doi:10.1037/0033-295X.112.3.662

Liew, T. S., & Schilthuizen, M. (2014). Association between shell morphology of micro-
landsnails (genus Plectostoma) and their predator’s predatory behaviour. PeerJ,
2(1), 1-29. doi:DOI10.7717/peer}.329

Madjos, G. G., & Demayo, C, G. (2018). Macro-geographic variations of the invasive
giant African snail Achatina fulica populations in Mindanao, Philippines.
Transactions on Science and Technology, 5(2), 143-154. Retrieved from
http://tost.unise.org/pdfs/vol5/no2/5x2x143x154.pdf

Madjos, G. G., Demetillo, M. T., Baguio, M. L., & Torres, M. A. J. (2015). Phenotypic
variation in populations of Pomacea canaliculata (golden apple snail): a case of
agroecotypes? AES Bioflux, 7(3), 432-441. Retrieved from
https://www.researchgate.neUpublication/309421595_AES_BIOFLUX_Advances
_in_Environmental_Sciences_-

international_Joumnal_of the Bioflux_Society_Phenotypic_variation_in_populat

ions_of_Pomacea_canaliculata_golden_apple_snail_a_case_of_agroecotypes

Mahilum, J. J.M., & Demayo, C. G. (2014). Sexual dimorphism on shell shape of
Pomacea canaliculata Lamarck thriving in lakes using the geometric
morphometric approach. International Journal of Bioscience, Biochemistry and
Bioinformatics, 4(4), 284-289. doi:10.7763/IJBBB.2014.V4.357

Maia, R., & Coutinho, R. (2016). The effects of salinity on the density, shell size and
survival of a mangrove gastropod: Laboratory and field evidence. Journal of the
Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, 96(6), 1191-1199.
doi:10.1017/S0025315415000715

Marin, F., Le Roy, N., & Marie, B. (2012). The formation and mineralization of mollusk
shell. Frontiers in Bioscience, 4(3), 1099-1125. Retrieved from
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/S1925970_The_formation_and_minerali
zation_of_mollusk_shell

Marshall, D. J., Santos, J. H., Leung, K. M. Y., Chak, W. H. (2008). Correlations
between gastropod shell dissolution and water chemical properties in a tropical
estuary. Marine Environmental Research, 66(4), 422-429.
doi:10.1016/j.marenvres.2008.07.003


Michalak, I., & Chojnacka, K. (2014). Effluent Biomonitoring. In P. Wexler,
Encyclopedia of Toxicology (3rd Edition ed., pp. 312-315). Waltham, MA:
Academic Press, Imprint of Elsevier. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-
386454-3.01008-3

Miot, H. A. (2018). Correlation analysis in clinical and experimental studies. Jornal
Vascular Brasileiro, 17(4), 275-279. doi:10.1590/1677-5449.174118

Moneva, C. S. O., Torres, M. A. J., Wada, T., Joshi, R., & Demayo, C. G. (2012).
Relative warp and correlation analysis based on distances of the morphological
shell shape pattems of Pomacea canaliculata Lamarck from Japan and the
Philippines. AES Bioflux, 4(1), 12-21. doi:10.1109/ICEEA.2010.5596099

Nica, D. V., Bura, M., Gergen, I., Harmanescu, M., & Bordean, D. M. (2012).
Bioaccumulative and conchological assessment of heavy metal transfer in a soil-
plant-snail food chain. Chemistry Central Journal, 6(1), 1-15. doi:10.1186/1752-
153X-6-55

Nikinmaa, M. (2014). Chapter 12- Bioindicators and Biomarkers. In M. Nikinmaa, An
Introduction to Aquatic Toxicology (pp. 147-155). Academic Press.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-41 1574-3.00012-8

Nuzzo, R. L. (2017). An Introduction to Bayesian Data Analysis for Correlations. PM R,
(12), 1278-1282. doi:10.1016/j.pmrj.2017.11.003

Panizzon, J. P., Macedo, V. R. M., Machado, V., & Fiuza, L. M. (2012). Microbiological
and physical-chemical water quality of the rice fields in Sinos River’s basin,
Southern Brazil. An International Journal Devoted to Progress in the Use of
Monitoring Data in Assessing Environmental Risks to Man and the Environment,
185(3), 2767-2775. doi:10.1007/s10661-012-2747-1

Pefia, S. C., Pocsidio, G. N., & Co, E. L. (2017). Histological responses of golden apple
snail (Pomacea canaliculata) to copper. Philippine Journal of Science, 146 (3),
315-321. Retrieved from http://philjournalsci.dost.gov.ph/55-vol-146-no-3-
september-2017/656-histological-responses-of-golden-apple-snail-pomacea-
canaliculata-to-copper

Ponder, W. F., Hallan, A., Shea, M., & Clark, S. A. (2016). Pomacea canaliculata
(Lamarck, 1822). Retrieved October 5, 2019, from Australian Freshwater
Molluscs:
https://keys. lucidcentral.org/keys/v3/freshwater_molluscs/Freshwater_Oct18/Med
ia/Html/pomacea_canaliculata.htm

Primost, M. A., Bigatti G., & Marquez, F. (2015). Shell shape as indicator of pollution in
marine gastropods affected by imposex. Marine and Freshwater Research,
67(12), 1-7. doi:DOI: 10.1071/MF15233


Qin, Z., Yang, M., Zhang, J.-E., & Deng, Z. (2020). Effects of salinity on survival,
growth and reproduction of the invasive aquatic snail Pomacea canaliculata
(Gastropoda: Ampullariidae). Hydrobiologia, 847, 3103-3114. Retrieved from
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10750-020-04320-z

Quintana, D. S., & Williams, D. R. (2018). Bayesian alternatives for common null-
hypothesis significance tests in psychiatry: a non-technical guide using JASP.
BMC Psychiatry, 18(178), 1-8. doi:10.1186/s12888-018-1761-4

Rama Rao, S. R., Liew, T. S., Yow, Y. Y., & Ratnayeke, S. (2018). Cryptic diversity:
Two morphologically similar species of invasive apple snail in Peninsular
Malaysia. PLoS ONE, 13(5), 1-16. Retrieved from
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id~10.1371 journal.pone.0196582

Redfern, S. K., Azzu, N., & Binamira, J. S. (2012). Rice in Southeast Asia: Facing Risks
and Vulnerabilities to Respond to Climate Change, Retrieved from
http://www. fao.org/fileadmin/templates/agphome/documents/climate/Rice_South
east_Asia.pdf

Rios-Jara, E., Navarro-Caravantes, C. M., Galvan-Villa, C. M., & Lépez-Uriarte, E.
(2009). Bivalves and gastropods of the Gulf of Tehuantepec, Mexico: A checklist
of species with notes on their habitat and local distribution. Journal of Marine
Biology, 20094), 1-12. doi:10.1155/2009/176801

Salgeback, J. (2006). Functional Morphology of Gastropods and Bivalves. Digital
Comprehensive Summaries of Uppsala Dissertations from the Faculty of Science
and Technology, pp. 1-31.

Schilthuizen, M., Van Til, A., Salverda, M., Liew, T. S., James, S. S., Bin Elahan, B., &
Vermeulen, J. J. (2006). Microgeographic evolution of snail shell shape and
predator behavior. Evolution, 60(9), 1851-1858. doi:10.1554/06-114.1

Schisterman, E. F., Moysich, K. B., England, L. J., & Rao, M. (2003). Estimation of the
correlation coefficient using the Bayesian approach and its applications for
epidemiologic research. BMC Medical Research Methodology, 3(5).
doi:10.1186/1471-2288-3-5

Seuffert, M. E., Burela, S., & Martin, P. R. (2010). Influence of water temperature on the
activity of the freshwater snail Pomacea canaliculata (Caenogastropoda:
Ampullariidae) at its southernmost limit (Southern Pampas, Argentina). Journal
of Thermal Biology, 35(2), 77-84.
doizhttps://doi.org/10.1016)jtherbio.2009.1 1.003,

Solas, M. R., Sepilveda, R. D., & Brante, A. (2013). Genetic variation of the shell
morphology in Acanthina monodon (Gastropoda) in habitats with different wave
exposure conditions. Aquatic Biology, 18(1), 253-260. doi:10.3354/ab00508


Tamburi, N. E., Seuffert, M. E., & Martin, P. R. (2018). Temperature-induced plasticity
in morphology and relative shell weight in the invasive apple snail Pomacea
canaliculata, Journal of Thermal Biology, 74, 331-336.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j,jtherbio.2018.04.008

Turke, M., Blattmann, T., Knop, E., Kindermann, A., Prestele, J., Marquez, L.,
Eisenhauer, N., & Fischer, C. (2012). Weeds and endangered herbs have
unforeseen dispersal helpers in the agrienvironment: gastropods and earthworms.
Renewable Agriculture and Food Systems, 28(4), 380-383.
doi:10.1017/$1742170512000415

Ueno, T. (2013). Bioindicators of biodiversity and farming practice in rice paddies.
International Journal of Chemical, Environmental & Biological Sciences, I(1),
84-87. Retrieved from
http://www .isaet.org/images/extraimages/IJCEBS%200101119.pdf

Urabe, M. (1998). Contribution of genetic and environmental factors to shell shape
variation in the lotic snail Semisulcospira reiniana (Prosobranchia:
Pleuroceridae). Journal of Molluscan Studies, 64(3), 329-343.
doi:10,1093/mollus/64,3.329

West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection (WVDEP). (2018). Watershed
Assessment Branch 2018 Field Sampling Standard Operating Procedures.
Charleston: Division of Water and Waste Management- Watershed Assessment
Branch. Retrieved from
http://dep.wv.gov/WWE/watershed/wqmonitoring/Documents/SOP%20Doc/WA
BSOP/2018%20FINAL%20WAB%20Field%20Sampling%20SOP.pdf

Whelan, N. V. (2021). Phenotypic plasticity and the endless forms of freshwater
gastropod shells. Freshwater Mollusk Biology and Conservation, 24(2), 87-103.
doi:https://doi.org/10.31931/fmbc-d-20-00015

Yang, S., Zhong, J., Zhao, L., Wu, H., Du, Z., Liu, Q., Zhang, J., Yan, T., & Huang, X.
(2018). The salinity tolerance of the invasive golden apple snail (Pomacea
canaliculata). Molluscan Research, 38(2), 90-98. Retrieved from
https://doi.org/10.1080/13235818.2017.1386260

Zachariah, T., & Mitchell, M. A. (2009). Chapter 3- Invertebrates. In M. T. Mitchell,
Manual of Exotic Pet Practice (1st Edition ed., pp. 11-38). Saunders.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-4160-0119-5.X5001-X

