
UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS

Master of Science in Soil Science
CARLITO P. BASAY, JR.

EFFECT OF NANOMATERIALS ON CULTURABLE BACTERIAL
POPULATION, MICROBIAL BIOMASS AND ENZYME ACTIVITIES IN TWO
SOIL TYPES

ERLINDA S. PATERNO, Ph.D.

Adviser

Date: AY 201

| This thesis can be made available to the general public

This thesis can be accessed only after consultation with the author and
thesis adviser

This thesis can be accessed only by those bound by confidentiality
agreement

CARLITO P. BASAY, JR.

(elie

ERLINDA S. PATERNO, Ph.D.


EFFECT OF NANOMATERIALS ON CULTURABLE BACTERIAL POPULATION,
MICROBIAL BIOMASS, AND ENZYME ACTIVITIES IN TWO SOIL TYPES

CARLITO POLO BASAY, JR.

{MOH A
STI-18-1439

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF THE GRADUATE SCHOOL
UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE
REQUIREMENTS FOR
THE DEGREE OF

MASTER OF SCIENCE
(Soil Science)

MAY 2019

{he thesis attached hereto, entitled “EFFECT OF NANOMATERIALS ON
CULTURABLE BACTERIAL POPULATION, MICROBIAL BIOMASS, AND
ENZYME ACTIVITIES IN TWO SOIL TYPES” prepared and submitted by
CARLITO P. BASAY, JR., in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of

MASTER OF SCIENCE (SOIL SCIENCE) is hereby accepted.

rf |

LILIA M/ FERNANDO LUCILLE C. VILLEGAS
Member, Guidance Committee Member, an Committee
Cy 4,
Date Signed Date Signed
NOLISSA D. ORGANO ERLINDA S. PATERNO
Co-Chair, Guidance Committee Chair, Guidance Committee
24, 24, 20)
Date Signed Date Signed

Accepted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of MASTER OF

[A

PEARL 6. SANCHEZ
Director, Agricultural Systems Institute

cx.
JOSE V. C. CHO JR.

Dean, Graduate School
University of the Philippines |Los Bafios

SCIENCE (SOIL SCIENCE).

Date Signed

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

The author is a chemist by profession and previously worked at Altawitawi Nickel
Corporation as an analyst and Dole Philippines Inc. as an analytical chemist. The latter
involved analyses of the physicochemical characteristics of soil samples which inspired
him to pursue MS in Soil Science. His research interest is on the application of chemistry
in soil science specifically on the field of soil microbiology, soil enzymology, and soil
biotechnology.

The author is the eldest of the two children of Mr. Carlito M. Basay, Sr. and Mrs.

Josena P. Basay of Libungan, North Cotabato.

CARLITO P. BASAY, JR.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

I would like to express my sincerest gratitude and appreciation to the following individuals
and institution:

First, to my Lord and Savior and my mighty fortress Jesus Christ, for your blessing,
guidance, protection, and relentless love, and for giving me strength and wisdom. You
never let me feel lonely even at times when I’m alone.

To my family who never failed to guide and support me.

To Dr. Erlinda S. Paterno, for being the best adviser, for helping me develop my skills
and self-esteem, for your immeasurable patience, trust, encouragement, and support, for
guiding me in the conceptualization and writing of my thesis, and for being an inspiration
for me to become a citizen who believe in service above-self.

To Prof. Nolissa D. Organo, for guiding and supporting me during the conduct and writing
of my thesis, for your patience, trust, and encouragement.

To Dr. Lilia M. Fernando and Dr. Lucille Villegas, for your guidance in the preparation,
writing, and conduct of my thesis.

To DOST-ASTHRDP, for the support, I will forever be grateful for the full scholarship
grant.

To SEARCA for the UC Thesis Grant.

To Experiments on Nanomaterials (EoN) Project (Roselle, Sir Jonanthan, Sir Conrad,
Lester, Ma’am Noli, Tita Tess, Czet), for supporting my laboratory experiments, for your
encouragement, and for the laughters and smiles.

To Nanobiotech Lab for letting me do spectrophotometric analysis
To Marcial Buladaco III, for sharing your chemicals with me.

To Tita Lucy, for lending things needed in my experiment without hesitance and to Titos
and Titas of DSS for your support. You everyday kindness will never be forgotten.

To ASL, for letting me use your analytical balance and pH meter.
To Sir Rocky, for helping me in my statistical analysis.

To the external reviewer who had done a good job by patiently and extensively reading
my manuscript. It really helped me a lot.

To the soil science people, for your kindness and support. Because of you, my stay in LB
has never been so boring.

To my professors, for giving me enough reason to love soil science even more, for doing
your job well, for inspiring me to share the knowledge that I have obtained with my future
students.

To all the significant ones who have been part of this endeavor, I wish to share this
victorious moment with you.

iv

CHAPTER

II

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Title Page

Approval Page

Biographical Sketch

Acknowledgement

Table of Contents

List of Tables

List of Figures

List of Appendices

Abstract

INTRODUCTION
Significance of the study
Objectives of the Study

REVIEW OF LITERATURE
Nanomaterials and their importance
Nanomaterials in agriculture
Factors affecting NPs
Characterization of nanomaterials
Fate, transport, and transformation of nanomaterials
Soil and soil microorganisms: functions and importance
Soil bacteria
Soil and nanomaterials

Effects of nanomaterials on bacteria

PAGE

xi

xiii

10
10
13
14
15

16

CHAPTER

Til

IV

Assessment of the effect of nanomaterials on soil

Assessment of the effect of nanomaterials on soil
microbial community

Soil enzymatic activity
Soil dehydrogenase

Soil urease

Assessment of soil microbial biomass by substrate-
induced respiration (SIR)

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Soil Collection and Characterization and Nanomaterial
Preparation

Incubation Experiments

Experiment 1. Assessment of the effect of
metal oxide nanoparticles (ZnO and CuO) on
the culturable soil bacterial population,
microbial biomass, and enzyme activities

Experiment 2. Evaluation of the effect of
nanofertilizers (FertiGroe®N) on culturable
soil bacteria and soil microbial biomass and
enzyme activities

Experiment 3. Assessment of the effect of
nanoplanthormone (HormoGroe®) on soil
bacterial community and soil microbial
biomass and enzyme activities

Enumeration of soil culturable bacteria
Dehydrogenase activity (DHA) assay
Urease activity (UA) assay

Determination of microbial biomass (MCB) by
substrate-induced respiration

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Soil Physicochemical Characteristics

vi

PAGE
22

23

23
24
25

25

28
28

30
30

31

31

32
33
34
36

40
40

CHAPTER

v
VI

Assessment of the effect of metal oxide nanoparticles
(nZnO and nCuO), FertiGroe®, and HormoGroe® on
culturable soil bacterial population

Assessment of the effect of metal oxide nanoparticles
(nZnO and nCuO), FertiGroe®’, and HormoGroe® on
soil dehydrogenase activity

Effect of metal oxides on soil dehydrogenase
activity

Effect of FertiGroe®N on soil DHA

Effect of HormoGroe® on the soil
dehydrogenase activity

Assessment of the effect of metal oxide nanoparticles
(nZnO and nCuO), FertiGroe®N, and HormoGroe® on
urease activity

Effect of metal oxides nanoparticles on soil
urease activity

Effect of FertiGroe®N on soil UA
Effect of HormoGroe® on soil UA

Assessment of the effect of metal oxide nanoparticles
(nZnO and nCuO), FertiGroe®N, and HormoGroe® on soil
microbial biomass

Effect of metal oxides on soil microbial
biomass

Effect of FertiGroe®N on soil microbial
biomass

Effect of HormoGroe® on soil MCB

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
LITERATURE CITED

APPENDIX

vii

PAGE

41

45

45

54

56

60

60

65
68

70

72

74

75
79
82

102

LIST OF TABLES

TABLE PAGE

1 Particle size of metal oxides 30

2 Physicochemical characteristics of the two soils used in the 40
experiment

3 Effect of metal oxide particles on the soil culturable bacterial 42
population

4 Effect of FertiGroe®N on the culturable soil bacterial population 43

5 Effect of HormoGroe® on the culturable soil bacterial population 43

Summary of the analysis of variance and the empirical probability

6 values of culturable soil bacterial population as affected by metal 44
oxide particle, FertiGroe®N, and HormoeGroe®.
7 Effect of metal oxide particles on the soil dehydrogenase activity 45

Summary of the analysis of variance and the empirical probability 47
8 values of DHA as affected by metal oxide particle, FertiGroe®N,
and HormoeGroe®.

9 Effect of FertiGroe®N on the soil dehydrogenase activity. 34
10 Effect of HormoGroe® on the soil dehydrogenase activity. 56
11 Effect of metal oxide particles on the soil urease activity. 61
12 Effect of FertiGroe®N on the soil urease activity. 65
13 Effect of HormoGroe® on the soil UA. 68

Summary of the analysis of variance and the empirical probability 71
14 values of UA as affected by metal oxide particle, FertiGroe®N, and
HormoeGroe®.

15 Effect of metal oxide particles on the soil microbial biomass. 73

16 Effect of FertiGroe®N on the soil microbial biomass. 74

viii

17

18

Effect of HormoGroe® on the soil microbial biomass.

Summary of the analysis of variance and the empirical probability
values of UA as affected by metal oxide particle, FertiGroe®N, and
HormoeGroe®.

ix

76

78

FIGURE

LIST OF FIGURES

Framework for the assessment of the effect of nanomaterials
on culturable soil bacterial population, microbial biomass,
and enzyme activities.

Standardization of D-glucose for the determination of
microbial biomass by SIR for (a) LCL and (b)SSL

Plots for the determination of the equation for the initial
biomass emission (z) for (a) LCL and (b) SSL.

The collection site of Sariaya sandy loam

Plot of the effect of metal oxides on the soil DHA across time
in (a) LCL and (b) SSL.

The plot of the effect of amendments on the soil DHA in (a)
LCL and (b) SSL.

The plot of the effect of amendments on soil DHA across time
for (a) LCL and (b)SSL.

The plot of the effect of metal oxides on UA in (a) LCL and
(b) SSL.

The plot on the effect of amendments on the soil UA across
time in (a) LCL and (b) SSL.

PAGE

29

37

38

41
46

55

58

65

67

APPENDIX

A

LIST OF APPENDICES

Methods for soil physicochemical determination

Schematic diagram for the enumeration of soil
culturable bacteria

Schematic diagram for the DHA assay

Schematic diagram for the Buffered Method of UA
assay

Schematic diagram for the Non-buffered Method of
UA assay

Schematic diagram for the soil MCB determination
using SIR

ANOVA of CFU as affected by metal oxide
particles

ANOVA of CFU as affected by FertiGroe®N
ANOVA of CFU as affected by HormoGroe®
ANOVA of DHA as affected by metal oxide
particles

ANOVA of DHA as affected by FertiGroe®N
ANOVA of DHA as affected by HormoGroe®
ANOVA of UA as affected by metal oxide particles

ANOVA of UA as affected by FertiGroe®N

xi

PAGE

103

104

105

106

107

108

109

110

lll

112

113

114

115

116

ANOVA of UA as affected by HormoGroe®
ANOVA of MCB as affected by metal oxide
particles

ANOVA of MCB as affected by FertiGroe®N

ANOVA of MCB as affected by HormoeGroe®

xii

117

118

119

120

ABSTRACT

BASAY, CARLITO JR POLO. University of the Philippines Los Bafios, May 2019
Effect of Nanomaterials on Culturable Bacterial Population, Microbial Biomass, and
Enzyme Activities in Two Soil Types

Major Professor: Erlinda S. Paterno, Ph.D.

This study assessed the effects of metal oxide nanoparticles (nZnO and nCuO),
nanofertilizer (FertiGroe®N), and nanoplanthormone (HormoGroe®) on the culturable soil
bacterial population, dehydrogenase (DHA) and urease (UA) activities, and microbial
biomass (MCB) in Lipa clay loam (LCL) and Sariaya sandy loam (SSL) over 28 to 75
days incubation period in the laboratory. The nanomaterials tested had no significant
effect on the culturable bacterial population. Interaction of nCuO and LCL significantly
reduced DHA up to 28 day after amendment (DAA) except at 14 DAA which adversely
affected DHA regardless of soil type. FertiGroe®N and HormoGroe® had no adverse
impact on DHA in both LCL and SSL. Soil UA was reduced significantly by nCuO at 7
and 28 DAA. At 1 DAA, FertiGroe®N significantly increased UA in LCL but adversely
affected UA in SSL. HormoGroe® significantly enhanced UA in SSL at 35 DAA but
significantly decreased UA in SSL at 75 DAA. Soil MCB was significantly decreased by
nCuO in LCL and by nZnO in SSL only at 7 DAA. FertiGroe®N had no adverse on MCB
but HormoGroe® decreased significantly the MCB at 1 and 75 DAA in SSL. Regardless
of amendment, LCL had higher DHA and UA but lower MCB than SSL. The
nanomaterials and the non-nanomaterials had similar effects on the parameters measured
which were influenced by the soil type. The nanoparticle nZnO appears to be less harmful
to the soil microbial community in SSL and LCL while nCuO seems to be less
detrimental in SSL. Results show that FertiGroe®N and HormoGroe® can be safely used

in crop production.

xiii

INTRODUCTION

Nanotechnology is the most ground-breaking field of the 21% century. Thus,
extensive research is being done to commercialize nanomaterial (NM) products around
the world (Sabir et al., 2014). Nanotechnology has the potential to play a crucial role in
worldwide food security, food safety, and food production. In agriculture,
nanotechnology enhances the efficiency and sustainability of agricultural practices by
requiring less input and producing less waste compared to conventional products and
approaches (Servin, et al., 2015).

The extensive production and usage of nanoparticles (NPs), with ultimate disposal
in the environment leads to unintentional exposure of non-target environmentally
beneficial bacteria, threatening the native soil inhabitants (Santimano and Kowshik,
2013). Beneficial microbial populations are one of the most important key subjects that
influence soil ecosystem processes especially by nutrient cycling, decomposing soil
organic matter (SOM), disease suppression, and growth enhancement, etc. Hence, any
factor that causes significant effects on soil microbial population would certainly
deteriorate soil sustainability and quality (Shin, et a/., 2012). Study of the biological
activity of nanomaterials in connection with different conditions of their entry into the
soil is very important to understand the impact of NPs on the environment (Handy, et al,
2012). Thus, this study aimed to assess the impact of nanomaterials on the soil bacterial

population using culture-dependent analysis and on soil microbial biomass and activities.

Significance of the study

Although nanomaterials have many beneficial applications there is a need to
assess their effects on the environment. The nanofertilizer, FertiGroe®N, and the
nanoplanthormone, HormoGroe®, were developed at the University of the Philippines
Los Bafios (UPLB). Further research to understand any possible negative effects of these
nano-based products on soil health needs to be done prior to their extensive use in crop
production and commercialization. Microorganisms are considered the most sensitive
indicators of environmental stresses. Thus, the potential adverse effect of the
nanomaterials on the environment was assessed based on their impact on soil

microorganisms and their enzymatic activities.

Objectives of the Study

General:

The study aimed to assess the effect of nanomaterials which include metal oxide
nanoparticles (nZnO and nCuO), nanofertilizer (FertiGroe®N), and nanoplanthormone
(HormoGroe®) on culturable soil bacterial population as well as soil microbial biomass

and activities.

Specific:
1. To determine changes in soil bacterial population in the soil microbial
community using culture-dependent analysis.
2. To assess the effect of NMs on soil enzymatic (dehydrogenase and urease)

activities.

2
3.To evaluate the change in microbial biomass using substrate-induced

respiration.

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

Nanomaterials and their importance

Nanomaterials (NMs) are engineered structures with at least one dimension of 100
nanometers (nm) or less (Nel, et al., 2006; Khot, et al., 2012; Srilatha, 2011). They include
all materials which contain nanoscale structure of 1 to 100 nm or one billionth of a meter.
At this size, the ordinary rules of chemistry and physics are shifted by transforming the
characteristics of materials such as their conductivity, strength, and reactivity that differ
considerably from macro- or micro-sized materials (Klaine, et al., 2012). Manipulation of
the properties such as shape, size, structure, and chemical composition, and incorporation
of surface coating rapidly creates unique forms of manufacted NMs (MNMs), nanoparticles
(NPs), and their suspensions (Hotze, et al., 2010).

From solid doped particles to (often nonpersistent) polymer and oil-water based
structures, NMs come in many different forms, surprisingly often greater than 100 nm
(Gogos, et al., 2012). They are the smallest increments of the physical world and are at a
comparable scale to the biomolecules (key to crucial functions) (Klaine, et al., 2012). Also,
their properties differ significantly from those of the bulk materials having the same
composition which allow them to perform exceptional feats of conductivity, reactivity, and
optical sensitivity (Nel, et al., 2006; Xia, et al., 2006). The most common engineered NPs
(ENPs) are the metal ENPs (elemental Ag, Au, Fe, etc.), fullerenes, metal oxides (TiO2 and
CuO), complex compounds (Co-Zn-Fe oxide), organic polymers (dendrimers), and
quantum dots often coated with polymer (CdSe) (Dinesh, et al., 2012).

Nanotechnology is an interdisciplinary field of research (Duhan, et al., 2017) and

5
the most innovative field of the 21‘ century (Sabir, et al., 2014). It is one of the fast-

developing fields having the potential to transform industries such as electronics, military,
agriculture, pharmaceuticals, and manufacturing (Grover, et al., 2012). NMs may serve
equally as additives, mostly for controlled release, and active constituents (Gogos, et al.,
2012). These materials are increasingly being used for commercial purposes such as drug
carriers, microelectronics, cosmetics, semiconductors, catalysts, opacifiers, fillers (Nel, et
al., 2006). ZnO NPs are being used in a variety of products and processes including
personal care products, coating, anti-fouling paints, textiles, food additives, antibacterial
agents, enhancement of agriculture, drug-delivery systems, and environmental remediation
processes (Read, et al., 2016; Manzo, et al., 2011; Sabir, et al., 2014). Nano-copper
particles (nano-Cu), due to its antimicrobial activity, are also being incorporated for
antimicrobial formulations and products (Anjum, et al., 2015; Kanhed, et al., 2014), photo-
catalyst and gas sensors (Hou, et al., 2016). In addition, nano-Cu also plays key role in the

field of optics and electronics (Kanhed, et al., 2014).

Nanotechnology has important role in global food production, food security, and
food safety (Servin, et al., 2015). Nanoparticle-mediated material delivery to plants and
advance biosensors for precision farming are made possible only by NPs and nanochips

(Duhan, et al., 2017).

Nanomaterials in agriculture

Healthy soils are important for the integrity of terrestrial ecosystems to remain

intact or to recover fast from disturbances, such as drought, climate change, pest infestation,

pollution, human exploitation which includes agricultural practices (Khati, et al., 2017).

6
Thus, as the world population increases, strategies for sustainable agriculture are needed to

fulfill the global demand for food and other commercial products (Anderson, et al., 2017).
In developing countries, the fertilizer cost can be significant and is usually the limiting
factor for food supply (Kottegoda, et al., 2017). Nitrogen is an important source which is
essential for the growth of plant and the most widely used water soluble plant nitrogen
source is urea. However, due to leaching, the nitrogen content in the soil reduces, thus,
decreasing the nitrogen utilization efficiency (Subbaiya, et al., 2012; Kottegoda, et al.,
2017). To improve crop productivity, new technologies are often applied in the area of
agriculture (Srilatha, 2011) such as nanoparticle formulations (Andeson, et al., 2017). The
modern nanotechnology-based tools and techniques have the capacity to solve the various
concerns of conventional agriculture (Duhan, et al., 2017). The use of slow release
chemicals has been widely used for drug delivery, but little work has been done on using
this general nanotechnology-based principle for delivering nutrient to crops (Kottegoda, et
al., 2017). Slow release fertilizers are one of the means of minimizing the fertilizer loss
(Subbarao, et al., 2013).

The work of Kottegoda, et al. (2017) demonstrates that nanotechnology can be used
to develop slow release fertilizers which can significantly reduce the amount of chemicals
used while maintaining yield (Daghan, 2017). Also, NMs have important applications as
smart delivery mechanisms for agrochemicals, nano-biosensors for precision farming and
food packaging, nanoformulations, nano-bioremediations, nanofibers for genetic
manipulation, etc. (Grover, et al., 2012) and nano-based treatment approaches to minimize
waste production (Servin, et al., 2015). Nanobiosensors can be used for sensing effectively
a broad array of fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides, insecticides, pathogens, moisture, and
even soil pH. Nanobiosensor is more efficient than the conventional biosensors due to its

miniature structure (Rai, et al., 2012). Aside from its application as fertilizer, it can also

7
serve as pesticides for pest and management of diseases (Servin, et al., 2015) and protects

plant from environmental stresses (Wang, et al., 2014). NPs have advantages, against their
solid or ionic counterparts, such as high activity, high stability, and high effectiveness in
delivering nutrients (Liu and Lal, 2015).

Nanoencapsulated conventional fertilizers aid in the slow and sustained release of
agrochemicals and nutrients thus resulting in the precise dosage to plants. Also,
nanoencapsulation can improve herbicide application by providing better penetration and
allowing controlled release of the active substances to desired plant tissue or specific plant
part (Duhan, ef al., 2017). Efforts are being made, in the management aspects, to raise the
efficiency of applied fertilizer with the aid of nano clays and zeolites. These materials also
help in the restoration of soil fertility by releasing fixed nutrients (Chinnamuthu and
Boopathi, 2009). This targeted delivery is in response to environmental triggers and
biological demands. The use of these nanofertilizers causes increase in their efficiency
while reducing soil toxicity by minimizing the potential negative effects of overdosage as
well as the frequency of the application. Nanofertilizers mostly delay the release of the
nutrients and prolong the fertilizer effect period (Naderi and Danesh-Shahraki, 2013).

Nanofertilizers could be classified as macronutrient or micronutrient fertilizers (Liu
and Lal, 2015). Due to their high efficiency, functionalities, convenience, and easy
applications, micronutrient nanofertilizers stand out as one of the most useful materials
(Janmohammandi, et al., 2016). This technology is designed to supply nutrients in a
regulated pattern in correspondence with the crop demand thereby improving the nutrient
efficiency without associated ill-effects (Manikandan and Subramanian, 2016). CuO and
ZnO NPs could be potential fertilizers as they provide essential metals, and as pesticides,
because of dose-dependent toxicity (Anderson, et al., 2017). According to Liu and Lal

(2015), NM-enhanced fertilizers are those NMs that neither contain nor provide the

8
targeted nutrients but rather augmented with plant nutrients to reduce the impact of

conventional fertilizer application. The most important example of this type is nutrient-
augmented zeolites. Zeolites are a promising NM for enhancing the uptake of
macronutrient by plants while reducing the risks of environmental pollution caused by
nitrogen leaching (Srilatha, 2011). The nanoporous zeolite based on N fertilizer
(nanozeourea) can be used as an alternate strategy to improve use efficiency in crop
production (Kaushik, et al., 2014). Thus, employing these particles to agriculture will
impart useful effect to crops. However, the extra cost of zeolite purchase and that for the
nutrient-loading process constrain the application of nutrient-augmented zeolite (Srilatha,
2011).

Aside from the sustained release of N that may considerably economize the N use
in crops, an added advantage of using nanozeolite is the prevention of groundwater
contamination (Kaushik, et al., 2014). These fertilizers are environmentally friendly and
can be applied frequently in small amounts. However, when applied at high doses, they
exhibit reducing effects on plant growth and crop yields, similar to chemical fertilizers

(Daghan, 2017).

Factors affecting NMs

The physical form of the nanomaterial is as important as its chemical reactivity
linking the structure and reactivity inextricably (Klaine, et al., 2012). It is a well-established
fact that the physico-chemical properties of NMs are affected as their size decreases to the
nanometer scale. This size provides the NMs with specific and unique electrical, optical,
or mechanical properties (Thiéry, et al., 2012). Aside from particle size, the shape, surface

area and charge, and the adsorptivity affect the colloidal complexity and aggregation

9
chemistry of manufactured NPs (MNPs) (Handy, ef a/., 2012). In environmental media, the

highly reactive and physiologically dynamic materials are the product of high surface area
to volume ratio of NPs (Lowry, et al., 2012). Also, the aggregation chemistry of NPS can
be altered by biological processes (Pan and Xing, 2012) and abiotic factors like pH, ionic
strength, presence of organic matter, as well as water hardness, thus influencing its toxicity
(Handy, et al., 2008). Also, the effect of surface coating, usually for metal-based NPs,
modifies their intrinsic behaviour (Tourinho, et al., 2012). In the environment, NPs cannot
be considered as other organic or inorganic xenobiotics. Because of their novel properties
and surface reactivity, NMs are subject to phenomena of classical and quantum physics
(Thiéry, et al., 2012).

Aggregation reduces the reactivity of NMs by reducing the surface area to volume
ratio effect which in turn increases aggregate size. The increase in size affects their
transport in porous media, sedimentation, reactivity, and uptake by microbes (Lowry, et
al., 2012). Therefore, aggregation of NPs controls their toxicity and fate in soils, making it
as one major, if not the most important, property (Pan and Xing, 2012). There are two types
of aggregation: homoaggregation and heteroaggregation. Homoaggregation occurs
between the same NMs while heteroaggregation forms between a nanomaterial and another
particle in the environment (Lowry, et al., 2012).

Plants, along with microorganism, are faced with both particle-specific and ion-
related changes, thus, adding to the complexity of the key transformational changes of NPs
in the environment (Dimpka, ef al., 2012). The physico-chemical characteristics of NMs
are necessary in understanding environmental fate and behaviour, uptake and distribution

within organisms, and the interactions with other pollutants (Handy, et al., 2008).

10
Characterization of nanomaterials

Size, among all of the parameters, is the most important in considering for the
characterization of NPs. It is critical for determining the interactions of NPs with living
systems. The size of NPs can be determined using various methods. The most commonly
employed techniques are Brunauer-Emmett-Teller, dynamic light scattering (DLS),
transmission electron microscopy (TEM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and
atomic force microscopy (AFM) (Dhawan and Sharma, 2010).

Structures of materials, such as soils having complex mixtures, that ranges from
millimeter to nanometer in particle size can now be understood using developed techniques
for nanotechnology such as TEM and AFM. These techniques are useful for the illustration
of colloidal organization of colloidal materials in soils even in the presence of moisture and
the discovery of new NPs such as NPs of iron oxides (Wilson, et al., 2008).
Characterization of NMs form and presentation in the environment are key to
understanding their behaviour, fate, and ecotoxicty. The characteristics of NPs, for
example, metal-based NPs, will determine the transformation they will undergo that will

control their fate, behavior, and toxicity in the environment (Tourinho, et al., 2012).

Fate, transport, and transformation of nanomaterials

Nanotechnology, having an immense potential in various area of research and our
daily life, has become a boon to the society (Rai, et al., 2012; Ingle, et al., 2013) and the
production and use of NMs are increasing rapidly (Gottschalk, et al., 2013). Metal oxide
NPs, for example, have served many purposes including health, cosmetics, water treatment,

electronics, and food packaging (Joo and Zhao, 2016). This technology holds great promise

11
for reducing the production of wastes, industrial contamination, and improving efficiency

of energy production and use. Conversely, the production, use, and disposal of MNPs will
inevitably lead to release to air, soils, and aquatic systems (Ju-Nam and Lead, 2008) by
airborne emission, water effluents, solid wastes or other releases (Lin, et al., 2010). Since
manufactured NMs are increasingly incorporated in our products, industrial application of
metal and metal-oxide NPs, and engineered nanoparticles as a whole, would likely increase
their release to soil and the environment due to increase manufacturing, use, and waste
disposal of NPs based products (Rousk, et al., 2012; Rizwan, et al., 2016; Holden, et al.,
2014). The increase use of NPS in household application, also, increases the release of
nanomaterials into the public sewer system. During the waste-water treatment processes,
biosolids may contain concentrated amount of NPs and introduced into the soil matrix when
applied on agricultural land (Shah, et al., 2014; Batley, et al., 2011). In addition, NPs can
be directly added to soil as fertilizers or plant protection (Batley, et al., 2011). The biggest
risk of environmental release comes from spillages associated with the transportation of
MNPs, intentional releases for environmental applications, and diffuse releases due to
concomitant wear and erosion from general use (Klaine, et al., 2008).

The environmental behavior, ecotoxicity, and fate of manufactured metal-based
NPs are controlled by a number of their key characteristics. These include chemical
properties (acid-base character of the surface and the aqueous solubility of the metal) and
physical characteristics (Tourinho, et al., 2012). Nanoparticles, reaching the soil, have the
capacity to contaminate, migrate into surface and groundwaters, and interact with biota
(Klaine, et al., 2008). For example, Cu NPs, once released, are expected to rapidly
homoaggregate initially but it will be dominated by heteroaggregation due to the presence
of natural colloids. Sedimentation is quite fast, usually hours once in micron scale,

removing the aggregated NPs from the water column unless they are stabilized by

12
extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) or other natural organic material (NOM) (Keller,

et al., 2017).

In the environment, a number of transformations can be undergone by the
nanoparticles depending on the characteristics of both the NP and of the receiving medium.
Aside from the transformations due to physical and chemical processes, biodegradation of
surface coating also occurs to stabilize many nanomaterial formulations (Batley, et al.,
2011). Reaction with biomolecules, redox reactions, aggregation, and dissolution are just
the many possible transformations of NMs that may occur in both the environmental and
biological systems that can alter their fate, transport, and toxicity (Lowry, et al., 2012).
Interaction with macromolecules via various mechanisms might also drive the metal oxide
NPs away from their pristine state which can have strong implications for their persistence,
bioavailability, toxic-effects, fate, and transport in the terrestrial compartment (Ambe, et
al., 2017).

The importance of the differences in particle size distribution of soil was highlighted
by Josko, et al. (2009) which reveals that greater permeability increases the mobility of
NPs, allowing them better access to the crystalline lattice of minerals than in soils with a
more compacted structure. Also, availability of metals (from metal metal-based NPs) in the
soil is affected by the phosphate concentration. Phosphate, a multipurpose anion, enhances
metal adsorption via anion-induced negative charge, like cation-exchange capacity (CEC),

and metal precipitation thereby facilitating in situ immobilization (Bolan, et al., 2003).

13
Soil and soil microorganisms: functions and importance

Soil is a dynamic natural body which is made up of mineral and organic materials
and living organisms in which plants grow (Brady and Weil, 1996). It is composed of
mineral particles having various sizes, shapes, and chemical characteristics, plant roots,
living soil population, and organic matter component in different stages of decomposition
(Paul and Clark, 1996). Also, it is part of the terrestrial compartment that supports all
terrestrial life forms (Wolinska and Stepniewska, 2012) and provides the important
ecological services necessary for environmental and human health as well as for efficient
food production (Neal, 2008).

According to Brady and Weil (1996), soil play several key roles. It supports the
growth of plants by providing the essential nutrient elements and controls the fate of water
in the hydrologic system such as water loss, utilization, contamination, and purification.
Also, soil functions as a natural recycling system in which the basic elements assimilated
from the waste materials of terrestrial organisms are made available for reuse by the next
generation of life. In addition, it provides habitat for a myriad of organisms, from the largest
one to the microscopic cells of exponential numbers and diversity. Lastly, it plays an
important role as engineering medium in human-built ecosystems.

Soil formation are influenced by several factors including climate, topography,
parent material, time, and soil organisms which include higher vegetation (Paul and Clark,
1996). The soil is a complex habitat for the growth of microorganisms or microflora
including bacteria, actinomycetes, fungi, and algae (Sylvia, et al., 2005). Microorganisms
often exist as complex communities, in natural and engineered environment, which are
considered as key to the ecosystem health and bioprocess success in various engineering

applications (Mohanty, ef al., 2014). Soil organisms are critically important since they

14
directly influence soil ecosystem processes and soil quality as a whole. Thus, they serve as

biological indicators and any factor that affect soil microbial biomass, activity, and
populations would greatly affect soil quality, sustainability (Dinesh, et al., 2012), and plant

productivity (Hill, et al., 2001).

Soil bacteria

Soil bacteria has population greater than one hundred million individuals per gram
of soil and represents approximately as many as 10‘ to 10° different species (Sylvia, et al.,
1999; Holden, et al., 2014). Hence, they are considered as the most abundant and diverse
soil organisms (Sylvia, et al., 1999). Bacterial, as well as fungal, diversity increases soil
quality by affecting soil agglomeration and increasing soil fertility. In addition, a healthy
rhizosphere population can help plants deal with biotic and abiotic stresses such as
pathogens, drought, and soil contamination (Kirk, et al., 2004). Reduced bacterial
community diversity in the natural environment have an impact on the ecosystem and,
consequently, to human health (Holden, et al., 2014).

Bacteria has large surface-volume ratio due to their size that ranges from 100 nm to
few microns thus bacterial shape favours interaction with NPs and NMs. They also act as
decomposers mediating hence the dynamics of inorganic and organic matter in soils, water,
and industrial process as well as in biogeochemical cycles of almost all known elements
affecting normal ecosystem functioning and productivity (Thiery, et al., 2012; Santimano
and Kowshik, 2013; Neal, 2008). Important biogeochemical cycles include carbon and

nitrogen cycling (Neal, 2008). Soil bacteria consists of six dominant bacterial phyla,

15
Acidobacteria, Bacteriodetes, Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, a-Proteobacteria, and the B-

Proteobacteria (Fierer, et al., 2007).

Soil and nanomaterials

Soil is an ideal medium for understanding the physiochemical behavior of
manufactured NPs because of its relative complexity. In comparison with the dissolved
phase, in which behavior can be understood largely in terms of particle stability against
aggregation, soil offers a solid matrix with which the NPs can interact. Soil, also, contain
an aqueous phase which may contain considerable amounts of naturally occuring colloidal
materials (Tourinho, et al., 2012). Due to the practice of applying sewage sludge as a
fertilizer or as an organic soil enhancer, soils are an environment more likely to be exposed
to MNPs (Read, et al., 2016). In addition, Gladkova and Terekhova (2013), states that for
the development of reliable methods for analyzing and revealing the content of NPs, soil
seems to be the most useful. It does not only accumulate pollution components but, as a
specific part of the biosphere, it plays the role of a natural buffer that controls the chemical
elements and compound to be transported into the atmosphere, hydrosphere, and living
matter.

The release of heavy metal-containing NPs into the environment could interfere
with the function and efficacy of beneficial microbes especially in element cycling,
pollutant degradation, and plant growth (Gajjar, et al., 2009). However, soil organic matter,
including humic and fulvic acids, could possibly nullify the toxic effects of engineered NPs
through various mechanisms under field conditions (Dinesh, et al., 2012). Chokor (2017)
noted that for all metals (including Cu and Zn), a general increase in metal adsorbed by soil

as equilibrium concentration and contact time increased. Additionally, desorption of metal

16
from soil follows a similar pattern of initial phase reaction followed by slow phase one

observed for the adsorption of metal onto the soil. A study conducted by Cornelis, et al.
(2014), showed that bioavailability of NMs to a particular organism species is influenced
by soil physicochemical properties. High bioavailability was observed in saturated,
coarsely textured soil where ionic strength and dissolved OM (DOM) concentration was
high while low bioavailabilty was observed in unsaturated, finely textured soils, where
ionic strength is high and DOM is low. Also, the toxicity of NPs varies with soil types such
as the case of ZnO NPs in which toxicity was highest in the acid soil, followed by neutral
soil (Shen, et al., 2015). The claim is supported by You, et al. (2017), emphasizing that
different OM concentrations and soil clay fraction in different soils were an important
factor on the resistance of soil microbial communities to nanomaterial effect. Soil type is a
key component in dictating the metal oxide nanoparticle effect on the microbial community
through the activities of soil enzymes including determining both the bacterial community
composition and size inhabiting on the soil (You, et al., 2018).

Since soil is expected to be the major sink of NPs released to the environment, the
impact of NPS on soil processes and the organisms that carry them out should be
comprehended (Ge, et al/., 2012). Bacterial associations with manufactured NMs often
results in sorption, uptake, alteration of NM phases, transport, and partitioning. Bacterial
influences on NM transport are generally important to the material’s bioavailability

(Holden, et al., 2014).

Effects of nanomaterials on bacteria

Life on earth evolved in the presence of natural nanomaterials, carbon, cellulose,

and nano-Ag, however, those produced or engineered for a specific purpose may pose

17
potential danger due to significantly high environmental concentration, although identical

to natural NMs (Klaine, et al., 2012). As the application of nanomaterials, especially metal
oxide nanoparticles, continue to expand, concerns about their environmental fate and
potential environmental health risks are mounting (Joo and Zhao, 2016). In assessing NMs
safety, bacteria are considered as an important ecological nanotechnology targets since they
can be found in different types of ecosystem wherein they influence NM fates (Holden, et
al., 2014).

The nanoparticle-bacteria interactions are dependent on two main factors:
physiochemical properties of NPs and the type of physiological state of bacteria (Aruguete
and Hochella, 2010; Hajipour, et al., 2012). Aruguete and Hochella (2010) added that the
coatings can largely affect the NPs’ toxicity to bacteria. Dinesh, et al. (2012) emphasized
that among the engineered NPs, fullerenes and their derivatives are said to be less toxic
while inorganic NPs (small-sized metal and metal oxide NPs) are detrimental to soil
microbes (Anjum, et al., 2015; Simonin and Richaume, 2015). Since soil is the major
receptor of nanoscale particles in the terrestrial ecosystem, there are models that are being
used to dissect the possible effect of NPs on the environment. These models include
microbiota and plants (Anjum, et al., 2015). The large production and wide usage of NPs
with ultimate disposal in the environment leads to unintentional exposure of non-target
beneficial bacteria. This may pose serious threat to native soil inhabitants (Santimano and
Kowshik, 2013). The nanomaterials affect the bacteria by interfering in their biological
processes such as behavior of cell membranes, biochemical pathways in cells, as well as
their genetic code (Klaine, et al., 2012). The size, aggregation, crystalline face, and shape
of NPs are not the only factors that affect the bacteria but also the chemical reactivity of
particle surfaces. Nanoparticles could be photocatalytic and generate reactive oxygen

species (ROS) (Thiery, et al., 2012).

18
Disruption of bacterial membranes is probably caused by the production of ROS as

a result of contact between the NP and bacterial membrane. However, it is unlikely that
nanoparticles can enter the intact cell and accumulation within the cytoplasm probably
occurs after the cell is disrupted (Neal, 2008). Other effects of ROS on bacteria include
alteration of lipids, proteins, and DNA (Thiery, et al., 2012). The endogenous generation
of ROS is in response to environmental stress. ROS can cause cell death by
nonphysiological (necrosis) or regulated pathways (apoptotic). Receptor activation,
caspase activation, Bcl-2 family proteins and mitochondrial dysfunction are the typical
mechanisms by which ROS can cause or regulate apoptosis (Ryter, et al., 2007). The
proximal mechanism responsible for the age-related reduction in organismal performance
has been directly correlated to the ROS-induced damage on host cells and molecules.
However, organisms have ways to reduce the negative effect of ROS. This can be done by
disposing of effective antioxidant defenses and by minimizing its production. The intensity
of oxidative stress is due to the unbalance of the amount of ROS produced and the
availability of antioxidant defenses (Criscuolo, et al., 2015).

Using AgNPs and bovine serum albumin (BSA), Dasgupta, et al. (2016) were able
to understand the mechanism of protein interaction with NPs. They found that the surface
of NMs would be covered by protein corona upon their entrance to the cellular and
biological medium. The immune system will then encounter the modified surface of the
NMs, and therefore further cellular or tissue responses depend on the corona’s composition.
In addition, they observed that the protein corona also influences the cellular uptake,
inflammation, accumulation, degradation, and clearance, and bioreactivity of NPs. The
demonstration of the detrimental effects of metal and metal oxides on microbial activity,
abundance, and diversity has already been done, even for very low concentrations (1

mg/kg) (Simonin and Richaume, 2015).

19
Concha-Guerrero, et al. (2014) showed CuO NPs are very toxic for native soil

bacteria or wild strains. Their interaction with bacterial cell wall components changes the
morphology and affected the function of membranes. This cytotoxicity against the model
strain could be associated to oxide-reduction reaction and the generation of reactive
nitrogen species. A study conducted by Anderson, et al. (2017) showed that at a dose of 10
mg/kg and above, of both the CuO and ZnO NPs, alters the production of key metabolites
involved in plant protection in a root associated microbe, Pseudomonas chlororaphis O6.
These nanoparticles affect the synthesis of phenazines (for plant resistance to pathogens),
pyoverdine-like siderophore (enhancement of Fe bioavailability in the rhizosphere), and
indole-3-acetic acid (for plant growth). Zinc oxide NPs, as demonstrated by Santimano and
Kowshik (2013), at 10 ppm affects the growth profile of bacteria under observation.
Prolonged lag phase was observed in Bacillus subtilis, whereas no significant effect was
seen in the case of Pseudomonas aeruginosa even at 200 ppm. Also, the enzymatic profile
of both organisms was affected at non-lethal concentration. The most obvious effect was
on the amylolytic activity, denitrification, and urea degradation wherein total inhibition of
activity was noted in B. subtilis.

ZnO NPs caused morphological changes to round-shaped Rhizobium
leguminosarum bv. viciae. The NPs also damaged the bacteria’s surface due to direct
surface attachments, release of free Zn’* from ZnO NPs, and perhaps by ROS
formation.Furthermore, the presence of ZnO NPs interfered with the early interaction of
Rhizobia and the host plant (pea) and nodule development. It also delayed the onset of
nitrogen-fixation and caused early nodule senescence (Huang, et al., 2014). A study was
also conducted by Shen, et al. (2015) on the effect ZnO NPs to soil microorganisms. with
length of 10 nm-300 nm and width of 10-100 nm and few were globular with a diameter of

10-80 nm and surface area of 30-50 m?/g. Ammonification was significantly inhibited in

20
the neutral soil treated with 1 mg ZnO NPs during the three-month study period but

inhibition decreased. During the period of one month, inhibition of dehydrogenase activity
and fluorescent diacetate hydrolase (FDAH) activity was observed in soil treated with 1
mg, 5 mg, and 10 mg ZnO NPs per gram soil. This toxic effect of ZnO NPs was probably
due to direct interaction of the NPs with biologic targets and not on the release of Zn?* from
ZnO NPs.

The influence of visible light photocatalysis on the toxicity of ZnO nanorods toward
model microbes, Escherichia coli (Gram-negative) and Bacillus subtilis (Gram negative)
in MilliQ water was investigated by Sapkota, et al. (2011). Results showed that inactivation
efficiencies of both organisms were doubled than those under dark conditions across the
cell concentration assayed. Under dark conditions, toxicity was attributed to the
bactericidal effect of Zn?* while under light conditions, toxicity of ZnO nanorods was
related to the combined effect of Zn”* and photocatalytically mediated electron injection.
A similar study was conducted by Adams, et al. (2006), using the same model microbes,
revealing that the photosensitive NMs (SiOz, TiOz, and ZnO) were harmful to varying
degrees and the increase of concentration also increases antibacterial activity. Also,
antibacterial activity increased from SiOz to TiO2z to ZnOz and B. subtilis was more
susceptible to their effect. They also found out that aggregation produced similarly sized
particles that were directly correlated to their antibacterial activity and light was an
important factor to the NMs’ effect.

Aside from the toxicological effect of NMs, they also influence the associated
functions of soil biota. ZnO NPs reportedly reduced CO2 emission, carbon and nitrogen
mineralization efficiency of soil microbes in sandy soil treated with date palm litter
(Rashid, et al., 2016). In addition, ZnO NPs and Ag NPs affected the alfalfa-Rhizobium

symbiosis by the reduction of the number and size of the nodules and the depression of

21
expression of nif gene. It was also determined that the minimun inhibitory effect (MIC) of

Ag NPs was less than the MIC of ZnO NPs against Sinorhizobium meliloti (a symbiotic
alfalfa associated bacterium) isolates, thus, AgNPs had a greater inhibitory effect compared
to ZnO NPs (Moghaddam, et al., 2017). However, ZnO NPs was found out to be more toxic
to S. meliloti than CeO2 NPs. The toxic action of ZnO NPs toward bacteria are associated
to the combined effect of surface attachment and internalization of NPs and Zn**
(Bandyopadhyay, et al., 2012). ZnO NPs was also found to significantly decrease the soil
overall bacterial community size and change bacterial composition in saline-alkali soil in
contrast to black soil (SOM of 3.32%) after 30-day incubation. At 2 mg/g ZnO NPs,
function bacterial populations including Actinobacteria, Gammaproteobacteria,
Alphabacteria, etc. were inhibited. However, the class Bacilli showed resistance and high
abundance to ZnO NPs-contaminated saline-alkali soil at a similar concentration (You, et
al., 2017).

The effect of soil pH (4.5 to 7.2) on the interaction of non-nano (ZnO particles and
ionic ZnCl) and nanoparticles (ZnO NPs) on soil bacterial community was studied by Read,
et al. (2016). The result showed that Zn in all forms were effective in changing the bacterial
community when compared to controlled samples. The largest changes in bacterial
community composition occured in soils with low and medium pH levels (4.8 and 5.9)
while the high pH soil (7.2) was less susceptible to the effects of Zn exposure. However,
all forms of Zn exhibited similar response in the soil bacterial community at a concentration
of 2500 mg kg’!. ENPs modify soil bacterial communities, but specific taxon changes
remain unknown. They significantly altered the bacterial communities in a dose-dependent
manner, increasing some of the taxa as proportion of the community while decreasing other
taxa as an indication of diversity reduction. Some of the declining taxa are related with

nitrogen fixation (Rhizobiales, Bradyrhizobiaceae, and Bradyrhizobium), methane

22
oxidation (Methylobacteriaceae), recalcitrant organic pollutant decomposition

(Sphingomonaceae), and biopolymers degradation (Streptomycetaceae and Streptomyces),
indicating potential consequences to ecosystem-scale processes (Ge, et al., 2012).

Along with ZnO NPs, commercial nanoparticles, CuO and Ag NPs, also showed
toxicity against an environmental soil microbe, Pseudomonas putida KT2440, against their
bulk equivalents. Bulk equivalents showed no inhibitory activity, indicating that particle
size was determinant in activity. The model microbes, bearing the luxAB reporter genes,
served as a biosensor. Treatment with nano-Ag and Cuo caused rapid dose-dependent loss
of light output in the biosensor or loss in Lux activity or cell death indicating that these NPs

are bactericidal, yet, effect of ZnO NPs was bacteriostatic (Gajjar, et al., 2009).

Assessment of the effect of nanomaterials on soil bacteria

Soil microbial community analysis may serve as a means for assessing soil
characteristics which, traditionally, depends on culturing techniques using different culture
media. The media are designed to maximize the recovery of diverse microbial population.
However, this technique accounts only 10% of the microorganisms in the environment and
less than 0.1 % of the soil microbial community (Hill, et al., 2001; Widmer, et al, 2001).
The colony forming unit (CFU) and most probable number (MPN) are being used to
estimate the cultivable microbial biomass using various culture media (Concha-Guerrero,
et al., 2014). At present, a number of techniques are available for studies on soil microbial
communities and one of these is using molecular techniques. This technique sidesteps the
isolation and culturing steps of microorganisms which are known for their selectivity

leading to a non-representative view of the extent, for example, bacterial community

23
(Ranjard, et al., 2000). This technique gives understanding of the distribution and diversity

of microorganisms in soil habitats (Hill, et al., 2001).

Assessment of the effect of nanomaterials on soil microbial community

Soil enzymatic activity

The soil, having numerous biophysicochemical factors interacting, is a complex
microbial habitat (Stotzky, 1972). Strongly associated with the microorganisms are soil
enzymes. Soil enzymes are closely related to the physical, chemical, and biological
characteristics of the soil and are important for the regulation of the formation of soil
fertility, organic matter, and nutrient mineralization, and cycling in nature (Purev, et al.,
2012; Joachim, et al., 2008; Shiyin, et al., 2004) and holds great potential as a biological
indicator of soil health (Alkorta, et al., 2013). Biological indicators are suitable tools for
the assessment and prediction of the changes happening in the soil that are due to both
natural and anthropogenic influences. Among the biological features, soil enzymes are
often used as soil fertility indicator because they are very sensitive and react to changes in
soil management more quickly than other soil variables (Frincu, et al., 2015).

Soil enzymatic activity are important in the life processes of microorganisms.
Natural enzymes mediate biological processes in living organisms by speeding up the rate
of chemical reactions up to 10!° times for specific substrates and reactions (Lin, et al.,
2013). Without proper soil enzymes system, soil life processes such as organic residue
decomposition and OM and soil structure formation will be disturbed (Wolinska and
Stepniewska, 2012). Soil enzyme activities are very sensitive to both natural and

anthropogenic disturbances (pesticide application, trace elements, or management

24
practices) and exhibit a quick response to any induced changes. Soil enzymes include

phosphatase, urease, dehydrogenase, catalase, peroxidase, saccharase, protease, amylase,
-glucosidase, arylsulphatase, and other enzymes (Purev, et al., 2012). Since soil enzyme
activity is considered to be sensitive to pollution, it has been proposed as an indicator for
measuring the level of soil degradation. However, the result of the study by Trasar-Cepeda,
et al. (2000) inferred that the changes in the activities of individual enzyme
(phosphomonoesterase, B-glucosidase, urease, and dehydrogenase) did not allow precise
quantification of soil degradation, instead, the information of enzyme activities must be
supplemented with the information on other biochemical soil properties to quantify soil

degradation.

Soil dehydrogenase

Soil dehydrogenase enzyme, an intracellular enzyme, is one of the major
components of soil enzymatic activities involved in assuring the proper sequence of all the
biological pathways in soil biogeochemical cycles (Kumar, et al., 2013) and most sensitive
bioindicators relating to soil quality and fertility (Wolinska and Stepniewska, 2012).

Intracellular enzyme is highly correlated with the microbial biomass and its activity.
As an indirect parameter, it could be a measure of microbial biomass (von Mersi and
Schinner, 1991). Thus, dehydrogenase activity (DHA) can be considered as a good measure
of soil microbial oxidative activity (Camiiia, et al., 1998) and has been proposed as the best
indicator of the microbial redox system in soil. In addition, DHA truly reflects microbial
activity because dehydrogenase will be quickly mineralized by other enzymes, unless they
are adsorbed by humic molecules as compared to extracellular enzymes (Wolinska and

Stepniewska, 2012).

25
Soil urease

Ureases (urea aminohydrolases, EC 3.5.1.5) (Krajewska, 2009) catalyzes the
hydrolysis of urea into COz2 and NHs (Maddela and Venkateswarlu, 2017). Urease is a
nickel-dependent metalloenzyme found in plants, some bacteria, and fungi (Kafarski and
Talma, 2018). Soil urease is mainly microbial in origin (Dharmakeerthi and Thenabadu,
1996) and is found in different microorganisms including filamentous fungi, yeasts,
mycorrhiza, bacteria, cyanobacteria, and actinomycetes (Hasan, 2000). The urease activity
(UA) might not be associated with the active microbial population (Frankenberger and
Dick, 1983) but also with the organo-mineral complex (enzyme-organic matter complex)
which makes urease resistant to the activities of proteolytic enzymes yet allows the
diffusion of substrate molecules to, and product molecules from, active enzyme sites
(Burns, et al., 1972). The activity of urease in soil is due to its accumulation. It dictates the
fate of urea. The effectiveness of urea as a N fertilizer has been reduced because of high
urease activity in most arable lands (Dharmakeerthi and Thenabadu, 1996).

Hydrolysis of urea by bacteria are common in soils. Of six soils studied by Lloyd and
Sheaffe (1973), some 17-30 per cent of the total bacterial populations, including aerobes,
micro-aerophiles and aerobes, could hydrolyse urea. A model was proposed by (Paulson
and Kurtz, 1969) to determine the location of active urease in soil. They found that under
steady state conditions, 78-89 % of the urease activity of the soil examined was due to
urease adsorbed on soil colloids. The concentration of urease was temporarily reduced by
an increase in microbial population until steady state was reached. Also, results show that
soil microorganisms were induced to produce more urease with the addition of a small
amount of urea (13 ppm of urea-N). Pauson and Kurtz (1970) confirmed that urease exists

in soil as in direct association with soil microorganisms and as excreted by microorganisms

26
and adsorbed on the soil colloids altering the activity of urease. Their finding further

supports the hypothesis from other reported literatures.

Kandeler and Gerber (1988) had developed a rapid assay for soil urease in the absence
of bacteriostatic agents. It includes incubation of soil with an aqueous or buffered urea
solution, extraction of ammonium with 1 N KCl, 0.01 N HCl, and colorimetric NH«*
determination. However, if the aim of the study is to simulate urea fertilizer treatment of
agricultural soil and to follow the direct response of urease activity without any microbial
growth, a nonbuffered method can be used as recommended by Dick (2011). Values of
urease activity remained the same for up to 5 months when stored at +5 °C or -20 °C. For
example, a field moist samples which was stored at +5 °C and analyzed | day after sampling
and 5 months after sampling had values of 22.9 ug N (g soil)! (2h)!. Another sample had
UA of 106.1 (+5 °C and analyzed 1 day after sampling) and 102.4 (-20 °C and analyzed 5
months after sampling). Thus, it was suggested to store samples at -20 °C or +5 °Cfor as

long as 5 months in a closed container for preserving soil samples.

Assessment of soil microbial biomass by substrate-induced respiration (SIR)

Soil microbial biomass plays an important role in maintaining of soil structure,
facilitating microbial metabolic processes and regulating the release of nutrients (Zhang, et
al., 2016). Soil structure and texture are dominant controls over decomposition of organic
matter by microbes (Van Veen and Kuikman, 1990). Pore size distribution could give an
indication of the accessibility of substrates to decomposition by microorganisms.
Generally, fine-textured clay soils have a larger amount of small pores (Verberne, et al.,

1990).

27
The substrate-induced respiration (SIR) is the most commonly used physiological

method for determining the soil microbial biomass. The equation dp/dt= re"'+ K is derived
on the assumption that the increase of the respiration rate dp/dt after substrate addition in
the SIR method represents the sum of the respiration rates of growing (re) and nongrowing
microorganisms (K). Accordingly, the equation SIR is equal to the initial respiration rate
of growing microorganisms (r) at the time of substrate addition or SIR =r + K (Stenstrom,
et al., 1998). SIR is a good and easy method for measuring the soil microbial biomass and
other aspects of microbial growth in the soil (Swain, et al., 2014).

SIR correlated better with enzyme activity than did other microbial indices (total
fungal length and biomass, and FDA bacterial biomass). Several possible reasons include
sampling scales of the SIR and enzyme assays are more similarly matched, and therefore,
integrate the activities of similar-sized pools of microbes (Kuperman and Carteiro, 1997).
There are two ways of measuring SIR following addition of glucose to soil, viz. solid
glucose or glucose in solution. Generally, similar patterns of CO2 evolution were found
between soils following addition of glucose as liquid or solid. For example, maximum rate
of CO2 evolution of soil sample (soil No. 9) added with solid glucose (4 mg/g soil) was
11.2 pL CO: g" soil and with addition of glucose solution was 15.7 pL CO2 g! (Lin and

Brookes, 1999).

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Soil Collection and Characterization and Nanomaterial Preparation

To determine the effect of nanomaterials on the previously-mentioned soil
biological properties, three separate experiments were performed at the Division of Soil
Science (DSS)-Agricultural Systems Institute (ASI), College of Agriculture and Food
Science (CAFS), University of the Philippines Los Bafios (UPLB) from July 2018 to
September 2018. The nanomaterials used were metal oxide nanoparticles (nCuO and
nZnO), FertiGroe®N, and HormoGroe®. The CuO and ZnO NPs (nZnO and nCuO) and
their bulk counterparts (bCuO and bZnO) were purchased from Merck (Darmstadt,
Germany). However, nanofertilizer (FertiGroe®N), nanofertilizer carrier (nanocarrier),
nanoplanthormone (HormoGroe®), and nanoplanthormone carrier (phospholipid) were
obtained from the UPLB-Biotech (National Institute of Molecular Biology and
Biotechnology).

Two soil types were used for the experiments: Lipa Clay Loam (LCL) and Sariaya
Sandy Loam (SSL). Figure 1 shows an overview of the activities done for this research.
LCL soil samples were collected from the experiment station of the Institute of Plant
Breeding (IPB), UPLB. On the other hand, the SSL soil samples were taken from
Barangay Canda, Sariaya, Quezon. Soil sampling was done by taking the top 20 cm of the
surface soil. Prior to analysis and set-up of experiments, visible debris were removed, and
the soil was air-dried and passed through a 2-mm sieve. A portion of the collected soil
was characterized chemically by quantitatively determining the pHwate, organic matter
(OM) by Walkley and Black Method, total N (Kjeldahl Method), exchangeable K (Flame

Photometer Method), CEC (Ammonium Acetate Method), and available P (Bray No. 2

29
Method), Zn and Cu (Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer). Physical characteristics,

such as texture (Hydrometer Method) and field capacity (FC) and moisture content
(Gravimetric Method), were also determined. The physicochemical methods are
summarized in Appendix A

Field capacity was determined by putting 500 g of the air-dried soil in a plastic pot
and soaked the pot in a tub containing water for an hour, thus, allowing the soil to absorb
water by capillary action until the soil was fully saturated. The soaked pot was removed
from the tub and allowed to drain for 18 h. Finally, the moisture content was determined

by oven-drying 10 g of soil for 24 h at 105 °C.

Soil Collection

Characterization
of Soil

es

Incubation
Experiments

Culture-dependent Microbial Biomass

" . an
(Viable Plate Count (Substrate-induced Urease Activity Assay)

Method) Respiration)

Figure 1. Framework for the assessment of the effect of nanomaterials on culturable soil
bacterial population, microbial biomass, and enzyme activities.

30
Incubation Experiments

Experiment 1. Assessment of the effect of metal oxide nanoparticles (ZnO and CuO)
on the culturable soil bacterial population, microbial biomass, and enzymatic

activities

An incubation experiment was performed in a sterile 10 in. by 12 in. polypropylene
containers each filled with 500-g sieved moist soil (100% moisture content at field
capacity). The moist soil was pre-incubated for a week prior to addition of metal oxide
amendments. Exactly 300 ppm for both the bulk and nano forms of ZnO and CuO were
used as treatment based on the experiments performed by Ge, et a/., 2011. There were 10
treatment combinations from two types of soils (LCL and SSL) and four types of
amendments (bulk CuO and ZnO and nCuO and nZnO shown in Table 1) and the
unamended soil as control. The 10 treatment combinations were replicated thrice and set
up in a split-plot completely randomized design (CRD) (Gomez and Gomez, 1984) and
placed in a stable and enclosed area in the Soil Microbiology Laboratory with
temperature ranging from 26 to 35 °C. The moisture of the soil plus amendment was

maintained at field capacity throughout the incubation period.

Table 1. Particle size of metal oxides.

Metal Oxide CAS No. Catalog No. Particle Size
nZnO 1314-13-2 544906-50 G <100 nm
nCuO 1317-38-0 544868-25 G <50 nm

bulk ZnO 1314-13-2 96479-500 G na

bulk CuO 1317-38-0 30843- 500 G n/a

31
Samples were collected at 1, 7, 14, and 28 day(s) after amendments (DAA) for

culture-dependent analysis of soil bacteria. Simultaneously, assessment of dehydrogenase
and urease (modified Buffered Method) activities, and microbial biomass were performed

as described below.

Experiment 2. Evaluation of the effect of nanofertilizer (FertiGroe®N) on culturable

soil bacterial population and soil microbial biomass and enzyme activities

A 2 x 4 factorial experiment was carried out in the Soil Microbiology Laboratory.
The factors were two types of soils (LCL and SSL) and four types of amendment
((FertiGroe®N, (150 kg N/ha), commercial fertilizer, urea (150 kg N/ha), nanocarrier, and
unamended soil as control. The treatments were replicated three times and laid out in
split-plot CRD (Gomez and Gomez, 1984). Pre-incubation was done in similar manner as
in Experiment 1. Except for the sampling periods and duration of incubation, the
procedure and assessments were the same as in Experiment 1. The Nonbuffered Method

was performed for the urease activity assay and sampling was done at 1, 35, and 75 DAT.

Experiment 3. Assessment of the effect of nanoplanthormone (HormoGroe®) on the

culturable soil bacterial population and soil microbial biomass and enzyme activities

A 2 x 4 factorial experiment was carried out in the Soil Microbiology Laboratory.
The factors were two types of soils (LCL and SSL) and four types of amendment (50-
ppm standard indole acetic acid (stdIAA), 50-ppm HormoGroe®, 400-ppm phospholipid,
and unamended soil as control. The treatments were replicated three times and laid out in

split-plot CRD (Gomez and Gomez, 1984). Pre-incubation was done in similar manner as

32
in Experiment 1. Except for the sampling periods and duration of incubation, the

procedure and assessments were the same as in Experiment 1. Sampling was done at 1,

35, and 75 DAT.

Enumeration of soil culturable bacteria

Indirect viable plate count (Appendix B) was done to determine the culturable soil
bacterial population by pour plating in Asparagine Mannitol Agar medium (Thorton,
1922) at 10°, 10°°, and 10° dilution. Nystatin was added prior to pouring of the medium.
Each dilution was plated in duplicate, allowed to solidify, inverted, wrapped with paper,
and incubated at room temperature (~29 °C) for 5 days.

After 5 days, the bacterial colonies were counted. Valid count is between 25 to

250 colonies for bacteria. The population (CFU/g dry soil) was determined using the

formula:
CFU average number of valid counts in one dilution x DF
—= - - x MCF
g of dry soil mass of moist soil
total count
CFU

EER = UND +2 ODN yy Cry MCF

gary soil Vp
where,

nl- number of plate with valid count at lower dilution
n2- number of plate with valid count at higher dilution
Vp- volume plated, mL

D- lower dilution

CF- convertion factor (mL water/g soil)

MCF- moisture correction factor

DF- dilution factor

33
Observations regarding the CFU of bacteria are reported in log values. Analysis of

Variance (ANOVA) was performed using Statistical Tool for Agricultural Research

(STAR) v2.0.1.

Dehydrogenase activity (DHA) assay

Soil dehydrogenase activity assay was performed according to the modified
procedure of Tabatabai, et al. (1982) by Achuba and Peretiemo-Clarke (2008). A 1-g soil
was placed in a screw-capped tubes, added with l-mL 3% (w/v) 2,3,5-triphenyl
tetrazolium chloride (TTC), stirred, and incubated for 96 h at 27 °C. After incubation, a
10-mL EtOH was added to the mixture and vortexed for 30 s. The tube was incubated for
1 h to allow suspended soil to settle. To a clean test tube, a 5-mL of the supernatant
solution was transferred to a clean test tube and measured spectrophotometrically at 485
nm using Thermo Scientific MultiSkan Go Spectrophotometer. The result was reported in
ug TF (tripheny! formazan) g"! dry soil 96 h”!. Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) STAR
v2.0.1. The schematic diagram for the DHA assay is shown in Appendix C.

A standard curve was constructed according to Ghaly and Mahmoud (2006). A
standard solution of 0.0002 M TF was prepared by dissolving 0.03-g TF in 500-mL AR
grade EtOH. A set of 9 solutions was then be prepared with TF concentrations of 1.2, 3.0,

6.0, 9.0, 12.0, 15.0, 18.0, 21.0, and 24.0 wg/mL.

34
Urease activity (UA) assay

Buffered method.

Urease activity assay was performed using the modified natural soil pH method
described by Kandeler and Gerber (1988). A 5-g soil sample was mixed with 2.5-mL
720-mM urea and 20-mL 0.1 M borate buffer solutions. The control was treated only with
borate solution. The flasks were stoppered then incubated for 2 h at 47 °C (Dash, et
al.,1981). After incubation, the control sample was treated with 2.5-mL of 720 mM urea
and all samples with 30-mL of acidified 2 M KCI. The samples were shaken for 30 min
on a rotary shaker and the soil suspension was filtered using folded Whattman Filter
Paper No. 41. The filtered extracts that were not processed for ammonium determination
directly after incubation were stored overnight at 4 °C or for longer time periods at -20°C.
A 1.5-mL aliquot was taken and placed in an Eppendorf tube and centrifuged at 10, 000 x
g for 5 min. A 1-mL supernatant solution was taken and mixed with 9-mL sterile dH2O,
5-mL sodium salicylate/NaOH solution, and 2-mL dichloroisocyanuric acid. The mixture
was swirled for a few seconds and the solution was incubated at room temperature for 30
min and the absorbance of each sample was determined using Thermo Scientific
MultiSkan Go Spectrophotometer at 660 nm. The concentration of the sample was
determined using a calibration curve of NHsCl standard solution ranging from 0-25 yg
NHs-N mL’!. Extracts containing more than 3.5 ug NHs-N mL"! were diluted with water
before performing the color reaction.

Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was performed using STAR v2.0.1. The

schematic diagram for the buffered method of UA assay is shown in Appendix D.

ureaseactivity = ODA x10x2.5

35
ai- NH«* content of the control
a2- NH«* content of the sample
ODM.- oven-dry mass
10- dilution factor
2.5- volume of extract

Non-buffered method.

Urease activity assay was performed using the modified natural soil pH method
described by Dick (2011) and Kandeler and Gerber (1988). A 5-g soil sample and a
contol sample (per treatment) was mixed with 2.5-mL 720-mM urea. The flasks were
stoppered then incubated for 2 h at 37 °C (Dash, et al.1981). After incubation, the control
sample was treated with 2.5-mL of 720 mM urea and all samples with 30-mL of acidified
2M KCL. The samples were shaken for 30 min on a rotary shaker and the soil suspension
was filtered using folded Whattman Filter Paper No. 41. The filtered extracts that were
not processed for ammonium determination directly after incubation were stored
overnight at 4 °C or for longer time periods at -20°C. A 1.5-mL aliquot was taken and
placed in an Eppendorf tube and centrifuged at 10, 000 x g for 5 min. A 1-mL supernatant
solution was taken and mixed with 9-mL sterile dH2O, 5-mL sodium salicylate¢(NaOH
solution, and 2-mL dichloroisocyanuric acid. The mixture was swirled for a few seconds
and the solution was incubated at room temperature for 30 min and the absorbance of
each sample was determined using Thermo Scientific MultiSkan Go Spectrophotometer
at 660 nm. The concentration of the sample was determined using a calibration curve of
NH4CI standard solution ranging from 0-25 wg NHa-N mL”. Extracts containing more
than 3.5 wg NHs-N mL’! were diluted with water before performing the color reaction.
The schematic diagram for the buffered method of UA assay is shown in Appendix E.

Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was performed using STAR v2.0.1.

36

ureaseactivity = ODA x10x2.5

ay- NH«* content of the control
a2- NH«* content of the sample
ODM.- oven-dry mass

10- dilution factor

2.5- volume of extract

Determination of microbial biomass (MCB) by substrate-induced respiration

Standardization of the amount of glucose, the substrate to be used, and the maximum
duration for the incubation of samples were determined based on the procedure by Swain,
et al. (2014). Each soil type was standardized prior to laboratory experiments involving
nanomaterials.

Standardization was performed by adding 10 mg/1 g to 70 mg/1 g glucose to glass
jars containing 10 g of soil and mixed. The glass wire, which served as stand, along with
plastic cup containing 10-mL of standard 0.04-N NaOH was immediately placed inside
the jar, covered, and sealed tightly. The samples then were incubated for 5 hours. The
amount of CO2 released was determined by titrimetric method using standard 0.04 N of
HCI with BaClz and phenolphthalein as indicators. The amount of CO2 released was
plotted against glucose concentration and the maximum amount of glucose consumed was
used for observing the microbial biomass throughout the experiments involving
nanomaterials. Exactly, the D-glucose used were 500 and 100 mg for every 10 g of soil

samples for SSL and LCL, respectively (Figure 2).

37

Standardization of D-Glucose for SIR Using SSL

Ey 6.80 6.80

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Glucose, mg/g soil

Standardization of D-Glucose for SIR Using LCL

10.8:

S

8.97

3
30
S
a
9
io)
3
E

O 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80

v
3
3
g
&
Fy
2
=
2
g
A
3
|
3
3
3
g
2
Pl
2
a
°
oC

Glucose, mg/g soil
b

Figure 2. Standardization of D-glucose for the determination of microbial biomass by
SIR for (a) LCL and (b) SSL.

38

Determination of the Equation for z value, LCL

: 16.59
8.00
10
00
3 2.0¢
0.00
Oo 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Incubation Time, h
a
Determination of the Equation for z value, SSL
3
2.5
2% > 1.941
Ea
3 § aoe
ae)
Zw i
ZE
£05
8 0.564 2.536
9 0
0 2 4 6 8 10 12

Incubation Time, h

b

Figure 3. Plots for the determination of the equation for the initial biomass emission (z)
for (a) LCL and (b) SSL.

Using the maximum amount of glucose used, the time for initial biomass emission
(z), median biomass emission at first generation (A), and median biomass emission

generation at second generation (B) were determined within a 10-hour incubation with 1

39
hour of sampling interval (Figure 3). Equations were generated depending on the curve

plotted and the value of proportional unit, z, signifying the volume (in mL) of standard
0.04 HCl used for titration. Using the value of z, the value of microbial biomass was
computed. For LCL, z=0.714B-1.714A while for SSL, z=4.348B-5.348. The standardized
SIR procedure was used to measure microbial biomass all throughout the experiment. The
calculations were performed using the formula below:

(b* N*88)mg CO2

mg CO2/10g soil =
DELI 10g soil

z*N*12*10°

Microbial Biomass (ug C/10g soil)=
10 gsoil

b- Vi control- VHC! delivered
N- concentration of standard HCI
Z- proportional unit
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was performed using STAR v2.0.1. The schematic

diagram for the soil MCB determination using SIR is shown in Appendix F.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Soil Physicochemical Characteristics

Listed in Table 2 are the physicochemical characteristics of the soils used in the
study. The pH of Sariaya sandy loam (SSL) is slightly higher than that of Lipa clay loam
(LCL). Lipa clay loam had higher OM, CEC, total N, exchangeable K, available Zn and

Cu, compared to SSL while SSL has 33 times higher available P than LCL.

Table 2: Physicochemical characteristics of the two soils used in the experiment.

Sariaya Sandy Loam Lipa Clay Loam

soil pH 5.80 5.40
OM, % 1.40 3.11

CEC, emol, kg? 14.09 40.06
Total N, % 0.08 0.19

Available P, ppm 348.50 10.50
Exchangeable K, cmol, kg! 1.99 2.05
Available Zn, ppm 1.0 2.0
Available Cu, ppm 2.0 9.0

Texture

% clay 6.48 33.16

% silt 28.94 39.61

% sand 64.58 27.23

% Field Capacity 33.1 50.8

The pH value of SSL is classified as moderately acid while that of LCL is in the
range of strongly acid soil (Soil Survey Manual, 2017). The CEC of LCL is greater than

that of SSL due to higher percentage of clay and organic matter, considering that cation

41
exchange sites are found at the surfaces of clay and OM (Ross and Ketterings, 1995). It

was also observed that available P of SSL is much higher than that of LCL. This high P
level could be due to leaching of phosphate ions coming from applied fertilizer since the

soil collection site was adjacent to an eggplant field (Figure 4).

Figure 4. The collection site of Sariaya sandy loam

Assessment of the effect of metal oxide nanoparticles (nZnO and nCuO),

FertiGroe®N, and HormoGroe® on culturable soil bacterial population

Soil bacteria has population greater than one hundred million individuals per gram of
soil and represents approximately as many as 10* to 10° different species (Sylvia, ef al.,

1999; Holden, et al., 2014). Hence, they are considered as the most abundant and diverse

42
soil organisms (Sylvia, et al., 1999). Bacterial as well as fungal diversity increases soil

quality by affecting soil agglomeration and increasing soil fertility. In addition, a healthy
rhizosphere population can help plants deal with biotic and abiotic stresses such as
pathogens, drought, and soil contamination (Kirk, et al., 2004). Reduced bacterial
community diversity in the natural environment has an impact on the ecosystem and,
consequently, on human health (Holden, et al., 2014). Since soil is expected to be the
major sink of NPs released to the environment, the impact of NPs on soil processes and
the organisms that carry them out should be comprehended (Ge, et al., 2012).

Soil microbial community analysis may serve as a means for assessing soil
characteristics which, traditionally, depends on culturing techniques using different
culture media (Hill, et al., 2001). The colony forming unit (CFU), along with the most
probable number (MPN), is being used to estimate the cultivable microbial biomass using

various culture media (Concha-Guerrero, et al., 2014).

Table 3. Effect of metal oxide particles on the soil culturable bacterial population

Treatments log (CFU g" soil)
Soil Type Amendment 1 DAA 7DAA 14DAA
control 5.82" 6.01"s 5.88 "5
bCuO 5.66 5.73 5.72
Lipa Clay Loam bZnO 5.87 6.11 6.05
nCuO 5.91 6.00 5.90
nZnO 5.69 6.01 6.36
control 6.47 "5 5.77™ 5.91"
bCuO 5.60 5.80 5.91
Sariaya Sandy Loam bZnO 3.78 5.78 6.25
nCuO 6.13 5.60 6.03
nZnO 6.71 5.71 5.91

"S not significant

43
Table 4. Effect of FertiGroe®N on the culturable soil bacterial population

Treatment log (CFU g" soil)
Soil Type Amendment 1 DAA 7DAA 14DAA
control 6.04"5 6.15" 5.40°5
FertiGroe®N 6.21 6.03 5.46
Lipa Clay Loam
urea 6.20 6.32 5.72
nanocarrier 6.06 5.86 5.98
control 5.71" 5.89" 5.18
FertiGroe®N 6.04 6.27 4.87
Sariaya Sandy Loam
urea 6.48 6.07 5.13
nanocarrier 5.89 6.02 4.80

°S not significant

Table 5. Effect of HormoGroe® on the culturable soil bacterial population

Treatment log (CFU g" soil)
Soil Type Amendment 1DAA 7DAA 14 DAA

control 6.05" 6.83 "5 5.32"

; stdIAA 6.33 6.10 5.39

Lipa Clay Loam

HormoGroe® 6.52 6.11 491

phospholipid 6.51 6.20 3.03
control 5.988 6.25 "s 4.825

. stdIAA 5.99 6.20 4.94

Sariaya Sandy Loam

HormoGroe® 5.98 6.08 5.22

phospholipid 6.59 6.10 4.82

"S not significant

The metal oxide nanoparticles, FertiGroe®N and HormoGroe® did not show
significant effect on the soil culturable bacterial population at o=5% as shown in Tables

3, 4, and 5, respectively. The summary of the empirical probability values is shown in

Table 6.

by

“JSS 10J SI QUO PUOdas ay} a[IYM [D7] JOJ SI UUINJOo ysIyy BY) ‘Potted Butjdures yoke 104,
yep Med aU} UO pase payesouad Y payndusoo oy) Jo yoee oJ sanjea  [eoidwg,

“Kjpanoadsai ‘| pue ‘yy ‘5 xipuaddy ut payeingey ar g201Q0ULOH pur ‘N,201DIHA, ‘soored apixo yeiour Xq poyoayye se uoneindod jersa}0eq [10s 9qzITY]NS JO VAONVe

a CU EE IEE IEEE

7 7 . 7 7 ; 7 " , F : f q 7 7 7 . 7 (%) aouEEA
Ivy] €b LS €S 69 98 Trl O81 TL Sl £9 8b HS 97 BH EF 9OZ 67 Jo yua19yJ205

. . . . . , . . . jusupueuly
09s€'0 €LIv'0 s919'0 ZOPL'0 11S9°0 189¢°0 szIlpo = L€99°0 8hET'O x adA], flog
LL87'0 80L1'0 y9E7'0 60£6°0 692L'0 €Z€7'0 Iece0  —-ZEZB'0 19870 juoulpusury
PS0L'0 7ZE'0 918€'0 LSLI0 71760 6L9v'0 SL7L'0 ~—- S8Z0°0 vLS8°0 adAJ, [log

(VVq) poled
SL se I SL se I ol L 1 guydureg
@2 01 20ULIOHL Ng?ADH407 sapped epixO [%}9IA woneLeA
Jo 991n0g

Sane AIqeqosg [esardurgy
a EEE eT
2 g®0JQOOULIOH] pure ‘Ng21DIHOT ‘gored oprxo
Jejour Aq poyoayye se uoeindod yerajoeq [10s afqeinyjno Jo sonjea AyIqeqosd jeouiduss oy) pue sourlseA Jo sIsAjeue oy) Jo Areulung “9 a1qeL

45
Assessment of the effect of metal oxide nanoparticles (nZnO and nCuO),

FertiGroe®N, and HormoGroe® on soil dehydrogenase activity

Effect of metal oxides on soil dehydrogenase activity

Soil dehydrogenase is the most important enzyme in the group of all enzymes in the
soil. It belongs to the group of oxidoreductases that is responsible for the oxidation of the
substrate by reducing an electron acceptor. In addition, DHA serves as an indicator and
measure of total microbial activity to assess soil health and quality (Navnage, et al.,

2017).

Table 7. Effect of metal oxide particles on the soil dehydrogenase activity

Treatment DHA, yg TF g" dry soil 96 bh?
Soil Type | Amendment 1DAAt 7DAAt 14 DAA* 28 DAA‘
control 7.95 a 19.38 a 25.75 a 32.95 a
bCuO 4.35 be 15.13 a 20.70 b 29.95 a
Lipa Clay bZnO 4.09 be 8.78b 23.23a 35.23a
Loam
nCuO 2.96 ¢ 16.83 a 18.51 b 19.36 b
nZnO 6.01 ab 13.57b 20.94 a 30.99 a
control 2.41 ab 6.1la 13.764 6.02 a
bCuO 2.43 ab 5.04a 3.73 b 16.09 a
Sariaya
Sandy bZnO 1.61 b 10.58 a 11.81la 5.69 a
Loam
nCuO 4.05a 8.06 a 4.12b 6.73 a
nZnO 2.95 ab 5.59 a 13.24a 5.83 a

t significant interaction effect on soil DHA between soil type and amendments at a=5 %

* significant interaction effect on soil DHA between soil types at a=5 %

* significant interaction effect on soil DHA among amendments at a=5 %

* means followed by the same letter(s) in a column are not significantly different at a=5 % according to
Least Square Difference (LSD) test.

46
The result of the test of significance of the treatments on DHA revealed a significant

interaction between the soil type and amendments at 1, 7, and 28 DAA. Significant
interaction effect between soil types and among amendments was seen at 14 DAA. The
empirical probability values for each treatment are summarized in Table 8.

DHA in LCL and SSL treated with metal oxide nanoparticles differed significantly
(Tables 7). At 1 DAA, except for the nZnO treatment, DHA in LCL, significantly
decreased relative to the control. On the other hand, DHA in SSL did not differ
significantly from the control. This contrasting result might be due to the different
physicochemical properties of the soil which affect the dissolution, availability, and
toxicity of metal oxides. Together, these combined factors (soil type and metal oxides)
either reduced or inhibited the soil DHA.

Properties such as pH, OM, particle size, colloidal particles, moisture content, CEC,
and level of phosphate might probably affect the interaction between the two factors on
its effect on soil dehydrogenase activity at 1 DAA. The pH of LCL belongs to those of
the strongly acid soil while SSL is in the range of moderately acid soil. Soil pH is
considered one of the most important factors that determine the solubility, sorption,
precipitation, availability, and metal fraction distribution pattern. It is the increase of
hydrogen ion concentration that influences the heavy metal mobilization intensity.
Moreover, the mobility of metallic elements is much higher in highly acidic soils than in
soils with neutral and alkaline reactions (Basta, et al., 2005; Fijalkowski, et al., 2012; Lu,
et al., 2005).

Considering the findings of other researchers, it is expected that more of the added
metal oxides in the LCL had been converted to its mobile form than in SSL. Wang, et al.

(2013) observed that ZnO NPs could not be detected after an hour of incubation in the

JSS 40] SI QUO puosas oy) a]1YM JO'T 10g SI UUMJOS ysIIJ oY ‘polod Sutjduwies yova 10,4,

Byep Med ay} UO paseg payesouad J poynduwioo ayy Jo yowo Joy sanjeA q [eodwigy
S JO VAONVe

“Ajaanoadsai ‘] pue Sy ‘¢ xipuaddy ut payeinge) oe g201N 0UNOP] pur ‘N_201DIH0, ‘sajotued opixo [eau Aq poyayye se VHC
5 Fi 5 F Fi . 3(%) aoueLIeA,
€St OBL BBE SO9T 68% FIZ Jo yua1915j207)

V2 90% 98% SLp TSt OOZ OV TBI LE TIE SLE OF O'S@ TU
yUIUIpHOUYy

0070 1961°0 99€€0 67750 sses‘0 86L5°0 L7v0'0 Sp9e'0 Sz10°0 7200°0 x ad [log

£680'0 7SéL0 0000°0 £1cr'0 £L60°0 veel 0 9980°0 $L00°0 £080°0 7L10°0 yusuIpuswWy

7s$70'0 600°0 9700°0 ZEE0'0 60200 1€c0'0 0000°0 €000°0 $z00°0 $1000 dX [Hos

(VV@ poled
SL se I SL s¢ I 87 oI L I Suydueg
@201)20UlI10H N@?1DD497 SapIHAvT ePixO [89
WOneLIEA
Jo ad1n0g

aSenqeA Anpqugorg jeoridurg

#' g2OIQ20uLoH]
pur ‘NQ2%01DIue,J ‘afoijed aprxo [eyo Aq payogyye se WHC JO sonjea Ayyiqeqosd yeoiidurs oy) pue souelseA Jo sissjeue oy Jo Areuruing ‘g a1quL
Lb

48
soil which led them to conclude that ZnO NPs underwent rapid dissolution. Similarly, it

was found that the strong influence by soil pH led to rapid dissolution of CuO NPs, added
at 100 mg/kg, and behaved similarly to dissolved Cu (Sekine, ef al., 2017). Cu sorption
increased linearly with increasing pH up to pH 5.5 but beyond this pH level, the Cu
adsorption remained constant (Agbenin and Atin, 2003). The increase of Zn and Cu levels
in the soil may confirm the key role of organic matter in the immobilization of metals
(Josko, et al., 2019).

The level of OM of LCL was twice as much as that of SSL. High OM content
entails increasing OM-bound metals (Lu, et al., 2015). Cu bound to OM, both in the
control and soil amended with CuO NP, was characterized by the highest concentration of
Cu. Similar result was obtained for soil with bulk CuO and CuCl2 as well as with ZnO
NP-applied soil. These results were correlated with high organic carbon content (Josko, et
al., 2019). Moreover, OM content of the soil would partially mitigate the CuO NP
contamination of the soil (Hortin, et al. 2017). The dominant role of OM is in the
complexation of Zn and Cu. Although deemed non-available, metal bound to OM may be
transferred to organisms as food (Josko, et al., 2019). At 1 DAA, soil microorganisms
might have consumed the OM complexed with Zn and Cu which caused the increase of
heavy metal ions in the microbial cell at a level toxic to the heterotrophic microorganisms
which resulted to cell death.

Aside from OM, soil moisture conditions are important for the concentration of
Cu bound to Fe/Mn oxides. The increase in the level of the Cu bound to Fe/Mn oxides
could have been the result of OM decomposition. In the case of CuO, the lower moisture
content might result in reduced solubility (Josko, et al., 2019). Both soil types were
incubated at field capacity with LCL exhibiting high water holding capacity. However,

Josko, et al. (2019) noted that moisture condition did not have any significant effect on

49
metal fractionation with a brief time of incubation. Significant effect on metal

fractionation after 3 and 24 months of incubation was observed.

Josko, et al. (2019), also, showed the importance of the differences in particle size
distribution. Greater permeability increases the mobility of NPs which allowed better
access to the crystalline lattice of minerals than in soils with a more compacted structure.
CuO NPs are mostly bound to the soil components (Mendes, et al., 2018). Considering
the permeability of the soil, metal oxide NPs had increased mobility in the Sariaya sandy
loam than in Lipa clay loam which allowed further access for sorption to the Fe/Mn
oxides, thus, reducing the toxicity of the metal cations in SSL. Another property that may
influence the availability of metals in the soil is the concentration of phosphate.
Phosphate, a multipurpose anion, enhances metal adsorption via anion-induced negative
charge, like cation-exchange capacity (CEC), and metal precipitation thereby facilitating
in situ immobilization (Bolan, et al., 2003). Since the level of phosphate ion in SSL was
33 times higher than LCL, phosphate might have immobilized much of the metal ions
from the nano and bulk metal oxides.

Aside from all the dynamic processes and transformations discussed above,
interaction with macromolecules via various mechanisms might also drive the metal
oxide NPs away from their pristine state which can have strong implications for their
persistence, bioavailability, toxic-effects, fate, and transport in the terrestrial compartment
(Ambe, et al., 2017). A field study conducted by Collins, et al. (2012) showed that both
the Cu and ZnO NPs altered the microbial community structure in the soil matrix. Josko,
et al. (2014) noted that dehydrogenase was proven to be sensitive to the presence of NPs
and exposure of soil to nanoparticles which results in a decrease enzymatic activity

impacting the microbial community composition (Rajput, et al., 2017).

50
The strongly acid pH which increased the dissolution of metal oxide to their ionic

forms which in tum increased the concentration of metal ions in the soil solution caused
the reduction of soil DHA as affected by the metal-oxide treated LCL as compared to its
control. Although LCL had higher OM (responsible for the immobilization) than SSL,
Lipa series having clay loam texture had limited permeability towards the crystal lattice
of Fe/Mn oxides thus limiting their sorption. Lastly, LCL had a lower concentration of
phosphates that would further help in immobilizing the dissolved metal oxide particles.
Hence, the toxic levels of Cu and Zn exposed the soil microorganism and decreased the
microbial activity at 1 DAA. The result is in accordance to Garcia-Gomez, et al. (2015)
which concluded that the hazard associated with the ZnO NPs was similar to its bulk
counterparts in the case of dehydrogenase activity, along with phosphatase and C and N
transformations. The result showed the lowest soil DHA in LCL amended with nCuO.
Kim, et al. (2011) concluded that CuO and ZnO in the soil microcosm negatively affected
the microbes. This high toxicity of CuO might due to the smaller particle size of CuO
NPs. The nCuO used in this study had a size of less than 50 nm while that of the nZnO
had a particle size below 100 nm as summarized in Table 1. Aside from morphology,
exposure time, concentration, pH, and biocompatibility, the impact of ZnO on biological
function depends also on its particle size (Siddiqi, et al., 2018).

At high concentrations, both the Cu and Zn ions become toxic to microorganisms
(Silva-Balilao, et al., 2017). Zn?* is required only in the very small amount by bacterial
cells (Suryawati, 2018) and an excess load of Zn shows toxicity and inhibition to
microbial processes (Bong, et al., 2010; McDevitt, et al., 2011). Zn becomes toxic in
excess because it is a highly competitive divalent metal and will displace the weakly
bound transition metals in the metalloenzyme active sites if remained unregulated

(Capdevila, et al., 2016). A study on the manganese uptake of Streptococcus pneumoniae

51
revealed that Zn could inhibit Mn uptake by binding to the Mn transport protein resulting

in slowed bacterial growth (McDevitt, et al., 2016). Also, at enough concentration, Zn
repressed the dehydrogenase activity of the exposed cell of Pseudomonas, Escherichia,
Proteus, Bacillus, and Arthrobacter (Nweke, 2009). Likewise, free Cu poses a hazard
because of its high chemical reactivity (Arguello, et al., 2013). In aerobic condition,
copper can catalyze a Fenton-like reaction that may generate reactive oxygen species
(ROS) which eventually cause lipid peroxidation and protein damage (Dupont, et al.,
2013). Neal, et al. (2012) suggests two general mechanisms on how synthetic metal oxide
NPs exert toxicity. It is through the release of free ions at levels which exert toxic effects
upon the target cells or specific surface-mediated physicochemical process leading to the
disruption of cell membranes and organelles following the formation of hydroxyl free
radicals and other reactive oxygen species (ROS).

SSL, on the other hand, had different result compared to LCL. All the metal oxide-
treated SSL showed enhanced soil DHA at 1 DAA. Like in LCL, the physicochemical
properties of the soil affected the microbial response in the presence of metal oxide. The
moderately acid soil condition might slowly decrease the rate of dissolution and the OM,
clay particles, Mn/Fe oxides, and the elevated level of phosphates simultaneously
decreased the availability and toxicity of Cu and Zn. These properties kept the Cu and Zn
concentration in the soil at a sufficient level that even supplied the microorganism Cu and
Zn ions necessary for microbial growth and function, thus the enhancement of soil DHA.
Zinc and copper are essential to transition metals. They participate in a variety of vital
processes by interaction with proteins (Silva-Balilao, et al., 2017). Zn, according to Bong,
et al. (2010), is an essential element for growth and enzyme activities of heterotrophic
bacteria. Zinc is a cofactor required by numerous metalloenzymes and is necessary for

structural and regulatory systems in bacterial cells (Suryawati, 2018) while copper is an

52
«portant micronutrient required as a redox cofactor in the catalytic centers of enzymes

(Arguello, et al., 2013). Maybe, the nCuO-amended SSL contained enough concentration

of Cu ions in the soil solution which caused significant increase in the DHA at 1 DAA.

LCL
40.00
30.00
20.00
10.00
20
< 0.00
a 1DAA 7DAA 14 DAA 28 DAA
—control = —@=bCuo bZnO = =@=nCu0 —®=nZnO
a
SSL
% 16.00
g& 14.00
3 12.00
§ 10.00
be 8.00
oe
= 6.00
op
& 4.00
=] 2.00
a 0.00
1DAA 7DAA 14DAA 28 DAA
control ~=—@=bcuo bzZnN0  —=®nCuO— —®=nZnO
b

Figure 5. Plot of the effect of metal oxides on the soil DHA across time in (a) LCL and
(b) SSL.

53
At 7 DAA, significant interaction effect on DHA between soil types and amendments

is shown in Table 7. ZnO-amended LCL exhibited reduced soil DHA relative to the
control. This may be attributed to the toxic level of bioavailable Zn in the soil that
repressed the microbial population. This may also be due to the adsorption/desorption
process that occurs within the soil. It is possible that desorption of Zn?* was greater at 7
DAA in LCL resulting in increased level of free Zn in the soil solution. Kandpal, et al.
(2004) noted that Zn had a higher extent of desorption than Cu in acidic and neutral soil.
At 14 DAA, CuO-treated LCL and SSL exhibited significant decreased in DHA (Table
7). The result at 14 DAA might be due to the increased and toxic level (due to desorption)
and the inherent toxicity of Cu ions towards the soil microorganisms. Free copper is a
potential hazard because of its high chemical reactivity (Arguello, et al., 2013). At 28
DAA, nCuO-amended LCL was significantly decreased. Perhaps, this is due to an
increase in the dissolved organic matter-bound Cu (CuDOC) which increase the mobility
of Cu. Temminghoff, et al. (1997) showed that at pH 3.9 about 30% of the Cu in solution
was bound by DOC and a much improved CuDOC (more than 99%) was seen at pH 6.6.
Figure 5 illustrates the effect of the factors studied on DHA across sampling periods.
LCL exhibited an increase in DHA as incubation time approached 28 DAA. Similarly,
DHA of SSL increased only up to 14 DAA but it dropped at 28 DAA. Adsorption and
complexation by OM, clay particles, phosphates, and Mn/Fe oxides might have stabilized
the Zn and Cu ions in the soil thus reducing their availability, mobility, and toxicity.
Moreover, the rate of desorption of soil-applied heavy metals was initially fast but
declined gradually with time (Kandpal, et al., 2004). Chokor (2017) noted that for all
metals (including Cu and Zn), a general increase in metal adsorbed by soil as equilibrium
concentration and contact time increased. Desorption of metals from soil follows a similar

pattern of initial phase reaction followed by slow phase one observed for the adsorption

54
of metal onto the soil. Comparatively, Figures 5a and 5b show that microbial activity

was higher for soils treated with ZnO than with those contaminated with CuO.

In Figure 5b, a sudden drop in microbial activity can be seen at 28 DAA. Maybe,
this is due to the depletion of available nutrients, the exponential increase of microbial
population, and competition among microorganisms which eventually caused cell death

and reduction of DHA.

Effect of FertiGroe®N on soil DHA

Results show no significant interaction effect on soil DHA between soil type and
amendments and among amendments. However significant main effect on soil DHA was
observed at 1 and 35 DAA as influenced by the type of soil (Table 9). The empirical

probability values are summarized in Table 8.

Table 9: Effect of FertiGroe®N on the soil dehydrogenase activity.

Treatments DHA, yg TF g" dry soil 96 bh"!
Soil Type Amendment 1DAaAt 35 DAAt 75 DAA
control 16.13 16.78 6.09
FertiGroe®N 19.59 18.85 5.79
Lipa Clay Loam
urea 17.34 21.25 6.69
nanocarrier 21.44 25.97 4.68
control 2.61 9.43 5.00
Sariaya Sandy FertiGroe®N 7.83 7.91 4.46
Loam urea 2.63 4.94 4.43
nanocarrier 1.80 14.11 4.44

t significant interaction effect on soil DHA between soil types at a=5 %

55
Figure 6 shows the change in DHA across time. No significant interaction effect

between LCL and SSL can be observed. However, at 75 DAA, a drop in DHA was
observed for all treatments. This might be due to the depletion of the carbon source,
decreased soil nutrients, and increased competition among soil microorganisms resulting

to low microbial population.

LCL
7 35.00
‘So 30.00
&
5S 25.00 |
PA
>> 20.00
= 15.00
bo
& 10.00 j
2 5.00
< 0.00
A 5.00 1 DAA 35 DAA 75 DAA
control —@=FertiGroe®N urea =~@==nanocarrier
a
SSL

= 20.00
=
©
a
= 15.00
3
&
Fal
3 10.00
be
I
fF 5.00
oD
X
< 0.00
z 1 DAA 35 DAA 75 DAA

5,00

control —@=FertiGroe®N urea ==-®@==nanocarrier
b

Figure 6. The plot of the effect of amendments on the soil DHA in (a) LCL and (b) SSL.

56
Effect of HormoGroe® on the soil dehydrogenase activity

Significant main effect on DHA between soil types at 1, 35, and 75 DAA was
observed. Also, significant difference among amendments was shown at 1 DAA at 95 %
level of significance (Table 10). The empirical probability values are summarized in

Table 8.

Table 10. Effect of HormoGroe® on the soil dehydrogenase activity.

Treatments DHA, vg TF g" dry soil 96 bh

Soil Type Amendment 1 DAAt* 35 DAAt 75 DAAt
control 8.93 c 19.76 6.66
Lipa Clay stdIAA 13.34 14.71 4.94
Loam HormoGroe® 11.73 be 21.35 4.65
phospholipid 45.9la 20.72 5.85
control 2.61c 6.02 3.65
Sariaya Sandy —«StdTAA 8.21b 8.94 4.42
Loam HormoGroe® 2.64 be 6.86 3.10
phospholipid 32.65 a 6.85 5.26

t significant main effect on soil DHA between soil types at a=5 %

+ significant main effect on soil DHA among the amendments added at a=5 %

* means followed by the same letter(s) are not significantly different at a=5 % according to Least Square
Difference (LSD) test.

Comparison in soil DHA among amendments in LCL and SSL showed significant
increase in DHA in phospholipid-amended soil. Moreover, HormoGroe®-amended soils
did not show significant difference in DHA as compared with the controls. Parr and
Norman (1965) noted that surfactants are involved in complex growth phenomena, such

as differentiation, induction, or auxin-mediated events. Surfactants are being used to

57
reduce the surface tension of aqueous solutions to enhance the wetting of tissues for the

penetration of various test compounds. The addition of surfactant in the soil system might
have benefited the microorganism. According to Sunde, et al. (2017), biosurfactants that
can reduce the surface tension or bridge the hydrophobic:hydrophilic boundaries are
required to support growth from microorganisms to mammals. Example of this
biosurfactants are the naturally occurring surface-active and interfacially active
polypeptides which are used to achieve reduction of surface tension, stabilization of
emulsions, surface motility, or attachment to interfaces.

Bacterial motility is a key mechanism for survival in a patchy environment.
However, their motility in soils is hindered by inherent heterogeneity, pore space
complexity, and dynamics of microhydrological conditions. Bacterial colonies grew fast
under matric potentials greater than -0.5 kPa (wet) while rate of bacterial growth
decreased significantly at -2 kPa. Thus, bacteria experience reduced cell motilities with
decreasing matric potential on rough surfaces resulting in suppressed growth and colony
expansion (Wang and Or, 2005). It is possible that phospholipid used in this study have
increased the matric potential at a level that allowed the bacteria to grow faster, hence,
increased DHA.

Surfactants such as low molecular weight phospholipids (PLs) include phosphatidic
acids, phosphatidylcholines, phosphatidylethanolamines, and phosphatidylglycerols.
These phospholipids have fatty acid chains of 5 to 12 carbon atoms, a range over which
they are soluble at room temperature (Weschayanwiwat, et al., 2005). Phospholipid such
as phosphatidylcholine decreased the amount of phosphate adsorption in soil and
increased the phosphate concentration in the soil solution by 10% (Read, et al., 2003)
Also, according to Karagunduz, et al. (2015), the introduction of surfactant solution

caused an increase in the percolation of water; however, this period of rapid water

58

LCL
=
a
*
oS nia 1DAA 35 DAA 75 BAA
control —@= stdiAA HormoGroe® == phospholipid
a
SSL
7 45.00
=
\o 40.00
&
= 35.00
% 30.00
s 25.00
= 20.00
oD
t 15.00
& 10.00
oD
= 5.00
< 0.00 i
QB -5.00
a 1DAA 35 DAA 75 DAA
-10.00
=—@=control —@= stdiAA HormoGroe® =@==phospholipid
b

Figure 7. The plot of the effect of amendments on soil DHA across time for (a) LCL and
(b)SSL.

drainage was followed by decreased water percolation. Percolation, therefore, resulted in
faster nonreactive solute transport than in the absence of surfactant. The presence of
surfactant increases the availability of nutrient in the soil solution and the rate of solute

transport. These processes must have allowed the microorganisms in the soil access to the

59
nutrient supply that is important for their growth. Hence, phospholipid-treated soil had

significant level of DHA compared to other materials used.

Figure 7 shows the change in DHA across time and a difference in DHA can be
observed in both the LCL (Figure 7a) and SSL (Figure 7b) treated with phospholipid.
DHA was comparable with the other treatments at 35 and 75 DAA. It is possible that the
phospholipid introduced was utilized by the microorganisms. Soliman and Radwan
(1981) isolated and identified bacteria and fungi in soils treated with a mixture of
phospholipid, along with cholesterol, f-sitosterol, and triloen. Mesophilic Streptomyces
sp., two thermophilic Bacillus spp., and two thermophilic Mycobacterium spp., as well as
seven species of fungi belonging to the genera Penecillium, Aspergillus, and
Cladosporium were able to utilize lipids as sole sources of carbon in their nutrition.

As summarized in Table 6 at 14 DAA, Table 7 at 1 and 35 DAA, and Table 8 at 1,
35 and 75 DAA, significant main effect between soil types was observed. LCL exhibited
higher DHA than SSL which may be attributed to the physicochemical properties that
affect the microbial community. Particularly, LCL has a finer particle size than SSL. In
the study conducted by Sessitsch, et al. (2001), particle size significantly affected the
microbial community structure, yielding higher diversity of microbes in small size
fractions than in coarse ones. Thus, a decrease in microbial community structure, as
affected by soil texture, might cause a decrease in soil DHA (Wolinska and Stepniewska,
2012). They concluded that DHA is related to the quantitative changes in the
microorganism population and connected with living microbial cells.

Dehydrogenase, an intracellular enzyme, can truly reflect microbial activity
Mineralization of DHA by other enzymes with respect to the degradation processes of
extracellular soil enzymes was possible unless they are either adsorbed by clays or

immobilized by humic molecules. Another factor for the higher DHA of LCL than SSL is

60
the level of organic matter. DHA reaches higher values in soils with higher total organic

carbon content (Wolinska and Stepniewska, 2012).

Assessment of the effect of metal oxide nanoparticles (nZnO and nCuOQ),

FertiGroe®N, and HormoGroe® on urease activity

Soil enzyme activity has enormous potential as a biological indicator of soil health
by acting as an integrative indicator of change in the biology and biochemistry of soil as a
response from external management or environmental factors (Alkorta, et al., 2003).
Urease catalyzes the hydrolysis of urea into CO2 and NH3 and exists as an intracellular or
extracellular enzyme in soil (Maddela and Venkateswarlu, 2017). Urease activity (UA)
remains persistent for long periods even in conditions like low water, low temperature,
and sterile regimes. It has been suggested that some form of enzyme-protective

mechanism exists in the soil (Burns, et al., 1972).

Effect of metal oxides nanoparticles on soil urease activity

Statistical analysis revealed significant interaction effect between soil type and metal
oxides on urease at 7, 14, and 28 DAA. Significant main effect was also revealed between
soil types only at 1 DAA which is summarized in Table 11. The empirical probability
values are summarized in Table 14.

The response in the UA of LCL and SSL towards the addition of nano metal oxides
(nZnO and nCuO) and their bulk counterparts (bZnO and bCuO) was investigated. Soil
type is a key component in dictating the metal oxide nanoparticle effect on the microbial

community through the activities of soil enzymes including determining both the bacterial

61
community composition and size inhabiting the soil (You, et al., 2018). Moreover,

micronutrients like Cu and Zn have the potential to inhibit soil UA and reduce NH3

emissions over a long duration of 8-12 weeks (Adhikari, et al., 2018).

Table 11. Effect of metal oxide particles on the soil urease activity.

Treatments pve NHN g! 2h?
SoilType Amendment 1DAAt 7DAAt 14DAA? 28 DAA*

control 117.65 107.65b 73.65 112.50a
bCuO 138.74 113.79b :106.39ab-— 75.93
Lipa Clay bZnO 151.77 103.17b  :109.11a_—-48.94 be
Loam
nCuO 143.15 63.82.¢ 86.93 b 20.99
nZnO 139.54 146.612  99.39ab 136.36
control 26.87 20.19 9.1475 19.70
bCud 22.48 15.03 6.84 20.20
Sariaya bZnO 29.64 6.60 12.11 13.36
Sandy Loam
nCuO 23.59 7.05 3.40 14.63
nZnO 21.41 23.92 12.51 13.04

t significant main effect on soil urease activity between soil types at a=5 %

t significant interaction effect on soil urease activity between soil types and amendments at a=5 %

* means followed by the same letter(s) in a column are not significantly different at a=5 % according to
Least Square Difference (LSD) test.

"Snot significant

Soil urease is mainly microbial in origin (Dharmakeerthi and Thenabadu, 1996) and
UA might not be associated with the active microbial population (Frankenberger and
Dick, 1983). Urease is associated with the organo-mineral complex while high proportion
of UA is associated with the clay fraction thus urease is resistant to the activities of

proteolytic enzymes (Burns, ef al., 1972). Under steady state conditions, 79-89 % of the

62
urease activity of the soil examined by Paulson and Kurtz (1969) was due to urease

adsorbed on soil colloids. The decrease in the UA, at 7 DAA, of the soil might be due to
the replacement of existing urease in the soil colloids by Cu** and Zn?* ions thereby
exposing the urease from proteolytic attack. Inhibition of urease by the cations rendering
it nonfunctional might be another reason. Metal ion inhibition is non-competitive and it
was postulated by Shaw, et al (1961) the reaction of the metal ions, though in alkaline
solution, with sulfhydryl group (involved in maintaining correct structural relationships in
the enzyme proteins) removed it from the catalytically active sites. Additionally, Kim et
al. (2008) concluded that the main impact of Cu** on soil UA occurred via direct
inactivation of urease. Also, the interaction of bioavailable Cu, in organic C-rich pasture
soil, with labile soil organic C and clay particles led to the inactivation of urease
(Adhikari, et al., 2018).

In contrast, the increase in the urease activity in the soil could be due to the toxic
level of Zn?* from nZnO. The microorganisms were probably exposed to toxic level of
cations, thus, killing them. The ruptured cells of microorganisms released the urease into
the soil solution which increased the level of free urease as well as UA. One factor to be
considered in the apparent increase in UA is the release of some intracellular urease
caused by the rupture of urease-active microbial cells (Burns, et al., 1972).

At 14 DAA, significant increase in the UA was observed in bCuO-, bZnO-, and
nZnO-amended LCL compared to the control. It is possible that the concentrations of Cu
and Zn ions in the soil solution were at toxic level due to desorption from the colloidal
particle or the degradation of the Zn- and Cu-organic matter complex, thereby, causing
the rupture of microbial cell and the release of intracellular urease (Burns, et al., 1972).
However, bioavailable Zn (specifically from ZnO) was not able to inhibit UA, rather, it

enhanced its activity despite being at a level toxic to microorganisms. Du, et al. (2011)

63
noted that the dissolved ZnO NP (40+10 nm) in soil did not inhibit the UA and the

bioavailable Zn had a limited effect on soil UA (Adhikari, et al., 2018). However, Zn
remained toxic to soil DHA since, according to Adhikari, et al. (2018), majority of the
added Zn did not complex with the soil colloids, thus remained bioavailable.
Lastly, significant decrease in the UA was observed in bZnO- and nCuO-amended
LCL while significant increase in UA was observed in nZnO-amended LCL relative to
the control at 28 DAA (Table 11). With longer incubation period, the organic material in
the soil might have decreased caused by the utilization of heterotrophic microorganisms
thus releasing the organic matter-bound urease in the soil solution as free urease. The free
urease then became susceptible to proteolytic attack while some were inhibited by the
Cu?* ions. Wyszkowska, et al. (2009) revealed that copper pollution within the rates of
150 to 450 mg/kg dry mass of soil significantly inhibits the activity of urease, including
dehydrogenase and catalase. However, the increase in UA of LCL amended with nZnO
might be due to the release of intracellular urease from dead cells due to toxic level of
Zn**. Cu can non-competitively inhibit the activity of urease in the soil making it more
toxic than Zn towards urease. This agrees with the study conducted by Krajewska (1991).
The researcher showed the relative toxicity sequence of metal ions on free urease:
Hg”*>Ag*>Cu**>Ni?*> Cd?*> Zn?*>Co**>Fe**>Pb**>Mn** which relates well with metal
sulfide solubility product constants (except for Fe**). Similarly, Shaw, et al. (1961)
arranged the various metal ions in decreasing toxicity that inhibited urease: Cu*, Zn”*,
Ni?*, Co?*, Fe?*, Mn?*.
In Figure 8, the UA of SSL is lower than that of LCL. Figure 8a shows that the UA
of unamended and nZnO-amended LCL decreased at 14 DAA compared to 1 DAA. It
also reveals that the UA of LCL amended with nCuO and bCuO decreased at 7, 14, and

28 DAA compared to the control at 1 DAA. However, LCL amended with bZnO

64
exhibited lower UA at 28 DAA than at 1 DAA. Results indicate that the UA of LCL

treated with nZnO was able to recover at 28 DAA.

Figure 8b reveals that the UA of unamended SSL decreased at 14 DAA while
nCuO-amended SSL was decreased at 7 and 14 DAA. Similarly, UA of nZnO-amended
SSL decreased at 14 and 28 DAA while both the bZnO- and bCuO-amended SSL had a

decrease in UA compared to those at 1 DAA. The result showed that nCuO-amended

LCL was able to recover its UA at 28 DAA.

LCL
200.00
ne fF
= 150.00
a
z 100.00
z 50.00
op
x
0.00
1DAA 7DAA 14DAA 28 DAA
control —@=bCu0 bZnO =~@=nCuO  =—®==nZno
A
SSL
40.00
35,00 T
= 30.00
2 25.00
bo
2
yy 20.00
15.00
=
5 10.00
eo 5,00
Ey
0.00
5,00 1DAA 7DAA 14DAA 28 DAA
control —@=bCuo bZnO ===nCu0 —®=nZno
b

Figure 8. The plot of the effect of metal oxides on UA in (a) LCL and (b) SSL.

65
Effect of FertiGroe®N on soil UA

Result revealed a significant interaction effect on UA between soil type and
amendments at 1, 35, and 75 DAA (Table 12) at 95 % level of significance. The

empirical probability values are summarized in Table 14.

Table 12. Effect of FertiGroe®N on the soil urease activity.

Treatment vg NHN g 2b"

Soil Type Amendment 1 DAA” 35 DAAY 75 DAAT
control 82.56 b 58.05 b 107.06 a

FertiGroe®N 106.81 a 48.45 b 106.85 a

Lipa Clay Loam

urea 90.73 ab 55.97b 102.78 b

nanocarrier 105.84 a 123.50a 32.50 a

control 135.98 b 67.65 ¢ 131.69 a
Sariaya Sandy FertiGroe®N 88.83 c 97.76 b 105.51 ab
Loam urea 64.68 d 33.32d 51.95¢
nanocarrier 174.72 a 204.36 a 85.10b

t significant interaction effect on soil UA between soil types and amendments at a=5 %
* means followed by the same letter(s) in a column are not significantly different at a=5 % according to
Least Square Difference (LSD) test.

At 1 DAA (Table 12), significant increase in the UA was observed in LCL
amended with Fertigroe®N and nanocarrier compared to control. In contrast, a significant
decrease in SSL amended with Fertigroe®N and urea was observed at 1 DAA. It is
possible that the introduction of porous Fertigroe®N and nanocarrier had increased the
CEC of LCL, resulting in increased urease activity. Kilzikaya, et al (2004) reported that
UA was strongly correlated with the clay content and CEC, but not significantly

correlated with organic C content. However, for SSL at 1 DAA, a decrease in UA could

66
be due to the increase in the microbial population considering that nitrogen was

introduced to both the LCL amended with Fertigroe®N and urea. Also, SSL contained
high phosphate concentration (Table 2) which, along with nitrogen, stimulated the
growth of microbial population. However, an increase in the microbial community led to
the decrease in the UA of the soil. Under steady state conditions, 79-89 % of the urease
activity of the soil examined by Paulson and Kurtz (1969) was due to urease adsorbed on
soil colloids and an increase in microbial population reduced this percentage temporarily
until a new steady state was reached.

At 35 DAA (Tables 12), nanocarrier-amended SSL and LCL were significantly
increased compared to other treatments (Figure 9). It is possible that the nanocarrier
protected the enzyme from degradation by proteases while maintaining the enzyme’s
function. Wu, et al. (2013) noted that surface micropores significantly influenced the
protein-nanoporous material interaction (such as the case of nanozeolite). They also
showed that Cyto-c and Candida antarctica Lipase B (CALB) showed strong affinity to
the porous nZeolite than to nonporous one and larger extent of protein unfolding induced
by porous nZeolite was positive for the enzyme activity of Cyto-c while negative for that
of CALB.

The UA of nanocarier-amended SSL and LCL, however, had significantly decreased
at 75 DAA (Figure 9) relative to the control. This could be due to the competition of
cations at the exchange sites of nanocarrier. The urease adsorbed was released from the
exchange sites of the nanomaterial causing it to be exposed in the soil solution making it
vulnerable from protease attack. The nanocarrier used in this study could be an effective
ion exchanger and because of its large porosity it also possesses high cation-exchange

capacity (Ramesh and Reddy, 2011). Similar to zeolites, the nanocarrier used might have

67
properties such as surface micropores and numerous cation exchange sites, thus, making

it an effective ion exchanger.

LCL
60.00
140.00
= 120.00
™ 100.00 Ps
o 80.00
% 60.00
40.00
Z 20.00
2 0.00
1 DAT 35 DAT 75 DAT
—O=control —@=Fertigroe®-N urea —~®==nanocarrier
a
SSL
300.00
= 250.00
=
“200.00
$8 150.00
Zz
4. 100.00
=| °
Z 50.00 7
oD =
#0100
1 DAT 35 DAT 75 DAT
control —@=Fertigroe®-N urea =~@==nanocarrier
b

Figure 9. The plot on the effect of amendments on the soil UA across time in (a) LCL
and (b) SSL.

68
Effect of HormoGroe® on soil UA

Result showed significant interaction effect on UA between the soil type and

amendments at 1, 35, and 75 DAA as indicated in Table 13 at 95 % level of significance.

The empirical probability values are summarized in Table 14.

Table 13: Effect of HormoGroe® on the soil UA.

Treatment pve NHa-N g! 2b!

Soil Type Amendment 1DAA™ 35 DAAT 75 DAA
control 135.72 a 139.87 a 172.69 a

stdlAA 96.19 b 89.20 b 95.39.

Lipa Clay Loam

HormoGroe® 149.68 a 154.75 a 120.31 b

phospholipid 88.92 b 91.26 b 131.21 b

control 27.80 ab 9.05 ¢ 11.78 b

Sariaya Sandy stdIAA 31.10a 19.18b 17.22b
Loam HormoGroe® 14.86 b 16.58 b 12.58b
phospholipid 39.86 a 25.76a 30.91 a

t significant interaction effect between soil types and amendments on the soil UA at a=5 %
* means followed by the same letter(s) in a column are not significantly different at a=5 % according to
Least Square Difference (LSD) test.

Comparison of the means showed significant differences in UA among treatments
for LCL and SSL (Table 13). Significant decrease in the UA of LCL amended with
stdIAA and phospholipid at 1, 35, and 75 DAA was observed. Also, the UA of
HormoGroe®-amended LCL was significantly higher than phospholipid treatment. It is
possible that phospholipid in LCL had stimulated the growth of microbial population up

to 35 DAA. Phospholipid might have increased the matric potential at a level that allowed

69
the bacteria to grow faster, hence, increased microbial population. However, an increase

in the microbial population might lead to the decrease in the UA of the soil. Under steady
state conditions, 79-89 % of the urease activity of the soil examined by Paulson and Kurtz
(1969) was due to urease adsorbed on soil colloids and an increase in microbial
population reduced this percentage temporarily until a new steady state was reached. In
contrast to LCL, phospholipid-amended SSL soil showed higher UA than SSL amended
with HormoGroe®. HormoGroe®-amended LCL was able to reduce the UA in the soil at 1
DAA while it increased the UA at 35 DAA.

Significant main effect on soil urease activity between soil types was observed at |
DAA (Table 11). The obvious difference in UA between the two soil types might
probably due to the differences in the level of soil colloids which include the organic
matter and clay fractions, with LCL having OM and percent clay, respectively, are 122 %
and 5.12 times higher than that of SSL. The result of Burns, et al. (1972) suggested that
urease exists in the soil as an enzyme-organic matter complex and with this kind of
association protects the enzyme against the activities of proteolytic enzymes and yet
allows the diffusion of substrate molecules to, and product molecules from, active
enzyme sites. Using multiple regression analysis, Chakrabarti, et al. (2004) revealed that
the stabilization of UA in the soils studied was caused by the complexation of organic
matter and enzyme and the variation of soil parameters in different soils influenced UA. It
was also concluded by Wyszkowska, et al. (2005) on their study regarding
dehydrogenase and urease that enzymatic activity was dependent on the type of soil.

Under steady state conditions, 79-89 % of the urease activity of the soil examined by
Paul and Kurtz (1969) was due to urease adsorbed on soil colloids. Also, according to
Dharmakeerthi and Thenabadu (1996), the remarkable long-term stability of urease is due

to organo-mineral complexes in the soil. Humic acid and fulvic acid, at pH below 10.4,

70
are negatively charged while urease is net positive below pH 5.2 or net negative at pH

5.2. Humic substances form strong complexes with oppositely charged proteins leading to
changes in enzyme activities (Li, et al., 2013). Considering that the pH of LCL (5.4) was
lower than SSL (5.8) shown in Table 2, the stability of free urease in SSL might have
decreased and at the same time the urease-high molecular weight humic acid increased
(Marzadori, et al., 2000) for LCL and that the UA of LCL was due to the urease-organic
matter complex leading to a more stable urease. It is possible that the degradation of free
urease is one of the reasons for the changes in UA in SSL since free urease are

susceptible to the action of proteases (Marzadori, et al., 2000).

Assessment of the effect of metal oxide nanoparticles (nZnO and nCuO),

FertiGroe®N, and HormoGroe® on soil microbial biomass

The most important environmental resource for human beings is the soil which is
of great importance to the quality of ecological environment and human health (Chu,
2018). The fertility of the soil relies on the maintenance of microbial processes and
activities for the nutrient cycle completion (Nawaz, et al., 2015). Microorganisms are
considered the most sensitive indicator of environmental stresses than macroorganisms in
soil ecosystems. They can reflect changes in the soil environment as early as possible
(Chu, 2018). Furthermore, soil microbial biomass plays an important role in soil structure
maintenance, microbial metabolic processes facilitation, and nutrient release regulation
(Zhang, et al., 2016). Dalal (1998) listed three critical functions of soil microbial biomass
in the soil and the environment: as a labile source of C, B, P, and S; an immediate sink of

C,N, P, and S; and as an agent of nutrient transformation and pesticide degradation.

“JSS 10] si UO puosas oy} a[1YM TOT JOJ SI UUINJOS ysuLJ OY) ‘Polsod Surjdures yoee JO.4,
Byep Mes DY} UO Paseq pajyesauad J payndusos ay) Jo yows Joy sone q [eoiduigg
“kppanoadsas ‘OQ pur ‘Ni ‘Al xipuaddy ut payejnge) ose g201OULIOH] pure ‘Ng20ID U0, ‘sojotured apixo jeyous Aq poyoayye se Wf) [10S JO VAONVe

2(%) dIUBLIeA

66 96 LOL GOL HIT €6 90% GLZ OBI 9SZ OOL O61 It THE Srl LOL E81 THe ECE SEE Jo yua1913205)

JUIUIpUEMTYy

0000°0 1000°0 0000°0 87200°0 $000'0 0000'0 0100°0 7800°0 6100°0 60£9'0 x ad4] log

0000°0 $100'0 81000 ¥000°0 000°0 0000°0 8000°0 $v00'0 0000°0 s6v9'0 jusUIpusUTYy

0000°0 0000°0 0000°0 09L5°0 pyieo0 v9L0'0 9000°0 0000°0 1000°0 £000°0 adK], [og

(VV) ported
SL se T SL se I 8Z as L I uydues
@201)20UL10H Ng? ADH497 Sa]IV1bq 2PIXO [B)2]\] uoneue,
JO a041n0g

aSneA AIqeqorg jeodury

e g201Q20ULOH]
pur ‘Ng201NIW8J ‘afoied apixo jejowl Aq poyoajse se yr) JO sanjea Ayi]iqeqoud eolsduia oy} pue souelseA Jo sisKjeue oy3 Jo AreuluINg “py a1qeL,
IL

72
Effect of metal oxides on soil microbial biomass

Results revealed significant interaction effect on the microbial biomass between soil
types and amendments at 1, 14, and 28 DAA (Table 15). Significant differences between
soil type and amendments at 7 DAA was also observed. Significant decrease in MCB was
seen in LCL amended with nCuO and SSL amended with nZnO at 7 DAA. The empirical
probability values are summarized in Table 18.

The decrease in MCB was possibly due to the exposure of microbial population to
the toxic level of Cu and Zn ions in the soil solution leading to microbial growth
inhibition. However, due to adsorption of heavy metal cations on the soil colloids the
concentration of the Cu and Zn ions in the soil solution was reduced to a level that was
stimulating for microbial growth. At high concentrations, both the Cu and Zn ions
become toxic to microorganisms (Silva-Balilao, et al., 2017). Zinc is required only in the
very small amount by bacterial cells (Suryawati, 2018) and an excess load of Zn shows
toxicity and inhibition to microbial processes (Bong, et al., 2010; McDevitt, et al., 2011).
Zn becomes toxic in excess because it is a highly competitive divalent metal and will
displace the weaker bound transition metals in the metalloenzyme active sites if remained
unregulated (Capdevila, et al., 2016). A study on the manganese uptake of Streptococcus
pneumoniae revealed that Zn could inhibit Mn uptake by binding to the Mn transport
protein resulting in slowed bacterial growth (McDevitt, et al., 2016). Also, at enough
concentration, Zn repressed the dehydrogenase activity of the exposed cell of
Pseudomonas, Escherichia, Proteus, Bacillus, and Arthrobacter (Nweke, 2009).
Likewise, free Cu poses a hazard because of its high chemical reactivity (Arguello, et al.,
2013). In aerobic condition, copper can catalyze a Fenton-like reaction that may generate

reactive oxygen species (ROS) which eventually causes lipid peroxidation and protein

73
damage (Dupont, et al., 2013). Neal, et al. (2012) suggests two general mechanisms on

how synthetic metal oxide NPs exert toxicity. It is through the release of free ions at
levels which exert toxic effects upon the target cells or specific surface-mediated
physicochemical process leading to the disruption of cell membranes and organelles

following the formation of hydroxyl free radicals and other ROS.

Table 15. Effect of metal oxide particles on the soil microbial biomass.

Treatment ug C 10g" soil
Soil Type Amendment 1 DAAt 7DAA? 14 DAAtT 28 DAAtT

control 109.41 35.44¢ 44.44 39.97

bCuO 83.87 98.93 a 28.18 62.10

a Clay bZnO 88.99 60.05 b 55.73 31.84

oam

nCuO 90.96 10344 58.66 10.16

nZnO 98.34 31.01¢ 64.31 19.65

control 15848 916.62a_—s«796.86 972.19

bCuo 108.98  -909.73a_— «534.75 501.71

Sariaya bZn0 126.28 1080.20a 563.20 597.92
Sandy Loam

nCuO 140.06 —-851.01ab «691.16 664.58

nZnO 138.86 551.42 __ 685.80 423.50

t significant main effect on soil microbial biomass between soil types at a=5 %

+ significant interaction effect between soil types and amendments on the soil UA at a=5 %

* means followed by the same letter(s) in a column are not significantly different at a=5 % according to
Least Square Difference (LSD) test.

74
Effect of FertiGroe®N on soil microbial biomass

Results revealed a significant main effect on MCB between soil types at 1 and 75
DAA (Table 16) at 95 % level of significance. Significant main effect among
amendments was observed at 1 DAA and significant interaction effect between soil types
and amendments at 35 DAA. The empirical probability values are summarized in Table
18. At 35 DAA, the soil amended with FertiGroe®N showed no significant difference in
MCB relative to the control. However, a significant decrease in MCB was observed in
urea-amended soil relative to the control while significant decrease in MCB in SSL
amended with urea compared to control and SSL amended with FertiGroe®N were

observed.

Table 16. Effect of FertiGroe®N on the soil microbial biomass.

Treatment ug C10 g" soil

Soil Type Amendment 1 DAAt 35 DAA? 75 DAAt
control 176.69 b 119.47 b 37.17
Lipa Clay Loam FertiGroe®N 264.30 ab 65.28 be 35.84
urea 249.04 b 45.40 ¢ 26.55
nanocarrier 358.80 a 212.27 a 50.45
control 415.91 b 1681.24a 416.61
Sariaya Sandy FertiGroe®N 526.98 ab 1459.13 a 144.10
an urea 436.05 b 919.93 b 229.08
nanocarrier 612.96 a 822.75 b 297.02

t significant main effect on soil MCB between soil types at a=5 %

* significant main effect among amendments on the soil MCB at a=5 %

* significant interaction effect on soil MCB between soil types and amendments at a=5 %

* means followed by the same letter(s) in a column are not significantly different at a=5 % according to
Least Square Difference (LSD) test.

75
The decrease in MCB in urea-treated soil might be due to the limited amount of

nitrogen as it approached 35 DAA due to ammonia volatilization. The fate of urea in soil
depends mainly on urease activity. The effectiveness of urea as a N fertilizer has been
reduced because of high urease activity in most arable lands (Dharmakeerthi and
Thenabadu, 1996). Soil urease can catalyze the hydrolysis of urea into carbon dioxide and
ammonia which affects the fate and performance of an important fertilizer, urea (Fu, et
al., 2009). However, FertiGroe®N might have slowly released NHa* in the soil which
provided the microbial population constant supply of nitrogen needed for their growth at

35 DAA.

Effect of HormoGroe® on soil MCB

Results revealed significant interaction effect on MCB between soil types and
amendments at 1, 35, and 75 DAA at 95 % level of significance (Table 17). The
empirical probability values are summarized in Table 18. It was observed that, in both
the LCL and SSL, the phospholipid-amended soils had significant increase in soil MCB.
This could be due to the effect of phospholipid as surfactant. According to Karagunduz,
et al. (2015), the introduction of surfactant solution caused an increase in the percolation
of water; however, this period of rapid water drainage was followed by decreased water
percolation. Percolation, therefore, resulted in faster nonreactive solute transport than was
observed in the absence of surfactant. With the increased in the availability of nutrient in
the soil solution and faster solute transport due to the presence of surfactant, maybe these
processes allowed the microorganisms in the soil access to the nutrient supply that is
important for their growth. Also, greater percolation and, thus, distribution of solute

mineral and soluble organic materials in SSL amended with nanocarrier than in LCL

16
might have occurred that allowed the microorganisms access to these growth factors,

hence, favoring microbial growth at 35 DAA and 75 DAA in SSL.

Table 17. Effect of HormoGroe® on the soil microbial biomass.

Treatment Hg C10 g" soil
Soil Type Amendment 1DAA™ 35 DAAT 75 DAAT
control 199.33 ¢ 123.08 50.45 "*
Lipa Clay stdIAA 290.88 be 49.92 14.60
Loam HormoGroe® 379.47 b TAS 84.30
phospholipid 576.35 a 64.60 79.65
control 1076.28 a 928.59 b 673.51 b
Sariaya Sandy stdIAA 997.18 a 920.07 b 344.09 c
Loam HormoGroe® 552.44 b 1173.79 b 627.99 b
phospholipid 412.54¢ 2258.79 a 1319.00 a

t significant interaction effect between soil types and amendments on the soil MCB at a=5 %

“ means followed by the same letter(s) in a column are not significantly different at a=5 % according to
Least Square Difference (LSD) test.

‘not significant

Significant main effect on MCB between soil types were observed as shown in
Table 15 (1, 14, 28 DAA) and Table 16 (1 and 75 DAA). Verberne, et al. (1990)
emphasized that the pore size distribution could give an indication of the accessibility of
substrates to decomposition by microorganisms with finer, clayey soils show, on average,
slower decomposition rates and higher retention of OM than coarse, sandy soils (Van
Veen and Kuikman, 1990). Moreover, fine-textured clay soils have a larger proportion of
small pores (Verberne, et al., 1990).
The reason for the significant differences in the MCB between LCL and SSL was the

differences in the amount of macropores. It is possible that substrate added during the

77
experiment was able to reach the micropores of the LCL which protected it from the

utilization of microorganisms present in the macropores while in SSL, majority of the
glucose added remained in the macropores and readily utilized by the microbes. Van
Veen and Kuikman (1990) described the role of soil architecture on biological
transformations of OM especially in the limited accessibility of OM in soil for utilization
as substrate by microorganisms. The mixing of substrates and microbes as found in the
laboratory systems is very much restricted in soil due to the limited water flow and
microbial movement. Therefore, the substrates even at distances of micrometers or less
might not be readily available for microorganisms. Furthermore, aside from the
entrapment in pores, entrapment in aggregates rendered the substrate inaccessible by

microorganisms.

ISS 40} SI U0 puodas a4) a]IYM JDJ JO SI UUMJOD Is OY} ‘ported Sutjdures yora 104,
Byep Mel ay) UO paseq payesousd J poynduios ay} Jo yowa Joy sonjed q [eodwgy
“Ajaarjoadsau “y pue ‘© ‘d xipuaddy ul parejnge} ae g201QOULOH pur ‘Ng201DIWE4 ‘sajotued apixo ejout Aq paroayye se GOW [10S JO VAONVe

(¢%) aome ue A

OLI SOE E8% NET FE Bh T8S POS BH BHT HLZ BIE NZ 909 TE ERE SLZ SL TI® £62 Jo 39193205

yuswipusuly

0000°0 7000°0 0000°0 L2Z1'0 0100°0 0726'0 6SE70 LS19°0 0100 $8060 x df] [log

0000°0 7000°0 1000°0 9001°0 7000 vvv0'0 00€7°0 9ves0 49100 blvl'o JusUIpusUTYy

£000°0 0000°0 0000°0 87200°0 1000°0 8800°0 Z100°0 €000°0 1000°0 £0€0°0 ad], Hos

(VVq) ported
SL se 1 SL s¢ I 87 +1 L I Suydueg
2049 20U110}] Ng®1Dieg sapHAed OPIXO 183211] aonere,
JO 391N0g

gsenyea Aiqeqosg jesaidurg

e g2OJQ20ULIOY] pure ‘Ng201D1H94
‘gjolued aprxo jejour Kq pajoayye se SseWiolg JeIqoJOIW [IOs Jo sonjea Ayyiqeqoud jeotdurs ayy pue souelseA JO sisAyeue oy) Jo ArewUINS ‘gT a1qeUL
8L

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Although nanomaterials have many beneficial applications there is a need to assess their
effects on the environment. The nanofertilizer, FertiGroe®N, and the nanoplanthormone,
HormoGroe®, were developed at the University of the Philippines Los Bafios (UPLB). Further
research to understand any possible negative effects of these nano-based products on soil health
needs to be done prior to their extensive use in crop production and commercialization.
Microorganisms are considered the most sensitive indicators of environmental stresses. Thus, the
potential adverse effect of the nanomaterials on the environment was assessed based on their
impact on soil microorganisms and their enzymatic activities.

A study was conducted to determine the effects of metal oxide nanoparticles (nZnO and
nCuO), nanofertilizer (FertiGroe®N), and nanoplanthormone (HormoGroe®) on the culturable
soil bacterial population, microbial biomass, and dehydrogenase (DHA) and urease (UA)
activities in Lipa clay loam (LCL) and Sariaya sandy loam (SSL).

The incubation experiment was in split-plot in CRD and samplings were done 28 days
after ammendment (DAA) for metal oxide nanoparticles, and 1, 35, and 75 DAA for
FertiGroe®N and HormoGroe®. Three separate experiments were set up. One experiment
compared the effect of the metal oxide nanoparticles (nZnO and nCuO) with their bulk
counterparts (bCuO and bZnO). The amendments in another experiment included the
nanofertilizer, FertiGroe®N, commercial fertilizer (urea), and nanocarrier. FertiGroe®N and urea
were applied at 150 kg N/ha. Another experiment included the nanoplanthormone, HormoGroe®,
standard indole acetic acid (stdIAA), and nanocarrier (phospholipid). Unamended soils as control

were included in all the experiments.

80
Analysis of physicochemical properties of the two soil types showed that LCL had higher

OM, CEC, total N, exchangeable K, available Zn and Cu, clay particles, and field capacity
compared to SSL. SSL, on the other hand, had higher available P and pHwater than LCL. These
properties influenced the interaction of soil types and the nanomaterials added in the soil. The
interaction of soil type and nanomaterials significantly affected DHA, UA, and MCB.

Beneficial microbial populations influence soil ecosystem processes especially by
nutrient cycling, decomposing soil organic matter (SOM), disease suppression, and growth
enhancement, etc. Hence, any factor that causes significant effects on soil microbial population is
critical in maintaining soil health and sustainability. Assessment of culturable soil bacterial
population, as affected by nanomaterials, allows the estimation of cultivable soil bacterial
population. The metal oxide nanoparticles, FertiGroe®N and HormoGroe® had no significant
effect on the culturable soil bacterial population at all sampling periods.

Soil DHA is the most sensitive bioindicator relating to soil quality and directly reflects
the soil microbial activity. The physicochemical properties of the soils used influenced the effect
of nCuO and nZnO particles on soil DHA. The DHA in LCL was significantly decreased over
the 28-day incubation period by nCuO. At 14 DAA, nCuO and bCuO adversely affected the soil
DHA regardless of soil type. The nZnO had no adverse effect on DHA in SSL but significantly
reduced the DHA of LCL at 7 DAA. The DHA was reduced significantly by bZnO at 1 and 14
DAA. FertiGroe®N had no adverse effect on soil DHA in both the LCL and SSL. Regardless of
soil type, DHA was significantly increased by stdIAA at 1 DAA whereas HormoGroe® had no
adverse effect on soil DHA up to 75 DAA.

Urease, found in different microorganisms and associated with enzyme-organic matter

complex, catalyzes the transformation of urea to CO2 and NHs, thus dictates the fate and

81
effectiveness of urea. Assessment of the effect of soil UA as affected by nanomaterials gives

information on the alteration of urease in the soil colloids. Metal oxide particles had no adverse
effect on UA of SSL while nCuO significantly reduced UA in LCL at 7 and 28 DAA. The UA in
LCL was increased significantly by FertiGroe®N only up to 35 DAA but affected adversely the
UA in SSL at 1 DAA. The UA in SSL was significantly reduced by urea up to 75 DAA in LCL.
Soil UA was enhanced significantly by HormoGroe® at 35 DAA in SSL but decreased
significantly at 75 DAA in LCL. The soil UA was significantly decreased by stdIAA in LCL up
to 75 DAA. Soil UA was reduced significantly by phospholipid at 35 and 75 DAA in LCL but
did not adversely affect UA in SSL.

Assessment of the effect of nanomaterials on soil MCB gives an estimation of their
physiological effect on microorganisms. Soil MCB plays important roles in soil structure and
biogeochemical cycles. At 7 DAA, the soil MCB in LCL was adversely affected by nCuO and in
SSL by nZnO. Fertigroe®N had no adverse effect on soil MCB in both soil types. Urea had
adversely affected the MCB at 35 DAA. The interaction of HormoGroe® and LCL increased
significantly the MCB at 1 DAA. The interaction of HormoGroe® and SSL decreased
significantly the MCB at 1 and 75 DAA in SSL. Regardless of treatment, LCL had significantly
higher DHA and UA, due to differences in the physicochemical properties, but lower MCB than
SSL caused by the variation in pore size.

The nanomaterials and the non-nanomaterials had similar effects on the parameters
measured which were influenced by the soil type. FertiGroe®N seems to be less detrimental to
the microbial biomass than urea. The nanoparticle nZnO appears to be less harmful to the soil

microbial community than nCuO. Results show that FertiGroe®N and HormoGroe® can be safely

82
used in crop production. FertiGroe®N can be an alternative nitrogen fertilizer while HormoGroe®

can be a good alternative source of plant hormone.

LITERATURE CITED

ACHUBA, F.I., and B.O. PERETIEMO-CLARKE. 2008. Effect of spent engine oil on
soil catalase and dehydrogenase activities. Int. Agrophysics 22:1-4.

ADAMS L.K., D.Y. LYON, and P.J.J. ALVAREZ. 2006. Comparative eco-toxicity of
nanoscale TiOz, SiOz, and ZnO wate suspensions. Water Research 40: 3527
3523. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2006.08.004

ADHIKARI, K.P., S. SAGGAR, J.A. HANLY, D.F. GUINTO, and M.D. TAYLOR M.D.
2018. Why copper and zinc are ineffective in reducing soil urease activity in
New Zealand dairy-grazed pasture soils. Soil Research, 56(5): 491-502.

AGBENIN, J. O., and ATIN, A. M. 2003. Copper sorption characteristics and activity in a
savanna acid soil from Nigeria. Water, air, and soil pollution, 150(1-4), 43-58.

ALKORTA, I, A. AIZPURUA, P. RIGA, I. ALBIZU, I. AMEZAGA, AND C.
GARBISU. 2003. Soil enzyme activities as biological indicators of soil
health. Reviews on environmental health, 18(1): 65-73.

ANDERSON A., J.E. MCLEAN, A.R. JACOBSON, and D. BRITT. 2017. CuO and ZnO
nanoparticles modify interkingdom cell signalling processes relevant to crop
production: a review. J. Agric. Food Chem. 1:48.

ANJUM N.A., V. ADAM, R. KIZEL, A.C. DUARTE, E. PEREIRA, M. IQBAL, A.
LUKATKIN, and I. AHMAD. 2015. Nanoscale copper in the soil-plant
system-toxicity and underlying potential mechanisms. Environmental
Research 138:306-325. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2015.02.019

AOYAMA, M. AND T. NAGUMO. 1996. Factors affecting microbial biomass and
dehydrogenasc activity in apple orchard soils with heavy metal accumulation. Soil
Science and Plant Nutrition, 42(4): 821-831.

84

ARGUELLO, J.M., D. RAIMUNDA, and T. PADILLA-BENAVIDES. 2013.

Mechanisms of copper homeostasis in bacteria. Frontiers in cellular and infection
microbiology 3: 73.

ARUGUETE D.M., and M.F.J.R. HOCHELLA. 2010. Bacteria-nanoparticle interactions
and their environmental applications. Environ. Chem. 7: 3-9. doi:
10.1071/EN09115

BANDYOPADHYAY S., J.R. PERALTA-VIDEA, G. PLASCENCIA-VILLA,
M.JOSE-YACAMAN, and J.L. GARDEA-TORRESDAY. 2012. Comparative
toxicity assessment of CeO and ZnO nanoparticles towards Sinorhizobium meliloti,
a symbiotic alfalfa associated bacterium: used of advanced microscopic techniques.
Journal of Hazardous Materials 241-241: 379-386.
doi:10.1016/j.jhazmat.2012.09.056

BASTA, N.T., J.A. RYAN, and R.L. CHANEY. 2005. Trace element chemistry in
residual-treated soil. Journal of environmental quality 34(1): 49-63.

BATLEY G.E., J.K. KIRBY, and M.J. MCLAUGHLIN. 2011. Fate and risks of
nanomaterials in aquatic and terrestrial environments. Accounts of Chemical
Research. doi:10.1021/ar2003368

BLACK, C.A., (Ed). 1965. Methods of Soil Analysis. Part II. American Society of
Agronomy Monograph no.9. Madison, Wisconsin, USA.: 922-923.

BRADY N.C., and R.R. WEIL. 1996. The nature and properties of soils. Prentice Hall
Inc., New Jersey.

BRAY, R.H., and KURTZ, L.T. 1945. Determination of Total Organic and Available
Form of P in Soils. Soil Sci. 59(39)

BOLAN, N.S., D.C. ADRIANO, and R. NAIDU. 2003. Role of phosphorus in
immobilization and bioavailability of heavy metals in the soil-plant system.
In Reviews of environmental contamination and toxicology: 1-44. Springer, New
York, NY.

BONG, C.W., F. MALFATTI, F. AZAM, Y. OBAYASHI, and S. SUZUKI. 2010. The
effect of zinc exposure on the bacteria abundance and proteolytic activity in

85

seawater. Interdisciplinary studies on environmental chemistry—biological
responses to contaminants. Terrapub, Tokyo: 57-63.

BOSATTA, E. and G.I. AGREN. 1994. Theoretical analysis of microbial biomass
dynamics in soils. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 26(1):143-148.

BRADY N.C., and R.R. WEIL. 1996. The nature and properties of soils. Prentice Hall
Inc., New Jersey.

BURNS, R.G., M.H. EL-SAYED, AND A.D. MCLAREN. 1972. Extraction of a urease-
active organo-complex from soil.

CAMINA F., C. TRASAR-CEPADA, F. GIL-SOTRES, and C. LEIROS. 1998.
Measurement of dehydrogenase activity in acid soils rich in organic matter. Soil
Biol. Biochem 30(8/9): 1005-1011.

CAPDEVILA, D.A., J. WANG, and D.P. GIEDROC. 2016. Bacterial strategies to
maintain zinc metallostasis at the host-pathogen interface. Journal of Biological
Chemistry, jbc-R116.

CASAGRANDE, J.C., JORDAO, C.B., ALLEONI, L.R.F. and CAMARGO, 0.A.D.,
2004. Copper desorption in a soil with variable charge. Scientia Agricola, 61(2):
196-202.

CHAKRABARTI, K., N. SINHA, A. CHAKRABORTY, AND P. BHATTACHARYYA.
2004. Influence of soil properties on urease activity under different
agroecosystems. Archives of Agronomy and Soil Science, 50(4-5): 477-483.

CHAPMAN, H. D. 1965. Cation-exchange capacity. Methods of soil analysis. Part 2.
Chemical and microbiological properties, (methodsofsoilanb), 891-
901.characterization, and applications. CRC Press.corn physiology and yield to six
agricultural practices over three years in middle Tennessee. Scientific Reports, 6
(27).

CHINNAMUTHU, C.R. and BOOPATHI, P.M. 2009. Nanotechnology and
agroecosystem. Madras Agricultural Journal 96(1/6): 17-31.

86
CHOKOR, A.A. 2017. Adsorption-desorption study of heavy metals on sandy-loam
soil of Sapele Metropolis. IOSR Journal of Environmental Science, Toxicology and

Food Technology 11(8): 17-27

CHU, D. 2018, February. Effects of heavy metals on soil microbial community. In IOP
Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science (Vol. 113, No. 1, p. 012009).
IOP Publishing.

COLLINS, D., T. LUXTON, N. KUMAR, S. SHAH, V.K. WALKER, and V. SHAH.
2012. Assessing the impact of copper and zinc oxide nanoparticles on soil: a field
study. PLoS One 7(8): e42663.

CONCHA-GUERRERO Sl, E.M.S. BRITO, H.A. PINON-CASTILLO, S.H.
TARANGO-RIVERO, C.A. CARETTA, A. LUNA-VELASCO, R. DURAN, and
E. ORRANTIA-BORUNDA. 2014. Effect of CuO nanoparticles over isolated
bacterial strains from agricultural soil. Journal of Nanomaterials. doi:
10.1155/2014/14874

CORNELIS G., K. HUND-RINKE, T. KUHLBUSCH, N. VAN DEN BRINK, and C.
NICKEL. 2014. Fate and bioavailability of engineered nanoparticles in soils: a
review. Environmental Science and Technology 44: 2720-2764. doi:
10.1080/10643389.2013.829767

CRISCUOLO F., M.D.M. GONZALEZ-BARROSO, F. BOUILLAUD, D. RICQUIER,
B. MIROUX, and G. SORCI. 2005. Mitochondrial uncoupling proteins: new
perspectives for evolutionary ecologists. The American Naturalist 166(6): 686-699.

DAGHAN, H. 2017. Nano fertilizers. Tiirkiye Tarimsal Arastirmalar Dergisi, 4(2):
197-203.

DALAL, R.C., 1998. Soil microbial biomass—what do the numbers really
mean?. Australian Journal of Experimental Agriculture, 38(7): 649-665.

DASGUPTA N, S. RANJAN, D. PATRA, P. SRIVASTAVA, A. KUMAR, and C.
RAMALINGAN. 2016. Bovine serum albumin interacts with silver nanoparticles
with a “side on” or “end on” conformation. Chemico-Biological Interactions 253:
100-111. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2016.05.018

87
DHARMAKEERTHI, R.S. AND M.W. THENABADU. 2013. Urease activity in soils: a
review. Journal of the National Science Foundation of Sri Lanka, 24(3).

DHAWAN A., and V. SHARMA. 2010. Toxicity assessment of nanomaterials: methods
and challenges. Anal Bioanal Chem 398:589-605. doi:10.1007/s00216-010-3996-x

DICK, R. P. 2011. Methods of soil enzymology. Madison, WI: Soil Science Society of
America.

DIMPKA C.O., J.E. MCLEAN, D.W. BRITT, and A.J. ANDERSON. 2012. Bioactivity
and modification of Ag, ZnO, and CuO nanoparticles with relevance to plant
performance in agriculture. Industrial Biotechnology 8(6): 344-357. doi:
10.1089/ind.2012.0028

DINESH R, M. ANANDARAJ, V. SRINIVASAN, and S. HAMZA. 2012. Engineered
nanoparticles in the soil and their potential implications to microbial toxicity.
Geoderma 173-174: 19-27. doi: 10.1016/j.geoderma.2011.12.018

DU, W., Y. SUN, R. JI, J. ZHU, J. WU, and H. GUO. 2011. TiO 2 and ZnO nanoparticles
negatively affect wheat growth and soil enzyme activities in agricultural
soil. Journal of Environmental Monitoring, 13(4): 822-828.

DUHAN S.D., R. KUMAR, N. KUMAR, P. KAUR, K. NEHRA, and S. DUHAN. 2017.
Nanotechnology: The new perspective in precision agriculture. Biotechnology
Reports 15: 11-23. doi: 10.101 6/j.btre.2017.03.002

DUPONT, C.L., G. GRASS, and C. RENSING. 2011. Copper toxicity and the origin of
bacterial resistance- new insights and applications. Metallomics 3(11): 1109-1118.
environmental soil microbe, Pseudomonas putida KT2440. Journal of Biological
Engineering 3: 9. doi: 10.1186/1754-1611-3-9

ETTEMA T.J.G. and S.G.E. ANDERSSON. 2009. The a-Proteobacteria: the Darwin
finches of the bacterial world. Bio. Lett. 5: 429-432. doi: 10.1098/rsb1.2008.0793

FIERER N., M.A. BRADFORD, and R.B. JACKSON. 2007. Toward an ecological
classification of soil bacteria. Ecology 88(6): 1354-1364.

88
FIJALKOWSKI, K., M. KACPRZAK, A. GROBELAK, and A. PLACEK. 2012. The
influence of selected soil parameters on the mobility of heavy metals in

soils. Inzynieria i Ochrona Srodowiska 15: 81-92.

FRANKENBERGER, W. AND W.A. DICK. 1983. Relationships between enzyme
activities and microbial growth and activity indices in soil 1. Soil Science Society
of America Journal, 47(5): 945-951.

FRINCU, M., C. DUMITRACHE, A.C. DUMITRIU, P.C. CIMPEANU, and L.P.C.
MIHAI. 2015. Soil fertility assessment through enzyme activity. Journal of Young
Scientist 3.

FU, L., YANG, W. and WEI, Y. 2009. Effects of copper pollution on the activity of soil
invertase and urease in loquat orchards. Chinese Journal of Geochemistry. 28(1):
76-80.

GAJJAR P., B. PETTEE, D.W. BRITT, W. HUANG, W.P. JOHNSON, and A.J.
ANDERSON. 2009. Antimicrobial activities of commercial nanoparticles against
an environmental soil microbe, Pseudomonas putida KT2440. Journal of Biological
Engineering 3: 9. doi: 10.1186/1754-1611-3-9

GARCIA-GOMEZ, C., M. BABIN, A. OBRADOR, J.M. ALVAREZ, and M.D.
FERNANDEZ. 2015. Integrating ecotoxicity and chemical approaches to compare
the effects of ZnO nanoparticles, ZnO bulk, and ZnCl 2 on plants and
microorganisms in a natural soil. Environmental Science and Pollution
Research 22(21): 16803-16813.

GE Y., J.P. SCHIMEL, and P.A. HOLDEN. 2012. Identification of soil bacteria
susceptible | TiOzand ZnO nanoparticles. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 78(18):

GHALY A.E. and N.S. MAHMOUD. 2006. Optimum conditions for measuring
dehydrogenase activity of Aspergillus niger using TTC. American Journal of
Biochemistry and Biotechnology 2(4): 186-194.

GLADKOVA M.M. and V.A. TEREKHOVA. 2012. Engineered nanomaterials in soil:
sources and migration pathways. Moscow University Soil Science Bulletin 68(3):
129-134. doi: 10.3103/s01476874 13030046

89
GOGOS A., K. KNAUER, and T.D. BUCHELI. 2012. Nanomaterials in plant protection
and fertilization: current state, foreseen applications, and research priorities. Journal

of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. doi:10.1021/jf302154y

GOMEZ, K.A and GOMEZ, A.A. 1984. Statistical procedures for agricultural research. 2™
ed. John Wiley and Sons.

GOTTSCHALK F., E. KOST, and B. NOWACK. 2013. Engineered nanomaterials in
water and soils: a risk quantification based on probabilistic exposure and effect
modeling. Environ Toxicol Chem 32: 1278-1287. doi: 10.1002/etc.2177

GREWELING, T., AND PEECH, M. 1960. Chemical Analysis of Plant Materials. Cornell
University Agri. Exp. Station Bulletin 960: 1-2.

GROVER M., S.R. SINGH, and B.V. VENKATSESWARLU. 2012. Nanotechnology:
scope and limitations in agriculture. International Journal of Nanotechnology and
Application 2:10-38.

HAJIPOUR M.J., K.M. FROMM, A.A. ASHKARRAN, DJ. DE ABERASTURI, LR. DE
LARRAMENDI, T. ROJO, V. SEERPOSHAN, W.J. PARAK, and M.
MAHMOUDI. 2012. Antibacterial properties of nanoparticles. Trends in
Biotechnology. doi: 10.1016/j.tibtech.2012.06.004

HAMARASHID, N.H., M.A. OTHMAN, and M.A.H. HUSSAIN. 2010. Effects of soil
texture on chemical compositions, microbial populations and carbon mineralization
in soil. Egypt. J. Exp. Biol. (Bot.), 6(1): 59-64.

HANDY R.D., R. OWEN, and E. VALSAMI-JONES. 2008. The ecotoxicology of
nanoparticles and nanomaterials: current status, knowledge gaps, challenges, and
future need. Ecotoxicology. doi: 10.1007/s10646-008-0206-0

HASAN, H.A.H. 2000. Ureolytic microorganisms and _ soil fertility: A
review. Communications in soil science and plant analysis, 31(15-16): 2565-2589.

HILL G.T., N.A. MITKOWSKI, L. ALDRICH-WOLFE, L.R. EMELE, D.D.
JURKONIE, A. FICKE, A. MALDONADO-RAMIREZ, S.T. LYNCH, and E.B.
NELSON. 2000. Methods for assessing the composition and diversity of soil
microbial communities. Applied Soil Ecology 15: 25-36.

90

HOLDEN P.A., J.P. SCHIMEL, and H.A. GODWIN. 2014. Five reasons to use bacteria
when assessing manufactured nanomaterial environmental hazards and fates.
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 27: 73-78. doi: 10.1016/j.copbio.2013.11.008

HORTIN, J. 2017. Behavior of copper oxide nanoparticles in soil pore waters as
influenced by soil characteristics, bacteria, and wheat roots.

HOTZE E.M., T. PHENRAT, and G.V. LOWRY. 2010. Nanoparticle aggregation:
challenges to understanding transport and reactivity in the environment. Environ.
Qual. 39(2010):1909-1924. doi: 10.2134/jeq2009.0462

HOU J., X. WANG, T. HAYAT, and X. WANG. 2016. Ecotoxicological effects and
mechanism of CuO nanoparticles to individual organisms. Environmental Pollution
221: 209-217. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2016.11.066

HUANG Y.C., FAN R., M.A. GRUSAK, J.D. SHERRIER, and C.O. HUANG. 2014.
Effects of nano-ZnO on the agronomically Rhizobium-legume symbiosis. Science
of the Total Environment 497-498: 78-90. doi: 10.1016/j. scitoten.2014.07.00

INGLE A.P., N. DURAN, and M. RAI. 2014. Bioactivity, mechanism of action and
cytotoxicity of copper-based nanoparticles: a review. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol
98: 1001-1009. doi: 10.1007/s00253-013-5422-8

JANMOHAMMADI, M., PORNOUR, N., JAVANMARD, A. and SABAGHNIA, N.,
2016. Effects of bio-organic, conventional and nanofertilizers on growth, yield and
quality of potato in cold steppe/Bioorganiniy, tradiciniy ir nanotraSy poveikis
bulviy augimui, derliui ir kokybei Saltojoje stepéje. Botanica Lithuanica, 22(2):
133-144.

JOACHIM H., J.R. MAKOI, and P.A. NDAKIDEMI. 2008. Selected soil enzymes:
examples of their potential roles in the ecosystem. African Journal of Biotechnology
7(3):181-191.

JOO S.H. and D. ZHOU. 2016. Environmental dynamics of metal oxide nanoparticles in
heterogeneous systems: a review. J. Hazard Mater.
doi:10.1016/j/jhazmat.2016.02.068

91

JOSKO, L., P. OLESZCZUK, and B. FUTA. 2014. The effect of inorganic nanoparticles

(ZnO, Cr2O3, CuO and Ni) and their bulk counterparts on enzyme activities in
different soils. Geoderma 232: 528-537.

JU-NAM Y. and J.R. LEAD. 2008. Manufactured nanoparticles: an overview of their
chemistry, interactions, and potential environmental implications. Science of the
Total Environment 400: 396-414. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2008.06.042

KAFARSKI, P. and TALMA, M. 2018. Recent advances in design of new urease
inhibitors: A review. Journal of advanced research, 13:101-112.

KANDELER E. and H. GERBER. 1988. Short-term assay of soil urease activity using
colorometric determination of ammonium. Biol Fertil Soils 6: 68-72.

KANDPAL, G., P.C. SRIVASTAVA, and B. RAM. 2005. Kinetics of desorption of
heavy metals from polluted soils: Influence of soil type and metal source. Water,
Air, and Soil Pollution 161(1-4): 353-363.

KANHED P., S. BIRLA, S. GAIKWAD, A. GADE, A.B. SEABRA, O. RUBILAR, N.
DURAN, and M. RAI. 2014. In vitro antifungal efficacy of copper nanoparticles
against selected crop pathogenic fungi. Materials Letters, 115: 13-17.

KARAGUNDUZ, A., YOUNG, M.H. and PENNELL, K.D., 2015. Influence of surfactants
on unsaturated water flow and solute transport. Water Resources Research, 51(4):
1977-1988.

KAUSHIK, G., VISHNU, J. and ARSLAN, R. 2014. Manufacture and categorization of
nanoporous zeolite based N fertilizer. African Journal of Agronomy2(7): 180-187

KELLER A.A., A.S. ADELEYE, J.R. CONWAY, K.L. GARNER, L. ZHAO, G.N.
CHERR, J. HONG, J.L. GARDEA-TORRESDEY, H.A. GODWIN, S. HANNA,
Z. JI, C. KAWEETEERAWAT, S. LIN, H.S. LENIHAN, R.J. MILLER, A.E. NEL,
J.R. PERALTA-VIDEA, S.L. WALKER, A.A. TAYLOR, C. TORRES-DUARTE,
J.I. ZINK, and N. ZUVERSA-MENA. 2017. Comparative environmental fate and
toxicity of copper nanomaterials.  Nanoimpact 7: 28-40. — doi:
10.1016/j.impact.2017.05.03

KELLY, J.J. AND R.L. TATE. 1998. Effects of heavy metal contamination and
remediation on soil microbial communities in the vicinity of a zinc smelter. Journal
of environmental quality, 27(3): 609-617.

92

KHATI, P., SHARMA, A., GANGOLA, S., KUMAR, R., BHATT, P. AND KUMAR, G.
2017. Impact of agri-usable nanocompounds on soil microbial activity: an indicator
of soil health. CLEAN-Soil, Air, Water, 45(5): 1600458.

KHOT L.R., S. ANKARAN, J.M. MAJA, R. EHSANI, and E.W. SCHUSTER. 2012.
Applications of nanomaterials in agricultural production and crop protection: a
review. Crop Protection 35: 64-70. doi: 10.1016/j.cropro.2012.01.007

KIM, B., M.B. MCBRIDE AND A.G. HAY. 2008. Urease activity in aged copper and
zinc-spiked soils: Relationship to CaCle-extractable metals and Cu**
activity. Environmental toxicology and chemistry, 27(12): 2469-2475.

KIM, S., J. KIM, and I. LEE. 2011. Effects of Zn and ZnO nanoparticles and Zn?* on
soil enzyme activity and bioaccumulation of Zn in Cucumis sativus. Chemistry and
Ecology 27(1): 49-55.

KIRK J.L., L.A. BEAUDETTE, M. HART, P. MOUTOGLIS, J.N. KLIRONOMOS, H.
LEE, and J.T. TREVORS. 2004. Methods of studying soil microbial diversity.
Journal of Microbiological Methods 58:169-188.

KIZILKAYA, R., ASKIN, T., BAYRAKLI, B. and SAGLAM, M., 2004. Microbiological
characteristics of soils contaminated with heavy metals. European Journal of Soil
Biology, 40(2): 95-102.

KLAINE S.J., A.A. KOELMANS, N. HORNE, S. CARLEY, R.D. HANDY, L.
KAPUSTKA, B. NOWACK, and F. VONDER KAMMER. 2012. Paradigms to
assess the environmental impact of manufactured nanomaterials. Environmental
Toxicology and Chemistry 31(1). doi: 10.1002/etc.733

KLAINE S.J., J.J. ALVAREZ, G.E. BATLEY, T.F. FERNANDES, R.D. HANDY, D.Y.
LYON, S. MAHENDRA, M.J. MCLAUGHLIN, and J.R. LEAD. 2008.
Nanomaterials in the environment: behavior, fate, bioavailability, and effects.
Environ Toxicol Chem 27(9): 1825-1851.

KOTTEGODA, N., SANDARUWAN, C., PRIYADARSHANA, G., SIRIVARDHANA,
A., RATHNAYAKE, U.A., BERUGODA ARACHCHIGE, D.M.,
KUMARASINGHE, A.R., DAHANAYAKE, D., KARUNARATNE, V. AND

93
AMARATUNGA, G.A. 2017. Urea-hydroxyapatite nanohybrids for slow release
of nitrogen. ACS nano, 11(2): 1214-1221.

KRAJEWSKA, B. 1991. Urease immobilized on chitosan membrane. Inactivation by
heavy metal ions. Journal of Chemical Technology & Biotechnology, 52(2):
157-162.

KRAJEWSKA, B. 2009. Ureases I. Functional, catalytic and kinetic properties: A
review. Journal of Molecular Catalysis B: Enzymatic, 59(1-3):.9-21.

KUMAR S., S. CHAUDHURI, and S.K. MAITI. 2013. Soil dehydrogenase enzyme
activity in natural and mine soil- a review. Middle-East Journal of Scientific
Research 13(7): 898-906. doi: 10.5829/idosi.mejsr.2013.13.7.2801

LI, Y., W. TAN, L.K. KOOPAL, M. WANG, F. LIU, AND W. NORDE. 2013. Influence
of soil humic and fulvic acid on the activity and stability of lysozyme and
urease. Environmental science & technology, 47(10): 5050-5056.

LIN D., X. TIAN, F. WU, and B. XING. 2010. Fate and transport of engineered
nanomaterials in the environment. Journal of Environmental Quality 39: 1896-
1908. doi: 10.2134/jeq2009.0423

LIN Y., J. REN, and X. QU. 2013. Catalytically active nanomaterials: a promising
candidate for artificial enzymes. Accounts of Chemical Research 47(4):1097-1105.

LIU R. and R. LAL. 2015. Potentials of engineered nanoparticles as fertilizers for
increasing agronomic productions. Science of the Total Environment 514: 131-139.
doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.01.104

LLOYD A.B. and M.J. SHEAFFE. 1973. Urease activity in soils. Plant and Soil 39:71-80

LORENZ T. C. 2012. Polymerase chain reaction: basic protocol plus troubleshooting and
optimization strategies. J. Vis. Exp. 63 (e3998): 1-15. doi: 10.3791/3998

94

LOWRY G.V., K.B. GREGORY, S.C. APTE, and J.R. LEAD. 2012. Transformations of

nanomaterials in the environment. Environ. Sci. Technol. 46: 6893-6899.
doi:10.1021/es300839e

LU, A., S. ZHANG, and X.Q. SHAN. 2005. Time effect on the fractionation of heavy
metals in soils. Geoderma 125(3-4): 225-234.

MADDELA, N.R. and K. VENKATESWARLU. 2018. Impact of acephate and
buprofezin on soil urease. In Insecticides— Soil Microbiota Interactions (pp. 65-73).
Springer, Cham.

MANZO S., A. ROCCO, R. CAROTENUTO, F. DE LUCA, M.L. MIGLIETTA, G.
RAMETTA, and G. DI FRANCIA. 2011. Investigation of ZnO nanoparticles’
ecotoxicological effects towards different soil organisms. Envi.Sci. Pollut. Res.
doi:10.1007/s11356-010-0421-0

MANIKANDAN, A. and SUBRAMANIAN, K.S. 2016. Evaluation of zeolite based
nitrogen nano-fertilizers on maize growth, yield and quality on inceptisols and
alfisols. Int J Plant Soil Sci, 9(4):1-9.

MARZADORI, C., O. FRANCIOSO, C. CIAVATTA, AND C. GESSA. 2000. The
influence of the content of heavy metals and molecular weight of humic acids
fractions on the activity and stability of urease. Soil biology and
Biochemistry, 32(13): 1893-1898.

MCDEVITT, C.A., A.D. OGUNNIYI, E. VALKOV, M.C. LAWRENCE, B. KOBE,
A.G. MCEWAN, and J.C. PATON. 2011. A molecular mechanism for bacterial
susceptibility to zinc. PLoS pathogens 7(11): 1002357.

MENDES, L.A., M.J. AMORIM, and J.J. SCOTT-FORDSMAND. 2018. Interactions of
soil species exposed to CuO NMs are different from Cu salt: A multispecies
test. Environmental Science & Technology 52(7): 4413-4421.

MOGHADDAM M.N., A.H. SABZEVAR, and S. MARTAZAEI. 2017. Impact of ZnO
and silver nanoparticles on legume-Sinorhizobium symbiosis. Advanced Studies in
Biology 9(2): 83-90. doi: 10.12988/asb.2017.712

95

MOHANTY A., Y. WU, and B. CAO. 2014. Impacts of engineered nanomaterials on

microbial community and structure and function in natural and engineered
ecosystems. Appl. Microbiol Biotechnol.

NADERI M.R. and A. DANESH-SHAHRAKI. 2013. Nanofertilizers and their roles in
sustainable agriculture. Intl J Agri Crop Sci 5(19): 2229-2232.

NAVNAGE, N.P., P.N. PATLE, and P.R. RAMTEKE. 2018. Dehydrogenase activity
(DHA): Measure of total microbial activity and as indicator of soil quality. CS
6(1): 456-458.

NAWAZ, M., A. WAHID, S.S. AHMAD, AND A. BUTT. 2015. Response of soil
microbial biomass and respiration in heavy metal contaminated soil of Multan.

NEAL A.L. 2008. What can be inferred from bacterium-nanoparticle interactions about
the potential consequences of environmental exposure to nanoparticles?
Ecotoxicology 17: 362-371. doi: 10.1007/s10646-008-0217-x

NEAL, A.L., N. KABENGI, A. GRIDER, and P.M. BERTSCH. 2012. Can the soil
7: bacterium Cupriavidus necator sense ZnO nanomaterials and aqueous Zn?*
differentially?. Nanotoxicology 6(4): 371-380.

NEL A., T. XIA, L. MADLER, and N. LI. 2006. Toxic potential of materials at the
nanolevel. Science 311: 622-627. doi: 10.1226/science. 1114397

NWEKE, C.O. 2009. Kinetics of zinc toxicity to environmental bacterial
isolates. Ambiente e Agua- An Interdisciplinary Journal of Applied Science 4(3):
23-34.

PAN B. and B. XING. 2012. Applications and implications of manufactured
nanoparticles in soils: a review. European Journal of Soil Science 63: 437-456. doi:
10.111/j.1365-2389.2012.01475.x

PARR, J. and NORMAN, A.G. 1965. Considerations in the use of surfactants in plant
systems: A review. Botanical Gazette, 126(2): 86-96.

96
PAUL E.A., F.E. CLARK. 1996. Soil microbiology and biochemistry. 2"! ed. Academic
Press: San Diego, California.

PAULSON K.N. and L.T. KURTZ. 1969. Locus of urease activity in soill. Soil Science
Society of America Journal, 33(6), 897-901.

PUREV D., J. BAYARMAA, B. GANCHIMEG, B. ANKHTSETSEG, and O.
ANUBANDAL. 2012. Catalase, protease and urease activity in some types of soil.
Mongolian Journal of Chemistry 13(39):16-18.

RAI V., S. ACHARYA, and N. DEY. 2012. Implications of nanobiosensors in
agriculture.Journal of Biomaterials and Nanobiotechnology
3:315324.doi:10.4236/jbnb.2012.322039

RAJPUT, V.D., T. MINKINA, S. SUSHKOVA, V. TSITSUASHVILI, S.
MANDZHIEVA, A. GOROVTSOV, D. NEVIDOMSKYAYA, and N.
GROMAKOVA. 2017. Effect of nanoparticles on crops and soil microbial
communities. Journal of Soils and Sediments 1-9.

RAMESH, K. and REDDY, D.D. 2011. Zeolites and their potential uses in agriculture.
In Advances in agronomy (Vol. 113, pp. 219-241). Academic Press.

RANJARD L., F. POLY, and S. NAZARET. 2000. Monitoring complex bacterial
communities using culture-independent molecular techniques: application to soil
environment. Res. Microbiol. 151: 167-177.

RASHID M.I., T. SHAHZAD, M. SHAHID, I.M.J. ISMAIL, G.M. SHAH, and T.
ALMEELBI. 2016. Zinc oxide nanoparticles affect carbon and nitrogen
mineralization of Phoenix dactylifera leaf litter in a sandy soil. J. Hazard. Mater.
doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2016.10.063

READ D.S., M. MATZKE, H.S. GWEON, L.K. NEWBOLD, L. HEGGELUND,
M.DIEZ ORTIZ, L. ELMA, D. SPURGEON, and C. SVENDSEN. 2016. Soil pH
effects on their interactions between dissolved zinc non-nano and nano-ZnO with
soil bacterial communities. Environmental Science and Pollution Research 23(5):
4120-4128. doi:10.1007/s1 1356-01 5-4538-2

97

RIZWAN M., S. ALI, M.F. DAYYUM, Y.S. OK, M. ADREES, M. IBRAHIM, M.

ZIA-UR-REHMAN M, M. FARID, and F. ABBAS. 2016. Effect of metal and metal

oxide nanoparticles on growth and physiology of globally important food crops: A

critical review. Journal of Hazardous Materials 322: 2-16. doi:
10.1016/j.jhazmat.2016.05.061

ROSS, D.S., and Q. KETTERINGS. 1995. Recommended methods for determining soil
cation exchange capacity. Recommended soil testing procedures for the
northeastern United States 2:62-70.

ROUSK J., K. ACKERMANN, S.F. CURLING, and D.L. JONES. 2012. Comparative
toxicity of nanoparticulate CuO and ZnO to soil bacterial communities. PLoS ONE
7(3): 34197. doi: 10.137 1/journal.pone.0034197

RUSSELL, B. J., SHELTON, J. P., & WALSH, A. 1957. An atomic-absorption
spectrophotometer and its application to the analysis of solutions. Spectrochimica

Acta, 8(6), 317E1319- 318E2328.

RYTER S.W., H.P. KIM, A. HOETZEL, J.W. PARK, K. NAKAHIRA, X. WANG, and
A.M.K. CHOI. 2007. Mechanism of cell death in oxidative stress. Antioxid Redox
Signal 9: 44-89.

SABIR S., M. ARSHAD, and S.K. CHAUDHARI. 2014. Zinc oxide nanoparticles for
revolutionizing agriculture: synthesis and applications. The Scientific World
Journal. doi: 10.1155/2014/925494

SANTIMANO M.C. and M. KOWSHIK. 2013. Altered growth and enzyme expression
profile of ZnO nanoparticles exposed non-target environmentally beneficial
bacteria. Environ Monit Assess 185: 7205-7214. doi: 10.1007/s10661-013-3094-6

SAPKOTA A., A.J. ANCENO, S. BARUAH, O.V. SHIPPIN, and J. DUTTA. Zinc oxide
nanorod mediated visible light photoinactivation of model microbes in water.
Nanotechnology 22. doi: 10.1088/0957-4481/22/21/215703

SEKINE, R., E.R. MARZOUK, M. KHAKSAR, K.G. SCHECKEL, J.P. STEGEMEIER,
G.V. LOWRY, E. DONNER, and E. LOMBI. 2017. Aging of dissolved copper and
copper-based nanoparticles in five different soils: Short-term kinetics vs. long-term
fate. Journal of Environmental Quality 46(6): 1198-1205.

98

SERVIN A., W. ELMER, A. MUKHERJEE, R. DE LA TORRE-ROCHE, H. HAMDI,

J.C. WHITE, P. BINDRABAN, and C. DIMKPA. 2015. A review of the use of

engineered nanomaterials to suppress plant disease and enhance crop yield. J.
Nanopart. Res. 17: 92. doi:10.1007/s11051-015-2907-7

SESSITSCH, A., A. WEILHARTER, M.H. GERZABEK, H. KIRCHMANN, and E.
KANDELE. 2001. Microbial population structures in soil particle size fractions of
a long-term fertilizer field experiment. Applied and Environmental Microbiology
67(9): 4215-4224.

SHAH V., J. JONES, J. DICKMAN, and S. GREENMAN. 2014. Response of soil
bacterial community to metal nanoparticles in biosolids. Journal of Hazardous
Materials 274: 399-403. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2014.04.003

SHAW, W.H. AND N.D. RAVAL. 1961. The inhibition of urease by metal ions at pH
8.9. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 83(15): 3184-3187.

SHEN Z., Z. CHEN, T. LI, and X. LU. 2015. Ecotoxicological effect of zinc oxide
nanoparticles on soil microorganisms. Front. Environ. Sci. Eng. doi;
10.1007/s11783-015-0789-7

SHIN, Y.J., KWAK, J.I. and AN, Y.J., 2012. Evidence for the inhibitory effects of silver
nanoparticles on the activities of soil exoenzymes. Chemosphere, 88(4), pp.524
529.

SHIYIN L., N. LEXIAO, P. PARRYING, S. CHENG, and W. LIANSHENG. 2004.
Effects of pesticides and their hydrolysates on catalase activity in soil. BIl.
Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 72:600-606.

SIDDIQI, K.S., A. UR RAHMAN, and A. HUSEN. 2018. Properties of zinc oxide
nanoparticles and their activity against microbes. Nanoscale Research Letters
13(1):141.

SILVA-BAILAO, M.G., K.L.P. DA SILVA, L.R.B. DOS ANJOS, P. DE SOUSA LIMA,
M. DE MELO TEIXEIRA, C.M. DE ALMEIDA SOARES, and A.M. BAILAO.
2018. Mechanisms of copper and zinc homeostasis in pathogenic black
fungi. Fungal Biology 122(6): 526-537.

99

SIMONIN M. and A. RICHAUME. 2015. Impact of engineered nanoparticles on the

activity, abundance, and biodiversity of soil microbial communities: a review.
Environ Sci Pollut Res. doi: 10.1007/s11356-015-4171-x

SOIL SCIENCE DIVISION STAFF. 2017. Soil Survey Manual. USDA

SOLIMAN, A. H., and RADWAN, S. S. 1981. Degradation of sterols, triacylglycerol, and
phospholipids by soil microorganisms. Zentralblatt fiir Bakteriologie,
Parasitenkunde, Infektionskrankheiten und Hygiene. Zweite
Naturwissenschaftliche Abteilung: Mikrobiologie der Landwirtschaft, der
Technologie und des Umweltschutzes, 136(5): 420-426.

SRILATHA B. 2011. Nanotechnology in agriculture. J. Nanomedic Nanotechnol 2(7).
doi: 10.4172/2157-7439.1000123

STOTZKY G. (1972). Activity, ecology, and population dynamics of microorganisms in
soil. CRC Critical Reviews in Microbiology.

SUBBATYA, R., PRIYANKA, M. and SELVAM, M.M. 2012. Formulation of green nano
fertilizer to enhance the plant growth through slow and sustained release of
nitrogen. Journal of Pharmacy Research, 5(11): 5178-5183.

SUBBARAO, C.V., KARTHEEK, G. and SIRISHA, D., 2013. Slow release of potash
fertilizer through polymer coating. International Journal of Applied science and
engineering, 11(1): 25-30.

SUNDE, M., PHAM, C.L. and KWAN, A.H., 2017. Molecular characteristics and
biological functions of surface-active and surfactant proteins. Annual review of
biochemistry, 86: 585-608.

SURYAWATI, B. 2018. Zinc homeostasis mechanism and its role in bacterial virulence
capacity. In AIP Conference Proceedings 2021(1): 070021. AIP Publishing.

SWAIN A., A. BASTIRAY, K. JITENDRA, and R. HAIBRU. 2014. Estimation of soil
microbial biomass using substrate induced respiration: an experiment review study
with loamy soil of North Bangalore.

100

SYLVIA, D.M., FUHRMANN, J.J., HARTEL, P.G. and ZUBERER, D.A. eds.,

2005. Principles and applications of soil microbiology. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Pearson Prentice Hall.

TABATABAI M.A. 1982. Soil enzymes, dehydrogenases. In R.H. Miller and D.R.
Keeney (ed.), Methods of Soil Analysis. Part 2. Chemical and Microbiological
Properties. Agron. Monography, 9, ASA and SSSA, Madison, WI.

TEMMINGHOFF, E.J., S.E. VAN DER ZEE, and F.A. DE HAAN. 1997. Copper
mobility in a copper-contaminated sandy soil as affected by pH and solid and
dissolved organic matter. Environmental Science & Technology 31(4): 1109-1115.

THIERY A., L. DE JONG, X. MOREAU, G. SAEZ, B. BARTHELEMY, I. BESTEL, C.
SANTAELLA, W. ACHOUAK, M. AUFFAN, I. ROSE, and J.Y. BOTTERO.
2012. Effects of metalic and metal oxide nanoparticles in aquatic and terrestrial
food chains. Biomarkers responses in invertibrates and bacteria. Int. J. Nanotechnol.
Vol.

THORTON H.G. 1922. On the development of a standardised agar medium for counting
soil bacteria, with special regard to the repression of spreading colonies. Annals of
Applied Biology, 9(3-4): 241-274.

TOURINHO P.S., C.A.H. VAN GESTEL, S. LOFTS, C. SVENDSEN, A.M.V.M.
SOARES, and S. LOUREIRO. 2012. Metal-based nanoparticles in soil: fate,
behaviour, and effects on soil invertebrates. Environ. Toxicol. Chem.
doi:10.1002/etc. 1880

TRASAR-CEPADA C., M.C. LEIROS, S. SEONE, and F. GIL-SOTRES. 2000.
Limitations of soil enzymes as indicator of soil pollution. Soil Biology and
Biochemistry 32:1867-1875.

VAN VEEN, J.A. AND P.J. KUIKMAN. 1990. Soil structural aspects of decomposition
of organic matter by micro-organisms. Biogeochemistry, 11(3): 213-233.

VERBERNE, E.L.J., J. HASSINK, P. DE WILLIGEN, J.J.R. GROOT, and J.A. VAN
VEEN. 1990. Modelling organic matter dynamics in different soils. Netherlands
Journal of Agricultural Science, 38:221-238.

101
VON MERSI W. and F. SCHINNER. 1991. An improved and accurate method for
determining the dehydrogenase activity of soils with iodonitrotetrazolium chloride.

Biol Fertil Soils 11:216-220.

WALKLEY, A AND BLACK, I. A. 1934. An Examination of Degtsaruf Method for
Determining Soil Organic Matter and Proposed Modification. pp. 29-38.

WANG, G. and OR, D. 2010. Aqueous films limit bacterial cell motility and colony
expansion on partially saturated rough surfaces. Environmental
microbiology, 12(5): 1363-1373.

WANG S., F. WANG, and S. GAO. 2014. Foliar application with nano-silicon alleviates
Cd toxicity in rice seedlings. Environ Sci Pollut Res. doi: 10.1007/s11356-014
3525-0

WANG, P., N.W. MENZIES, E. LOMBI, B.A. MCKENNA, B. JOHANNESSEN, C.J.
GLOVER, P. KAPPEN, and P.M. KOPITTKE. 2013. Fate of ZnO nanoparticles in
soils and cowpea (Vigna  unguiculata). Environmental Science &
Technology 47(23): 13822-13830.

WEETALL H.H., N. WELIKY, and S.P. VANGO. 1965. Detection of micro-organisms
in soil by their catalatic activity. Nature 206:1019-1021.

WESCHAYANWIWAT, P., SCAMEHORN, J.F. and REILLY, P.J. 2005. Surfactant
properties of low molecular weight phospholipids. Journal of surfactants and
detergents, 8(1): 65-72.

WIDMER F., A. FLIEBBACH, E. LACZKO, J. SCHULZE-AURICH, and J. ZEYER.
2001. Assessing soil biological characteristics: a comparison of bulk soil
community DNA-, PLFA-, and BIOLOG™-analyses. Soil Biology and
Biochemistry 33: 1029-1036.

WILSON M.A., N.H TRAN, A.S. MILEV, G.S.K. KANNANGARA, H. VOLK, and
G.Q. MAXLU. 2008. Nanomaterials in soils. Geoderma 146: 291-302.
doi:10.1016/j.geoderma.2008.06.004

102

WOLINSKA A, KUZNIAR A, U. ZIELENKIEWICZ, D. IZAK, A. SZAFRANEK-

NAKONIECZA, A. BANACH, and M. BLASZCZYK. 2017. Bacteriodetes as a

sensitive biological indicator of agricultural soil usage revealed by a
culture-independent approach. Applied Soil Ecology 119:128-137.

WOLINSKA A. and Z. STEPNIEWSKA. 2012. Dehydrogenase activity in the soil
environment.In Dehydrogenases. InTech.

WU, J., LI, X., YAN, Y., HU, Y., ZHANG, Y. AND TANG, Y. 2013. Protein adsorption
onto nanozeolite: effect of micropore openings. Journal of Colloid and Interface
Science, 406: 130-138.

WYSZKOWSKA, J., J. KUCHARSKI, and W. LAJSZNER. 2005. Enzymatic activities
in different soils contaminated with copper. Polish Journal of Environmental
Studies, 14(5).

XIA T., M. KOVOCHICH, J. BRANT, M. HOTZE, J. SEMPF, T. OBERLEY, C.
SIOUTAS, J.I. YEH, M.R. WIESNER, and E.N. ANDRE. 2006. Comparison of
the abilities of ambient and manufactured nanoparticles to induce cellular toxicity
according to an oxidative stress paradigm. Nano Letters 6(8): 1794-1807.
doi:10.1021/nlo61025k

XIE, Y., J. FAN, W. ZHU, E. AMOMBO, Y. LOU, L. CHEN, AND J. FU. 2016. Effect
of heavy metals pollution on soil microbial diversity and bermudagrass genetic
variation. Frontiers in plant science 7: 755.

YOU T., D. LIU, J. CHEN, Z. YANG, R. DOU, X. GAO, and L. WANG. 2018. Effects
of metal oxide nanoparticles on soil enzyme communities in two different soil
types. Journal of Soils Sediments. doi: 10.1007/s11368-017-1716-2

ZHANG, X., F. LI, T. LIU, C. XU, D. DUAN, C. PENG, S. ZHU, and J. SHI. 2013. The
variations in the soil enzyme activity, protein expression, microbial biomass, and
community structure of soil contaminated by heavy metals. ISRN Soil
Science, 2013.

ZHANG, C., S. NIE, J. LIANG, G. ZENG, H. WU, S. HUA, J. LIU, Y. YUAN, H.
XIAO, L. DENG, and H. XIANG. 2016. Effects of heavy metals and soil
physicochemical properties on wetland soil microbial biomass and bacterial
community structure. Science of the Total Environment, 557: 785-790.

APPENDICES

Appendix A. Methods for soil physicochemical determination

Parameter Methods References
PHater 1:1 distilled water using pH Black, 1995
Meter
Organic Matter Walkley and Black Walkley and Black, 1934
CEC Ammonium Acetate, pH 7 Chapman, 1965
Total N Kjeldahl Grewling and Peech, 1960
Available P Bray No. 2 Bray and Kurtz, 1945
Flame Photometer
Exchangeable K (Ammonium Acetate Black, 1965
Extraction)
Available Zn Atomic Absorption Russel, 1957
Spectrophotometer
Available Cu Peeounic A Usornuion Russel, 1957
Spectrophotometer
Soil Texture Hydrometer Black, 1995
Moisture Content Gravimetric Black, 1995

Appendix B. Schematic diagram for the enumeration of soil culturable bacteria

10-g Soil

Sample Collection

10-g Soil

Plate Count
Method

a

Statistical

Analysis

Oven-dry Mass

Determination

104

Appendix C. Schematic diagram for DHA assay

1-mL 3%

TTC
Incubation
(96h, 27 ‘C)
10-mL absolute
EtOH

Incubation
aH)

5-mL aliquot

Spectrophotometric TF standard
measurement (485 nm) preparation

Sta al
Result

105

Appendix D. Schematic diagram for the Buffered Method of UA assay

5-g soil 5-g control soil
sainple sample
2.5-mL 720 mM 0.1 M borate
urea buffer buffer
L_______
0.1 M borate Incubation
buffer (2h, 47 °C)
we en
Incubation 2.5-mL 720 mM
(2h, 47 °C) urea buffer
LC
30-mL acidified
2MKCI
Shake (30 min)
Filter
(Whattman #41)
1.5 mL aliquot
Centrifuge

(9464xg, 5 min)

Add 9-mL dist. H2O, 5-mL,
sodium salicylate/NaOH. 2-mL
dichloroisocyanuric acid

Swirl and let
stand for 30 min

Measure Agé0om

Calculate NH;
content

Statistical
Result

106

107
Appendix E. Schematic diagram for the Non-buffered Method of UA assay

5-g soil 5-g control soil
sample sample
|

Incubation
(2h, 47 °C)

2.5-mL 720 mM
urea buffer

2.5-mL 720 mM
urea buffer

Incubation
(2h, 47 °C)

30-mL acidified 2M KCI

Shake (30 min)

1.5 mL aliquot

Centrifuge
(9464xg, 5 min)

i-mL
supernatant

Add 9-mL dist. H2O, 5-mL
sodium salicylate/NaOH, 2-mL
dichloroisocyanuric acid

Swirl and let
stand for 30 min

Calculate NH;-
content
Statistical
Result


Appendix F. Schematic diagram for the soil MCB determination using SIR

10-g soil in
mason jar

10-mL std.
0.04 N NaOH in plastic cup

Incubation
? hour

Titration with
std. 0.04 N HC]

Compute Microbial
Biomass

Statistical
Result

108

Appendix G. ANOVA of CFU as affected by metal oxide particles

109

1 DAA
Source DF Sumict Meat) F Value Pr(> F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 0.0204 0.0204 0.04 0.8574
Error(a) 4 2.2199 0.555
Amendment 4 7.7625 1.9406 1.37 0.2867
Soil Type:Amendment 4 8.7655 2.1914 1.55 0.2348
Error(b) 16 22.5854 1.4116
Total 29 41.3536
7 DAA
Source pr - Sumof_ = Mean F value Pr(>F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 0.426 0.426 11.23 0.0285
Error(a) 4 0.1518 0.0379
Amendment 4 0.1214 0.0304 0.37 0.8232
Soil Type:Amendment 4 0.1965 0.0491 0.61 0.6637
Error(b) 16 1.2958 0.081
Total 29 2.1915
14DAA
Source DF Sumof Mean Evalue —_-Pr(> F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 0.0033 0.0033 0.14 0.7275
Error(a) 4 0.0947 0.0237
Amendment 4 0.5239 0.131 1.24 0.3331
Soil Type:Amendment 4 0.4433 0.1108 1.05 0.4125
Error(b) 16 1.6883 0.1055
Total 29 2.7534

Appendix H. ANOVA of CFU as affected by FertiGroe®N

110

1DAA
Source DF Sum of — Mean F Value Pr(> F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 0.0551 0.0551 0.64 0.4679
Error(a) 4 0.3434 0.0859
Amendment 3 0.7312 0.2437 1.64 0.2323
Soil Type:Amendment 3 0.3136 0.1045 0.7 0.5681
Error(b) 12 1.7832 0.1486
Total 23 3.2264
35 DAA
Source DF Sunol ean F Value Pr(> F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 0.0054 0.0054 0.01 0.9412
Error(a) 4 3.4867 0.8717
Amendment 3 0.2478 0.0826 0.44 0.7269
Soil Type:Amendment 3 0.3139 0.1046 0.56 0.6511
Error(b) 12 2.2396 0.1866
Total 23 6.2934
75 DAA
Source DF Sumof Mean Evalue Pr(> F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 2.4813 2.4813 2.7 0.1757
Error(a) 4 3.6753 0.9188
Amendment 3 0.2467 0.0822 0.15 0.9309
Soil Type:Amendment 3 0.719 0.2397 0.42 0.7402
Error(b) 12 6.8049 0.5671
Total 23 13.9273

Appendix I. ANOVA of CFU as affected by HormoGroe®

111

1DAA
Source DF Sumit be F Value Pr(> F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 0.2802 0.2802 0.96 0.3816
Error(a) 4 1.1614 0.2903
Amendment 3 0.9091 0.303 1.62 0.2364
Soil Type:Amendment 3 0.3466 0.1155 0.62 0.6165
Error(b) 12 2.2431 0.1869
Total 23 4.9404
35 DAA
Source DF Sumion be F Value Pr(> F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 0.1382 0.1382 1.27 0.3222
Error(a) 4 0.434 0.1085
Amendment 3 0.7611 0.2537 1.98 0.1708
Soil Type:Amendment 3 0.3928 0.1309 1.02 0.4173
Error(b) 12 1.5376 0.1281
Total 23 3.2637
75 DAA
Source DF um of Mean F Value Pr F)
quare Square
Soil Type 1 0.0074 0.0074 0.16 0.7054
Error(a) 4 0.1799 0.045
Amendment 3 2.0384 0.6795 1.41 0.2877
Soil Type:Amendment 3 1.7149 0.5716 1.19 0.356
Error(b) 12 5.7802 0.4817
Total 23 9.7208

112
Appendix J. ANOVA of DHA as affected by metal oxide particles

1DAA
Source DF Sum of Mean F Value  Pr(> F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 42.5783 42.5783 60.77 0.0015
Error(a) 4 2.8024 0.7006
Amendment 4 20.887 5.2218 4.14 0.0172
Soil Type:Amendment 4 34.0859 = 8.5215 6.76 0.0022
Error(b) 16 20.174 1.2609
Total 29 120.528
7 DAA
Source pr - Sumof_ = Mean Evalue Pr(>F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 341.24 341.24 46.05 0.0025
Error(a) 4 29.6412 7.4103
Amendment 4 119.75 29.9374 2.54 0.0807
Soil Type:Amendment 4 213.053 53.2632 4.51 0.0125
Error(b) 16 188.833 11.8021
Total 29 892.517
14 DAA
Source pr  Sumof_ = Mean EValue Pr(>F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 1171 1171 148.29 0.0003
Error(a) 4 31.5859 = 7.8965
Amendment 4 318.071 79.5178 5.13 0.0075
Soil Type:Amendment 4 72.0517 18.0129 1.16 0.3645
Error(b) 16 248.232 15.5145
Total 29 1840.94
28 DAA
Source pr  Sumof_ = Mean EValuePr(>F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 4160.46 4160.46 890.36 0
Error(a) 4 18.6912 4.6728
Amendment 4 197.752 49.4379 2.47 0.0866
Soil Type:Amendment 4 253.601 63.4002 3.17 0.0427
Error(b) 16 320.309 20.0193
Total 29 4950.81

113
Appendix K. ANOVA of DHA as affected by FertiGroe®N

1 DAA
Source pr Sumof/ = Mean FValue—Pr(> F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 1559.61 1559.61 12.84 0.0231
Error(a) 4 485.848 121.462
Amendment 3 20.4729 6.8243 0.43 0.7324
Soil Type:Amendment 3 32.1552 10.7184 0.68 0.5798
Error(b) 12 188.553. 15.7128
Total 23 2286.64
35 DAA
Source DF Sumlot en F Value Pr(> F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 809.449 809.449 13.67 0.0209
Error(a) 4 236.865 59.2162
Amendment 3 211.26 70.42 2.64 0.0973
Soil Type:Amendment 3 61.213 20.4043 0.76 0.5355
Error(b) 12 320.28 26.69
Total 23 1639.07
75 DAA
Source DF Sumlct Mean F Value Pr F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 9.139 9.139 10.19 0.0332
Error(a) 4 3.5878 0.8969
Amendment 3 3.9702 1.3234 1.01 0.4213
Soil Type:Amendment 3 3.0952 1.0317 0.79 0.5229
Error(b) 12 15.6914 1.3076
Total 23 35.4836

Appendix L. ANOVA of DHA as affected by HormoGroe®

114

1 DAA
Source pp  Sumof_ = Mean F Value Pr(>F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 428.331 428.331 44.6 0.0026
Error(a) 4 38.4144 9.6036
Amendment 3 4508.7 1502.9 95.8 0
Soil Type:Amendment 3 58.6094 19.5365 1.25 0.3366
Error(b) 12 188.259 15.6883
Total 23 5222.31
35 DAA
Source DF Sumlot meat) F Value —- Pr(> F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 859.566 859.566 22.01 0.0094
Error(a) 4 156.231 39.0576
Amendment 3 18.8551 6.285 0.45 0.7252
Soil Type:Amendment 3 77.3429 25.781 1.83 0.1961
Error(b) 12 169.43 14.1191
Total 23 1281.42
75 DAA
Source DF Sum of — Mean Evalue Pr(> F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 11.9992 11.9992 12.17 0.0252
Error(a) 4 3.9437 0.9859
Amendment 3 9.3511 3.117 2.74 0.0893
Soil Type:Amendment 3 6.0754 2.0251 1.78 0.204
Error(b) 12 13.6333 1.1361
Total 23 45.0028

Appendix M. ANOVA of UA as affected by metal oxide particles

115

1DAA
Source DF Sumioh Mean F Value = Pr(> F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 103736 103736 129.82 0.0003
Error(a) 4 3196.25 799.063
Amendment 4 1831.1 457.775 0.63 0.6498
Soil Type:Amendment 4 1915.79 478.948 0.66 0.6309
Error(b) 16 11673.9 729.616
Total 29 122353
7DAA
Source DF Sumiot ean F Value = Pr(> F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 65116.8 651168 297.66 0.0001
Error(a) 4 875.052 218.763
Amendment 4 7893.14 1973.29 15.79 0
Soil Type:Amendment 4 3488.67 872.167 6.98 0.0019
Error(b) 16 1999.01 124.938
Total 29 79372.7
14DAA
Source DF Sum of Square we F Value = Pr(> F)
Square
Soil Type 1 58166.0078 58166.0078 747.75 0
Error(a) 4 311.1524 77.7881
Amendment 4 1355.9006 338.9751 5.77 0.0045
Soil Type:Amendment 4 1178.7581 294.6895 5.01 0.0082
Error(b) 16 940.1992 58.7625
Total 29 61952.0181
28 DAA
Source DF Sum of Square Ae ean F Value  Pr(> F)
quare
Soil Type 1 29540.8182 29540.8182 99.7 0.0006
Error(a) 4 1185.1893 296.2973
Amendment 4 13408.8651 3352.2163 8.36 0.0008
Soil Type:Amendment 4 12808.089 3202.0223 7.99 0.001
Error(b) 6413.5342 400.8459

Total

16
29 _63356.4958

Appendix N. ANOVA of UA as affected by FertiGroe®N

116

1 DAA
Source DF Sumiot een F Value Pr(> F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 2297.13 2297.13 5.64 0.0764
Error(a) 4 1628.36 407.09
Amendment 3 123184 4106.14 36.65 0
Soil Type:Amendment 3 10603.1 3534.37 31.54 0
Error(b) 12 1344.56 112.047
Total 23 28191.6
35 DAA
Source DF Suniel Mean F Value —— Pr(> F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 5144.5 5144.5 10.55 0.0314
Error(a) 4 1949.62 487.405
Amendment 3 50912.7 16970.9 70.49 0
Soil Type:Amendment 3 9217.55 3072.52 12.76 0.0005
Error(b) 12 2889.25 240.771
Total 23 70113.6
75 DAA
Source pr - Sumof_ = Mean EWalue —_-Pr(> F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 235.627 235.627 0.37 0.576
Error(a) 4 2549.03 637.258
Amendment 3 13543.4 4514.46 13.07 0.0004
Soil Type: Amendment 3 8703.25 2901.08 8.4 0.0028
Error(b) 12 4143.83 345.319
Total 23 29175.1

117
Appendix O. ANOVA of UA as affected by HormoGroe®

1DAA
Source DF Sumit ue) F Value Pr(> F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 47758.6 47758.6 =: 1037.13 0
Error(a) 4 184.195 46.0486
Amendment 3 1945.16 648.387 9.36 0.0018
Soil Type:Amendment 3 6936.57 2312.19 33.39 0
Error(b) 12 830.881 69.2401
Total 23 57655.4
35 DAA
Source pr Sumof Mean FValue— Pr F)
quare Square
Soil Type 1 61360.6  61360.6 1110.97 0
Error(a) 4 220.926 55.2315
Amendment 3 3805.8 1268.6 9.83 0.0015
Soil Type:Amendment 3 6736.91 2245.64 17.41 0.0001
Error(b) 12 1547.96 128.997
Total 23 73672.2
75 DAA
Source pr Sumof = Mean Evalue Pr(> F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 74966.4 74966.4 1500.05 0
Error(a) 4 199.904 49.976
Amendment 3 4515.65 1505.22 27.89 0
Soil Type:Amendment 3 5537.04 1845.68 34.2 0
Error(b) 12 647.581 53.9651
Total 23 85866.5

Appendix P. ANOVA of MCB as affected by metal oxide particles

118

1 DAA
Source DF Sum of Mean F Value  Pr(> F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 12168.185 = 12168.185 10.81 0.0303
Error(a) 4 4504.4612 1126.1153
Amendment 4 4651.4846 =1162.8712 1.97 0.1474
Soil Type:Amendment 4 577.8147 144.4537 0.25 0.9085
Error(b) 16 9430.9377 589.4336
Total 29 31332.883
7DAA
Source DF cum of Mean’ F Value Pr F)
quare Square
Soil Type 1 4978224.4 4978224.4 318.02 0.0001
Error(a) 4 62615.383 —15653.846
Amendment 4 261224.08 65306.02 417 0.0167
Soil Type:Amendment 4 200914.51 50228.627 3.21 0.041
Error(b) 16 250389.24  15649.328
Total 29 5753367.6
14 DAA
Source DF SLKGs Mean F Value Pr(> F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 2736929.4 2736929.4 150.49 0.0003
Error(a) 4 72747.814 = 18186.953
Amendment 4 75319.396 18829.849 0.81 0.5346
Soil Type:Amendment 4 62934.284 = 15733.571 0.68 0.6157
Error(b) 16 370131.31 23133.207
Total 29 3318062.2
28 DAA
Source DF — — FValue  Pr(> F)
Soil Type 1 2693128.4 2693128.4 66.44 0.0012
Error(a) 4 162140.8 40535.2
Amendment 4 271965.29 67991.323 1.57 0.23
Soil Type:Amendment 4 268015.5 67003.874 1.55 0.2359
Error(b) 16 692488.24  43280.515
Total 29 4087738.2

Appendix Q. ANOVA of MCB as affected by FertiGroe®N

119

1DAA
Source DF Sumof = Mean pValue Pr(>F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 333515.53 333515.53 22.85 0.0088
Error(a) 4 58373.78  14593.445
Amendment 3 119184.29  39728.095 3.65 0.0444
Soil Type:Amendment 3 5177.5507 =: 1725.8502 0.16 0.922
Error(b) 12 130509.71 — 10875.809
Total 23 646760.85
35 DAA
Source DF um us en F Value Pr(> F)
quare Square
Soil Type 1 7394686.9  7394686.9 270.44 0.0001
Error(a) 4 109370.86  27342.714
Amendment 3 719026.66  239675.55 8.77 0.0024
Soil Type:Amendment 3 884454.81 294818.27 10.78 0.001
Error(b) 12 328112.57 27342.714
Total 23 9435651.8
75 DAA
Source DF Sumit Mean Evalue Pr(> F)
Square Square
Soil Type 1 329095.5 329095.5 43.25 0.0028
Error(a) 4 30435.727 7608.9318
Amendment 3 62922.824 20974.275 2.6 0.1006
Soil Type:Amendment 3 57169.02 19056.34 2.36 0.1227
Error(b) 12 96852.794  8071.0662
Total 23 576475.86

Appendix R. ANOVA of MCB as affected by HormoeGroe®

120

1 DAA
Source DF Somot Mean Square F Value  Pr(> F)
Square
Soil Type 1 950921.565  950921.565 1342.91 0
Error(a) 4 2832.4295 708.1074
Amendment 3 157534.056  52511.352 19.02 0.0001
Soil Type:Amendment 3 1036058.52 345352.84 125.09 0
Error(b) 12 33130.2363 2760.853
Total 23 2180476.81
35 DAA
Source DF Sumlot Mean Square F Value  Pr(> F)
Square
Soil Type 1 9478747.95 9478747.95 355.37 0
Error(a) 4 106692.246 26673.0615
Amendment 3 1834943.63 611647.877 15.99 0.0002
Soil Type:Amendment 3 1813402.19  604467.398 15.8 0.0002
Error(b) 12 459149.712  38262.476
Total 23 13692935.7
75 DAA
Source DF pumiot Mean Square F Value  Pr(> F)
Square
Soil Type 1 2806274.23 2806274.23 132.55 0.0003
Error(a) 4 84683.0837 21170.7709
Amendment 3 849898.997 283299.666 61.36 0
Soil
Type:Amendment 3 686242.805 228747.602 49.55 0
Error(b) 12 55400.1967 4616.6831
Total 23 4482499.31

