Ectoparasites and Gastrointestinal Helminths of Bats in Cavinti Underground River and Cave Complex, Cavinti, Laguna

GIL GABRIEL SALAMAT VILLANCIO

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Zoology

JUNE 2015

ABSTRACT

A total of 172 bats collected from the Cavinti Underground River and Cave Complex
(CURCC) located in Cavinti, Laguna within a span of 10 days. There were 122 bats
found to be positive with parasites resulting in an overall parasite prevalence of 70.93%.
From this total number infected, 53 (30.81%) individuals had ectoparasites only, 19
(11.05%) had GIT helminths only while 50 bats (29.07%) had both groups of parasites
infecting them. Subadults (83.72%) had significantly higher prevalence of ectoparasites
than adults (51.94%)(x²=13.561, p<0.001) Linear correlation between parasite intensities
and bat weight was significant for ectoparasites, showing a weak positive linear
relationship (r= 0.171, p= 0.025); GIT helminths on the other hand had a weak negative
linear relationship(r= -0.243, p< 0.001). Analysis of ectoparasite intensity versus GIT
helminth intensity revealed a weak negative linear correlation (r= 0.111, p< 0.05)
Furthermore, it was also observed that frugivores were generally more infested with
ectoparasites than insectivores (x²= 18.975, p < 0.01) and there was no significant
difference between the groups in terms of GIT helminth intensity (x²= 7.136, p=
0.08).The study also suggests a relationship between ectoparasite and GIT helminth
intensity. Some of the parasite findings in the study represent new records of host-
parasite association involving bats in the area.

I. INTRODUCTION

Parasites of animals include protozoans, helminths and arthropods, all of which
can either be found internally or externally. Helminth parasites are diverse; they include
trematodes, cestodes and nematodes,and are commonly found in the gastrointestinal tract
or encystedin the muscles, peritoneal cavity, and subcutaneous tissue or in other vital
organs. Likewise, the diversity of arthropod parasites is also immense infecting a wide
range of vertebrates and invertebrates. These parasites can cause discomfort andreduce
the fitness of their host. Severity of the symptoms and side effects of parasitic
infection/infestation depend on several factors which include the host’s overall health and
fitness,their immune response, the overall parasite load and site of infection.

Parasite-host relationships are one of the least studied aspects of a community as
well as a target for conservation efforts. This is due to the fact that parasites are difficult
to study because of their size, location and distribution in their hosts and within the
ecosystem as well as the fact that they have been viewed as having little or no influence
at all on ecosystem organization and function due to their small biomass. This, however,
is slowly changing because of the increase inthe number of research that have included
not only the parasite’s mere presence, prevalence and abundance but also the impact of
such parasites on their host’s populations, the immediate community as well as on other
populations in close interaction with their hosts. Such studies are showing the immense
diversity of parasites and that they may play key roles in ecological processes including
population control, competition and predator-prey interactions (Gomez and Nichols,

2013).

Parasites are important components of a community because they can cause
symptoms ranging from lowering of fitness and further leading to morbidity and
mortality its host. Though symptoms caused by the parasites are localized to their
individual hosts, such effects could be amplified onto host populations depending on the
transmissibility and virulence of the parasite. Several studies have shown that parasites
can play a key role in population control its hosts by increasing mortality rate or
decreasing their host’s fitness resulting to effects such as decrease in reproduction rates,
increase their host’s vulnerability to predation or its susceptibility to other infections or
pathogens (secondary infections). This capability of parasites to affect ecological
processes in an ecosystem is enough reason for them to be studied as well as their
interactions with their host and host’s populations.

One of the most intriguing organisms to conduct parasitic surveys on are bats,
mainly because of their habitat, diet and behavior; this fact also makes study on bat
parasites difficult. There has been little to no effort to study parasites of bats. Out of all
their parasites, only arthropod ectoparasites have received favorable and positive interest
from researchers in the Philippines which have resulted to new reports of occurrences and
identification of new species of bat ectoparasites (Cuy, 1980; Hastriter and Bush, 2013;
Zabat and Eduardo, 2011; Alvarez,2012). There has been, however, a publication by
Eduardo ( ) identifying two trematodes infecting bats but without further detail.
Further studies should also be done on protozoan and helminth parasite diversity in bats
as well as their transmission dynamics, not only to fill in the gaps in the different host-
parasite interactions involving the Philippines’ bat species as well as to further add to the

biodiversity records in the Philippines. It is also important to understand how these

parasites affect bat populations in terms of their biology and ecology as well as their
effects in their individual hosts.

Bats mainly roost on top of trees or in caves, either solitarily or in colonies, and
conduct most of their activities well above ground. This characteristic alone could
theoretically decrease the presence and prevalence of soil transmitted helminths, since
bats seldom come in contact with the ground. This, along with the fact that their diet is
mostly composed of fruit (frugivores) or insects (insectivores), suggests a much more
intricate mode of transmission for helminths. This is would be more evident in frugivores
than insectivores because most intermediate hosts of helminths are arthropods, the main
diet of insectivores;helminths of frugivores on the other hand, might require much more
elaborate transmission dynamics and much more complex interactions since these bats
mainly eat fruits.

Another interesting aspect is that bats are very mobile because of their ability to
fly. This gives them the ability to cover long distances in search of food or for their other
activities. Therefore the areas covered during foraging or other activities by different bat
populations could overlap, suggesting possible inter-population interactions. This fact
plays an important role in the distribution and transmission of the parasite within and
across bat populations. Meanwhile, the bats social and roosting behavior makes an
appealing case for parasite transmission within bat populations.

Considering such importance and impact of parasites, it is thus truly needed to
catalog parasites of wild animals to determine the overall health and susceptibility of a
population especially that of which has been targeted for conservation efforts.

Furthermore, our environment is facing constant changes due to anthropogenic activities

as well as the effects of climate change. These changes bring about new host-parasite
interactions into the mix together with our native parasites and pathogens which could
have adverse effects on our native animal populations. Baseline information studies on
the current biodiversity of our habitats, including pathogens would be an important tool
to have a bigger picture on the effects of such environmental changes on the diversity and
overall health of our wildlife.

In connection with this, thegeneral objective of the study is to identify the
different ectoparasites and gastrointestinal helminths of endemic and non-endemic bats
from Cavinti Cave and Underground River Complex (CURCC), Cavinti,

LagunaPhilippines. While the specific objectives are to:

1. Identify and describe different ectoparasite and gastrointestinal (GIT)helminths of
different bat species found inthe CURCC, Cavinti, Laguna;

2. Determine prevalence, intensity and abundance of the ectoparasites and GIT
helminths collected from each bat species;

3. Compare the prevalence, intensity and abundance of ectoparasites and
gastrointestinal helminths among bat species, their sex, age and collection sites;
and to

4. Correlate levels of infestation of ectoparasites with the level of infection of

gastrointestinal helminths.

This study was conducted as part of the expedition undertaken by the Natural
History Meuseum, UPLB at the CURCC in Cavinti, Laguna on May 2014 with
Gratuitous Permit no. R4A-WGP-02-2014-LAG-001 as provided by DENER

(APPENDIX CC).

Scope and Limitations

The samples collected for the study was limited tosampling sites located at
Cavinti Underground River and Cave Complex and its vicinity which was situated in

Cavinti, Laguna.

The study targeted to recover and observe adult and larval stages of ectoparasites

as well as of gastrointestinal helminths.

Only ectoparasites that could be handpicked or those visible with the naked eye
were collected. Helminths were recovered and collected from the gastrointestinal tract,
specifically from the stomach, small and large intestines. These parasites came from
different species of bats present in the area with each species having at least one (1)
representative to be sacrificed with the total number per species sacrificed not limited to

just one (1).

I. REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

Bats are mainly divided into two groups, Megichiropterans and
Microchiropterans. One of the easier ways to differentiate the two is through their diet
and size, basically the former eat fruits and are generally bigger bodied compared to the
latter and the latter mainly feed on insects or small organisms and most use echolocation
as a means of perceiving their environment. Both of these groups are nocturnal with some

species in both exhibiting either colonial roosting or individually.

Preliminary netting in the study siteshowed that bat species present within the
vicinity of the Cavinti Underground River and Cave Complex (CURCC) included:
Megachiroptera: Cynopterus  brachyotis, Ptenochirus jagori, and Rousettus
ampexicaudatus; Microchiropterans: Hipposideros diadema, H.lekaguli, H.pygmaeus,

Miniopterus australis, Rhinolophus rufus, Rhinolophus inops.

Parasites of Bats

Parasites are a diverse group of organisms ranging from the unicellular
protozoans to the more complex arthropod and vertebrate parasites. Parasites of wildlife
have been least studied most especially in the Philippines first and foremost because of
the lack of interest and lack of funding. Most parasitological surveys in the country have
been focused on parasites of medical or veterinary importance, those of which have an
immediate impact on human populations.Furthermore, they have been neglected mostly

because they have been thought to have little impact on ecosystem dynamics because of

their small biomass and most negative effects localized to individual hosts or within a
host population only. Bats have been targeted by researchers for their potential to harbour
zoonotic diseases. Some studies done in the Philippines have shown that these bats are
positive for viral antigens of Ebola and Marburg. Aside from these, only ectoparasite
diversity of bats found in the country has been explored and yet to be published. Internal
parasites, such as helminths, have been least focused on with Eduardo only reporting two
trematode species; this may bedue to the little threat they could pose to humans and

domestic animal populations.

Studying host- parasite interactions as well as the parasite’s biology and ecology
is important because both have implications in host population fitness as well their
ecology and behavior. In fact there have been several studies that have shown that
parasites have an impact on roost fidelity of bats and their roost selection and that the
level of roost fidelity, conversely, affects ectoparasite biology as well ( Lewis, 1995;
Dick and Patterson, 2006; Bartoni¢ka, 2008; Gikas, 2011 ).This is supported in an article
by Holt and Boulinier (2005) wherein they cited studies in birds where an increase in the

host’s dispersal was associated with high ectoparasite burdens.

However, studies by Russo and his colleagues (2005) have shown otherwise but hinted
that roost selection can be driven by compounded effects of population density and
overall parasite load. This density dependent movement/ roost preference can be possible
because it has been proven that in some mammalian host-parasite relationships, the risk

of parasitism increases as population density increases (Rifkin, 2012).

Ectoparasites of bats

Ectoparasite fauna are important aspects to consider when dealing with interactions
within an ecosystem. Ectoparasites not only cause disease and stress but may also serve as
intermediate hosts and vectors of other diseases. Studies on the ectoparasites of bats in the
Philippines are still a few, but interest in such field is slowly on the rise. Several published
articles have shown a diversity of ectoparasite fauna that parasitize on bats most of which include
the well-studied batflies, fleas, mites and ticks as well as the non-obligate parasites such as bugs,
mosquitoes and other insects. There has been several efforts in cataloguing such parasites of bats
because of the ease of collecting such macroparasites because they are commonly found in the
furred areas of their bat hosts (Dick and Patterson, 2006). To date, there is increasing interest in
the study of ectoparasites of not only bats, but of wildlife as a whole in the Philippines and, in
fact, recentexpeditions by the Museum of Natural History in UPLB have included these

ectoparasites of bats within their interests.

One of the most studied ectoparasite of bats are the batflies because of their high degree
of host specificity. A recent study done by Alvarez (2012) on bat flies of Mt. Makiling, Laguna
showed a wide variety of batflies. On the otherhand, Cuy (19804; 1980°) published a compilation
of records of batflies, both nycteribiid and streblid further showing the diversity of batflies that
can be found in the Philippines. Meanwhile, Cuy (1979) also published a compilation of reports
of a variety of mites that were collected from various bats from the country, further adding to the
already reported mite species infesting bats of the Philippines in a paper by Delfinado and Baker

(1963).

Cuy (1979) also made reports on mites (Acarina: Mesostigmata) with several reported
species collected from bats around the country. Another paper by Delfinado and Baker further

adds to the diversity of mites (Acarina) that are associated with bats in the Philippines.

Several species of fleas of bats collected from the Philippines were also included in
Hopkins and Rothschild (1953) compiled reports as well as in the work by Traub (1951).
Moreover,there is still an abundance of new species of parasites in the country. In fact, recent
studies by Hastriter and Bush have resulted in new records of fleas in Luzon (2013) and
Mindanao (2014) as well as the discovery of two new species of fleas, Medwayella

independencia collected from Urogale everetti (Hastritter and Bush, 2014) and Lentistivalius

Dhilippinensis (Hastriter and Bush, 2013).

Gastrointestinal Helminths of bats

Information on the helminth fauna of bats in the Philippines has been scarce and
is limited to descriptions cited by Eduardo of the trematodes. However, studies from
countries in the Americas, Africa, Europe and Asia have shown that bats have a diverse
array of helminth parasites. These studies reported that helminth parasites of bats,
frugivores and insectivores, include trematodes, cestodes and helminths. Parasites of bats
have been reported in Brazil', Nigeria’, Arkansas? 5 Japan’, South Africa’, Puerto Rico®
and Hungary’ (‘Noguiera, 2004; Okafor, 2004; 3McAllister, 2004; “Sawada, 1970;
Junker, 2008; “Krichbaum,2009; "Murai, 1976 ). These parasites have been observed and
collected from the peritoneal cavity, wing membranes, encysted in tissues and organs,

and from the intestinal tract of the bats.

Trematode species reported in Nigeria, South Africa and Arkansas belonged to
the genus Prosthodendrium, Castoria, Maxbraunium, Hastilesia, Allassogonoporus and
Acanthatrium. These groups of parasites however have a complicated lifecycle and

transmission to their bat hosts has yet to be established. There is still much to be known


on how they reach their definitive hosts. A study by (Brown 1933)showed the use of
arthropod/snail intermediate hosts by several species of trematodes with some even
involving another arthropod as its second intermediate host. One such example of this is
the trematode Acanthurium, which uses a snail as its 1° intermediate host and the
caddisfly as its second intermediate host, infecting it during its aquatic larval stage
(McAllister, 2007). Meanwhile, Noguiera (2004) and his team suggested that the larval
stage of these parasites might have been picked up when the bats drink at lick sites. This
is plausible since most trematodes include an aquatic phase in their life cycles. Lick sites
of the bats may be teeming with larvae and once the bat goes for a drink, they might have

ingested the larvae and then establishment of infection ensues.

Cestodes of bats have been reported in countries like Japan, South Africa,
Hungary, Nigeria, the United States and South America, withmost reporting cestodes
belonging to the family Hymenolepidae. This family of tapeworms is fit for infecting bats
because they are known to have arthropod intermediate hosts, the main diet of insect bats.
What make these reports more interesting are the reported infections of cestodes not only
in insectivorous bats, but also in fruit bats (Nogueira, et al. 2004). This further suggests a
much more intricate transmission route since fruit bats normally do not normally target
arthropod prey, though some species have been observed to utilize arthropods as an
alternative source of protein. Explanations on as how they might infect both bat groups
include complex manipulation of host phenotype and behaviour that has been observed in
other parasites. It has been observed that infection of larval forms of parasites in ants
have changed their behaviour making them move to areas where they can be accidentally

ingested by their hosts. Other parasites go as far as changing the phenotype of their hosts,


for example ants, in such a way that they resemble fruits or berries as well as altering
their behaviour. The exact lifecycle of most reported cestodes of bats and their
transmission dynamics have not yet been elucidated and are yet to be established and
should be further studied because such information could prove useful or add to the
current reports on as to how parasites have evolved to increase the probability and rate of

transmission to their definitive hosts.

On the other hand, transmission of nematodes are not so complex, with some
generally having direct lifecycles, meaning that they do not need any intermediate hosts
or vectors, though some require intermediate hosts for their larval stages to develop. The
infective stage of nematodes is either the egg stage or their third stage larvae (L3) which
can either be ingested directly or infect hosts by penetrating the skin or via vector or

intermediate host.

Nematodes of bats have been reported in countries in the US and South America,
Africa, Japan and other countries. The transmission dynamics of these parasites have not
yet been established but potential intermediate hosts could also include arthropods as well
as ants. There have been less or no hypothesis at all about the direct transmission of such
parasites to the bats but a potential route could also be the lick sites of the bats,
contaminated with eggs or larvae, or through communal grooming where in the bodies of
the bats are contaminated with fecal material containing eggs and larvae. Some bats also
spend some time on the ground in contact with soil, from which they could possibly

acquire eggs or larvae.


Why Study Parasite and Diseases of Wildlife?

Parasite diversity and infections as well as other disease causing pathogens are
important not only in terms of assessing the overall health of individuals and populations
but also in considering conservation and management strategies for animals. Parasitic
infections can have direct and indirect effectson the physiology and behavior of an
animal and may influence its overall fitness, movement, social interactions, and home
range (Dobson and Carper 1992; Scott 1988). Effects of parasitic infections can be
further observed in the host’s reproductive rate, growth rate, and ultimately their survival
(Gomez, 2013; Scott, 1988). Host-paraiste interactions can further be affected by the

immediate environment and changes that happen to it.

Data on parasites as well as their biology and ecology has applications on
conservation and management strategies of habitats. For example, given the implication
of parasites affecting bat’s roost switching and roost fidelity, to ensure the fitness of bat
populations, there should be abundant roosting sites in the area. Furthermore, similar to
the importance of monitoring diseases in humans, monitoring of infectious diseases in
wildlife is also important because the incidence of novel diseases in a population could
cause adverse effects which could be reflected up to the entire ecosystem. Management
strategies in conservation sites should be aptly aware of such situations to manage

outbreaks of disease.

Parasite data is not the only important factor that should be considered in
assessing or maintaining the overall health of populations. Several factors work in

tandem with diseases which increases the risk of transmission. Studies on the effect of


anthropogenic movement on infectious diseases in bats are not well studied or might even
be a novel idea but this could be a major area for conservation and management.
Anthropogenic incursions and activity as well as introduction of domestic animals
could also apply pressures to wild animal populations. Disturbances can cause stress
which in turn can lower the immune response of individuals making them susceptible to
infections, be it parasitic or of bacterial or viral origin. However stress could also lower
the probability and success for establishment of parasitic diseases. This should be well
monitored especially in sensitive populations. Furthermore, the establishment of
settlements and other facilities may enable and support the entry and introduction ofother
animals such as domestic animals, immigrant species and worst case, other pests. For
example, the increase in size and number of farms established by humans in an area
would surely entail an increase in rodent population in the area. This could benefit
animals such as predators but could also attract other competitors for the local endemic
species of rodents or small mammals. This introduction of animals could affect the
diversity and transmission dynamics of parasites and other pathogens in the habitat. This
movement may result to new host-parasite interactions in the area and may pose a viable
threat to both the local and introduced species.Parasites and other pathogens tend to be
more virulent in new hosts or to those having no exposure or are not yet adapted in
dealing with the novel infections (Sasal, 2000; Moller, 2005). Furthermore, introduction
of species may not only introduce novel diseases but also introduce new hosts for native
parasites to infect. These new hosts may help maintain the transmission of native diseases

(Lafferty and Kuris, 2005; Moller, 2005)


Another factor that could affect host-parasite interactions is climate change. It has
been well documented that our ecosystems are experiencing changes in temperature and
other factors related to temperature such as rainfall, humidity and many more. These
changes could allow the colonization of parasites and other diseases in novel areas
through the increased range of its hosts and vectors due to changes in habitat suitability.
For example, the increase in temperature could increase the range of parasitic diseases
moving up and down latitudes because increased temperatures in the area improves the
chances of effective colonization by arthropod vectors and other intermediate hosts.

Studies on parasites and diseases of wildlife and effects on their ecology with
response to changes in their environment is pretty much still an understudied aspect of
host-parasite interactions. Furthermore, the relationships and interactions between
parasites and their hosts as well as with the immediate environment only shows that
conservation efforts should also understand the parasitic diversity of their target,be it
introduced or native species. There must also be studies on how to effectively monitor
and manage parasitic infections and other diseases. The only way to monitor such effects
especially on animals such as bats is to build an existing database of endemic infectious
diseases of bat populations in an area, especially those targeted for conservation and
consistent monitoring of the populations. There is large evidence for interspecific
transfer of diseases, there is a large possibility that novel parasites and diseases from
other species could establish in/on them and the implications of this from an ecological

stand-point are great.

II. METHODOLOGY

Sampling for Bats

Mist-nets (size: 6m X 2m) were placed near the openings of the caves and open
areas at 6:00-7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. — 7:00 p.m. (Barlow, 1999) to capture the bats.
Each captured bat was placed in clean cloth bags before processing them for parasites

(Sedlock, 2001).

Another alternative used was the capture of the bats within the cave by use of
makeshift poles and mist-nets as well as insect nets. This was done on caves where in

setting up of nets at its entrance is not advisable and not possible.

Processing of Collected Bats

Species Identification

The captured bats were identified with reference to Heaney and Ingley (1992).
The bats were sacrificed using ethyl acetate. Ethyl acetate was placed inside a plastic bag
and the bird bags containing the bats were then placed in it. Its sex, age, weight and wing

spanhas also been recorded (Sedlock, 2001).

Collection of Ectoparasites

Upon death, the bat was removed from the bag and the bag was inspected for
ectoparasites that might have fallen off. Visible ectoparasites were then picked from the

body, ears, mouth and wings of the bats and were placed in vials containing 70% ethanol.


Collection of Gastrointesitinal Parasites

Samples, adult and larvae, came mainly from the gastrointestinal tract (GIT) of
the bats and were collected upon dissection and extraction of the GIT. Further
examination of the peritoneal cavity, wings and skin was done to collect worms and cysts

of parasites.

The extracted GI tract was separated into sections: stomach, small intestines and
large intestines. This was done to prevent post mortem migration of adult worms and
larvae to other parts of the GI tract. This was important to accurately determine the
location where the parasite was found because this information could aid in its

identification.

Large intestines

Esophagus

Small Intestines

Stomach

Figure 1. A model of the gastrointestinal tract that was separated into four segments:
esophagus, stomach, small intestines and large intestines

These segments were then cut and separated from each other. The separated
sections were then opened up longitudinally. Large and visible food items were then

removed from the GIT and the opened up sections were placed inside a vial containing


saline solution. The vial was shaken for one (1) minute. After this, the vial was filled
with saline solution and the contents were allowed to settle for one (1) to two (2) minutes
after which the vial was gently tilt and the upper three quarters of the mix decanted onto a
sieve. A sieve was present to prevent loss of parasites from decanting. When the mixture
was clear, almost all liquid from the vial was decanted then hot water was poured into it
to kill the parasites. The parasites were then fixed and stored in 70% Ethanol.

When the GIT were too small to be manipulated and processed accordingly as
stated above the cut intestines were teased using the back of a scalpel or a finely tipped
forceps Themixture of digested food and mucosa that goes out the end of the cut

intestines was then agitated to reveal the parasites trapped in them.

Processing of Parasites

Ectoparasites

Ectoparasites were generally stored in 70% alcohol from collection until
processing. Ectoparasites were generally cleared in 10% Potassium Hydroxide (KOH)to
makethem translucent and then were mounted onto a slide using Hoyer’s solution. Bat
flies were directly viewed under a dissecting microscope while fleas and mites were
identified after mounting.

Keys and other published work were used to determine the genus or species of each
of the ectoparasites collected (Cuy, 1980; Cuy, 1979; Delfinado and Baker, 1963;

Hopkins and Rothschild, 1953)


Gastrointestinal Helminths

To identify and view trematodes and cestodes, they were needed to be stained
using Acetocarmine stain. This was done by directly placing the parasites, from storage
(70% ethanol), onto depression slides and pre-mixed acetocarmine was then dropped onto
the wells containing the parasite. After five (5) minutes, the acetocarmine was pipetted
off and acid ethanol (1ml HCL: 100 ml 70% Ethanol) was then introduced into the wells.
This was done to clear some of the red tinge off of the specimen. Total time for clearing
of specimen was variable depending on the tinge on the specimen; some might take
longer while others have shorter clearing times. After this, the acidic ethanol was the
replaced by basic ethanol (1ml 10% NH; : 100m! 70% Ethanol). This was done to add a
bluish tinge to some of the parasites external and internal structures to add a colour
gradient to the specimen for easier viewing of its structure and organs. Time needed for
this step was also variable depending on the desired intensity of the bluish tinge on the
specimen. After this step, the basic ethanol is then pipetted out and the stained specimen
was subjected to a series of serial dilutions of ethanol, specifically: 70%, 80%, 90% and
100% ethanol. The specimen was be placed in each dilution for 15 minutes in order to
extract all water from the specimen. The specimen was cleared in Xylene and mounted
on a slide using Canada balsam. Specimens that were not immediately mounted were
stored in either xylene or 100% ethanol.

Nematodes on the other hand were subjected to the same serial dilution of ethanol
as mentioned above. After dehydration, the nematodes were then placed into two (2)

washings of clove oil for at least 30 minutes each washing. They were then placed in a


3:1 (clove oil:balsam) for preparation for mounting. The nematodes were then mounted
onto glass slides using balsam.
The works of Williams (1959) and Meszaros (1973) were used in identifying the

helminths collected.

Analysis of data
Prevalence

Prevalence of the parasite is known as the proportion of the host population that is
infected by the parasite. It is computed by dividing the number of hosts infected with the
parasite by the total number of sampled hosts. Total number of hosts is the number of

infected hosts plus the number of uninfected hosts.

No. of infected hosts
Prevalence = ———————————- X 100
Total number of hosts sampled

Intensity

Intensity of a parasite is the total number of the specific parasite in one single
host. Meanwhile, mean intensity is the total number of all the individuals of the specific
species of parasite divided by the total number of infected hosts.

Total no. of individuals of parasite x
Mean Intensity =_—§$_ ————_______L-
Total number of infected hosts


Statistical Analysis

Two (2) kinds of computer software were used for the statistical analysis of the

data collected and these were SPSS and QP 3.0.

Chi-square test of independence was used to determine whether the number of
infected hosts differs significantly among all the samples. This was done with the help of

QP 3.0.

Shapiro-Wilk test for normalcy was done to determine if the data collected from
the samples are drawn from a collection that is of random distribution. This was done
with the help of QP 3.0. This determined whether to use parametric (normal dist) or non-

parametric (non-normal) tests to treat the data.

To compare and rank the parasite intensities, Kruskal- Wallis (H- test) and Mann-
Whitney (U-test) will be used. Mann- Whitney is basically for comparing two (2) means
to determine if the intensity of parasites from one sample set is frequently different from
that of another. Kruskal- Wallis on the otherhand, was used in ranking theintensities of
the parasies based on their designated mean ranks thereby determining which group had

the highest and lowest values.

Linear correlation was done to assess whether there is a positive or negative
correlation between intensity of parasites and bat weight. While binary regression will be
used to determine cause and effect relationships between weight, age or sex and parasite

intensity.

III. |. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

4.1 Bat Samples Collected

A total of 172 bats were sacrificed and collected in the vicinity of the Cavinti
Underground River and Cave Complex (CURCC) located in Cavinti, Laguna within a
span of 10 days. These 172 individuals belonged to 13 species which include: Rousettous
amplexicaudatus (n=32), Cynopterus brachyotis (n=16), Ptenochirus jagori (n=13),
Eunycteris robusta (n=1), Haplonycteris fischerii (n=2),Myotis horsefieldii (n=1),
Hipposideros lekaguli (n=20), H. diadema (n=15), H. pygmaeus (n=21), Rhinolophus
rufus (n=9), R. inops (n=17), R. arcuatus (n=1) and Miniopterus australis (n=24).

Of the 172 bats collected, 64 (37.21%) were fruit bats belonging to 5 species:
Rousettous amplexicaudatus (n=32), Cynopterus brachyotis (n=16), Ptenochirus jagori
(n=13), Eunycteris robusta (n=1) and Haplonycteris fischerii (n=2). These bats were
mainly caught in mist nets that were set-up in areas around the camp site.

Meanwhile, a total of 108 insectivores were caught belonging to 8 distinct
species: Myotis horsefieldii (n=1), Hipposideros lekaguli (n=20), H. diadema (n=15), H.
pygmaeus (n=21), Rhinolophus rufus (n=9), R. inops (n=17), R. arcuatus (n=1) and
Miniopterus australis (n=24). Most of these bats were caught in mist nets that were set-
up along cave entrances while others were caught using handheld nets set-up inside the
caves. Only a handful of individuals were caught in the nets setup around the campsite,

these mainly includedH. diadema, H. lekaguli, R. rufus and Myotis horsfieldii.


Of the 172 individuals, 91 were male and 81 were femalewith a mean weight of
27.87 grams. Furthermore, 43 of the total bats caught were subadult while 129 were

already adults and having the capacity to breed.

Frugivores

Table 1. Bat Species Collected from the CURCC and Prevalence of Ectoparasites and
GIT Helminths

Insectivores

SPECIES No. of Bats No. of Bats Positive (%)
Collected Ectoparasite GIT Both TOTAL
Helminth
Rousettus 32 19(59.4) 1(3.1) 12(37.5) 100.00
amplexicaudatus
Cynopterus 16 10(62.5) 0 1(6.25) 68.75
brachyotis
Ptenochirus jagori 13 4(30.8) 2(15.4)  3(23.1) + 69.23
Hipposideros 20 3(15.0) 0 0 15.00
lekaguli
Hipposideros 15 5(33.3) 1(6.67) 5(33.3) 73.33
diadema
Hipposideros 21 3(14.3) 3(14.3)  1(4.8) 33.33
pygmaeus
Rhinolphus rufus 9 2(22.22) 4(44.44) 2(22.22) 88.89
Rhinolophus inops 17 3(17.6) 1(5.9) 10(58.8) 82.35
Miniopterus 24 1(4.2) 7(29.2)  16(66.7) 100.00
australis
**Haplonycteris 2 0 0 0 0(0)
fischerii
**Myotis horsefieldii 1 1 0 0 pos(4)
**Rhinolophus 1 1 0 0 pos(2)
arcuatus
**Eunycteris 1 1 0 0 pos(1)
robusta

Total 172 53 19 50 70.93



From these 172 individuals, 122(70.93%) bats were found positive with either an
ectoparasite or gastrointestinal (GIT) helminth, while 50 (29.01%) had no infection from
both sources. Of these 122that were positive,53bats(30.81%) were infested with
ectoparasites only while 19(11.05%) were infected with GIT helminths only, while a total
of 50bats(29.07%) had both infections.

Meanwhile, looking at each parasite group individually, ectoparasite prevalence
was at 59.88% (n=103) with an average intensity of five (5) ectoparasites per infested bat
while GIT helminth prevalence was at 40.11% (n=69) with a mean intensity of eight (8)

GIT helminths per infected bat.

4.2 ECTOPARASITE AND GIT HELMINTH FAUNA


4.2.1 ECTOPARASITES

Table 2. The overall prevalence and mean intensity of ectoparasites as well as that of
each group of ectoparasites collected from bats from the CURCC, Cavinti,
Laguna (N=172)

Group n Prev (%) No. Ecto Mean Int

Nye 40(5) 23.25% B 2
Streb _.27(12) 15.70% 67 3
Fleas 15 (2) 8.72% 37 3
Mites 45 (6) 26.16% 236 5
Ticks 6 (2) 3.48% 27 5
Larvae 19(7) 10.92% 91 5
Total 103 59.88% 531 5

A total of 502 ectoparasites were observed and collected from the 103 individuals
out of 172 were found to be infested with them. This amounted to a total ectoparasite
prevalence of 59.88% and a mean intensity of five (5) ectoparasites per infested bat
collected from the CURCC vicinity. Mites and the presence of larvae accounted for most

of the mean intensity of ectoparasites.

These ectoparasites were then sorted into six (6) groups, mainly: Nycteribiidae,
Streblidae, Fleas, Mites, Ticks and Larval forms. Larval forms were included because
these forms comprise both bat flies and other unknown ectoparasites whose larval forms
are embedded in the bat’s tissues. Streblids was the most common group of ectoparasite
which was observed in 12 bat species, mites were collected from seven (7) species,
Nycteribiids collected from five (5) species while ticks and fleas were only found in two
(2) bat species. Fleas were only found on frugivores Rousettus amplexicaudatus and

Ptenochirus jagori.


Of all these ectoparasites, mites had the highest overall prevalence (n=45;
26.16%), which was followed by Nycteribiids (n=40; 23.25%). Streblids came in third
with a total prevalence of 15.70% (n=27) and it is worth noting that they were present in
at least one individual from 12 out of 13 species collected. They were absent in only
Haplonycteris fischerii. Meanwhile there were only a few individuals that were infested
by fleas (n=15; 8.72%) and ticks (n=6; 3.48%). It is also worth noting the presence of

larval forms (19; 10.92%) of ectoparasites on some of the bats.

Mites and ticks had the highest mean intensity, with five (5) ectoparasites per bat.
Though both had the same mean intensity it is worth noting that there were 45 bats (from
6 species) infested with mites with a total of 252 individual mites collected as compared
to ticks infesting six (6) bats from two (2) species, having a total of 27 ticks collected all
in all. Though 40 individuals harboured Nycteribiids there were only 74 of them collected
resulting to a mean intensity of only two (2) Nycteribiids per bat while streblids had a
higher mean intensity with three (3) streblids per bat despite having almost only 24
individuals infested and being present in all bat species caught. Fleas had a mean
intensity of three (3) fleas per bat and were present in only 17 individuals from 2 bat

species.


Aggregation of Ectoparasites

Frequency

Figure 2. Distribution of intensities of ectoparasites mostly showing a slightly aggregated
distribution with most bats harbouring only 1 individual.

ectos

There were 69 individuals uninfected as seen in the figure. With this excluded it is
evident that the distribution of the intensities of ectoparasites follows a non-normal
distribution (k=0.430) and is pretty much aggregated (D=0.700); most of the infected bats
harbouring only one (1) individual ectoparasite. This follows the normal description of
parasite distribution being normally aggregated with few hosts harbouring high intensities

of the parasite.


Weight vs. Ectoparasite intensity

r= 0.284

vw


So

o
T ™
60 80

Figure 3. Positive linear correlation observed between weight and ectoparasite intensity
from bats collected in CURCC, Cavinti, Laguna.

Linear regression analysis showed that there was a significant weak positive
linear relationship (r=0.284, p< 0.001) between ectoparasite intensity and bat weight.
This suggests that bigger bodied and heavier bat groups, frugivores and relatively big

insectivores, have more ectoparasites than smaller bodied bats.

Age vs. Ectoparasite Intensity

Frequency

|

‘Subadults Adults

c

Ectoparasite Intensities

Figure 4.Frequency distribution of ectoparasites in subadult and adult bats.

Table 3.Prevalence and Mean Intensity of ectoparasites with respect to age.

Age N nD Total Intensity Mean Intensity

Subadult 43 36 (83.73%) 281 8
Adult 129 67 (51.93%) 250 4

Frequency distribution of intensities for both age groups was both non-normal

with that of sub adults having a lighter slope as compared to that of the adults. There is

also a large difference between the number of adults (129) and sub adults (43) caught. It

is worth noting that a large proportion of the captured sub adultsinfested with

ectoparasites (36 out of 43; 83.73%) is significantly higher than that of the adults (67 Of


129; 51.93%) (x”=13.561, p<0.001). Furthermore, Mann-Whitney U-test showed that the
intensity of ectoparasites infesting sub adults is frequently greater compared to values

ybserved in adults (U= 1243, p < 0.01).

Sex vs. Ectoparasite Intensity

Frequency
§

Males Females

Ectoparasite Intensities

Figure 5.Frequency distribution of ectoparasites in male and female bats.

Table 4 Prevalence and Mean Intensity of ectoparasites with respect to sex.

Sex N a Total Intensity _ Mean Intensity
Male 91 60 (65.93%) 310 5

Female 81 43 (53.01%) 221 5


Frequency distribution shows a non-normal distribution, and further suggesting an
aggregated distribution with respect to sex as a grouping variable. There were more males
(n= 91) than females (n= 81) collected with infected males having a higher prevalence
(65.93%) compared to that of the infected females (53.01%). Mann-Whitney U-test
showed the intensity between both sexes was not different from each other(U= 3291, p =
0.209) and the difference prevalence between both sexes was not significant (x?=2.945,

p=0.086).

Ectoparasite Species

There were a total of 28 species of ectoparasites collected from bat samples in
CURCC Cavinti, Laguna. This was composed of: Nycteribiidae: 14 species belonging to
five (5) genera; Streblidae: five (5) species from three (3) genera; Fleas: two (2) species
belonging to one (1) genera; and Mites: seven (7) species from four (4) genera. The
collected ticks were not identified because all of them were in their larval form making it

almost impossible to differentiate or assign to a genus.


Family NYCTERIBIIDAE

A total of 73 nycteribiids were collected from bats captured within the vicinity of
CURCC Cavinti, Laguna. The nycteribiids collected in this study were identified using a
dichotomous key by Cuy (1980). These ectoparasites are obligate parasites of bats, hence
the common name batflies. Batflies from this group hardly resemble true flies because of
the absence of wings and closely resembles the wingless Hippoboscids (Hippoboscidae)
of other mammals.Of the 20 species and three (3) subspecies found in the Philippines and

described by Cuy (1980) in his paper, 14 species from five (5) genera were identified.

There are two (2) subfamilies of Nycteribiids collected: subfamily Cyclopodiinae,
which includes the genus Leptocyclopodia and Euxampsipoda, and_ subfamily
Nycteribiinae, which includes genus Nycteribia, Phthiridium, and Penicilidia. One of the
major difference between the two (2) subfamilies is their host preference, with the former
primarily parasitizing Megachiropterans and the latter on Microchiropterans. Moreover,
the thoracic and abdominal ctenidia of individuals of subfamily Cyclopodiinae are well-
developed with coarse blunt teeth. On the other hand, those of subfamily Nycteribiinae

have slender thoracic and abdominal ctenidia, with either pointed or peg-like teeth

Class INSECTA
Order DIPTERA
Superfamily HIPPOBOSCOIDEA
Family NYCTERIBIIDAE
Subfamily CYCLOPODIINAE

Genus Eucampsipoda
E. inermis
E. philippinensis
E. sundaica

Genus Leptocyclopodia
L.brevicula
L. simulans
L. haplotes

Subfamily NYCTERIBIINAE

Genus Nycteribia
N. allotopa
N. allotopoides
N. parvula
N. parvulodes

Genus Penicilidia
P. acuminata
P. dofourii tainani
P. oligacantha

Genus Pthiridium
Pt. brachyacantha


Subfamily CYCLOPODIINAE

Genus Eucampsipoda

The head of members of this genus is laterally compressed bearing a set of
pigmented eyes. There are also two (2) visible rings on their tibia. Three (3) species, E.
Philippinensis, E. inermis and E. sundaica, were collected primarily from R.
amplexicaudatus(Cuy,1980; Bergmans and Rozendaal, 1988).Despite the fact that the
preferred hosts of these parasites are Megachirpoterans, samples of E. philipinensis were
collected from M. australis. This could have resulted from accidental infestation of the
ectoparasite or an error due to contamination of the bat because of the repetitive use of

the same bird bags.

The main difference of E. philippinensis with the other two is that the syntergite
1+2 of the female of this species has a concave posterior margin. Its an tergite also
extends nearly across the abdomen which has several short setae along its margin.
Meanwhile, E. inermis and E. sundaica can be differentiated by the number of pegs in the
male’s clasper and the presence of setae on its base. The claspers of males of the former
bear 7-9 pegs with setae present along its base while the claspers of latter have 9-12 pegs

with no setae at the base.


Eucampsipoda inermis (2.32%, n=4) (APPENDIX A)

Hosts: Rousettus amplexicaudatus (12.50%, n=4)

Other host records (Phil): E. spelaea glandifera

Distribution (Phil): Luzon, Catanduanes, Mindoro, PAlwan, Balabac, Samar,

Leyte, Cebu, Negros, Mindanao, Samal, Jolo

Eucampsipoda philippinensis (6.98%, n=12) (APPENDIX B)

Hosts: Rousettus amplexicaudatus (34.38%, n=11), Miniopterus australis (4.17%,

n=1), Eonycteris robusta (n=1)

Other host records (Phil): E. spelaea glandifera, C. brachyotis, H. diadema

griseus, M. schreibersii

Distribution (Phil): Luzon, Leyte, Mindoro, Negros, Polilio, Marinduque

Eucampsipoda sundaica (0.58%, n=1) (APPENDIX C)

Hosts: Rousettus amplexicaudatus (3.13%, n=1)

Other hosts (Phil): £. spelaea glandifera

Distribution (Phil): Luzon, Mindoro, Palawan, Leyte, Negros, Mindanao


GenusLeptocyclopodia

One of the more obvious differences important in recognizing Leptocyclopodia
with Eucampsipoda, aside from the former being more slender, is the presence of three
(3) rings in the tibia of the former while the latter has two (2) rings. This feature is also
evident in the members of genus Cyclopodia. However, there are easily detectable

differences between the two .

The palps on Leptocyclopodia are tapering and bear long seta at its tips while the
palps on Cyclopodia are broad and laterally compressed with shorter apical seta.
Furthermore the males of the former have a long and narrow anal segment while the latter

has a broad and conical anal segment.

Out of the six (6) species reported by Cuy (1980), three (3) species from this
genus were collected from fruit bats in CURCC Cavinti, Laguna. Leptocyclopodia
brevicula and Leptocyclopodia simulans were collected from both P. jagori and C.
brachyotis, while Leptocyclopodia haplotes was collected from P. jagori only.Members
of these genus can also be collected from bats of genus Rousettous ((Cuy,1980;

Bergmans and Rozendaal, 1988).

One quick difference between the three is that L. simulans lacks a series of teeth
on the ventral side of the male’s claspers while the other two have a series of 5-12 teeth
arrange in a single longitudinal series along the ventral surface of the clasper.
Furthermore, the phallobase of L. simulans is curved upwards with a sharp tip while that
of the other two has a blunt tip and only slightly curved upwards.Meanwhile, the legs of

L. brevicola and L. haplotes can be differentiated because the legs of the former are


evidently longer and narrower as compared to the short and broader profile of the latter’s
legs. Furthermore, the anal segment of male L. brevicula has deep transverse grooves

near its base while those of L. haplotes lack this.

Leptocyclopodia brevicula (4.65%, n=8) (APPENDNIX D)

Hosts: Cynopterus brachyotis (43.75%, n=7), Ptenochirus jagori (15.38%, n=2)
Other hosts (Phil): -

Distribution (Phil): Mindanao, Luzon

Leptocyclopodia simulans(1.16%, n=2) (APPENDIX E)

Hosts: Prenochirus jagori (7.69%, n=1), Cynopterus brachyotis (6.25%, n=1)

Other hosts (Phil): R. amplexicaudatus, E. robusta, Macroglossus lagochilus

Distribution (Phil): Luzon, Mindoro, Leyte, Bohol, Cebu, Negros, Camiguin,

Mindanao

Leptocyclopodia haplotes (0.58%, n=1) (APPENDIX F)

Hosts: Ptenochirus jagori (7.69%,n=1)

Other hosts (Phil): H. fischeri, C.brachyotis, M. lagochilus, R. amplexicaudatus

Distribution (Phil): Luzon, Negros, Mindanao


SubfamilyNYCTERIBIINAE

Genus Nycteribia

Two of the earliest records of batflies in the Philippines are N. allotopa and N.
parvula. One distinguishable characteristic of these batflies is that they do not have eyes.
Furthermore, species from this genus have a body length of approximately 1.5- 2.5 mm
long. Their tibia is also short and wide with its length approximately 2.5 or 3.5 times its

width.

There were four (4) species of Nycteribia that were identified and collected from
M. australis. Species identified included: N. allotopa, N. allotopoides, N. parvula and N.
parvuloides. As stated earlier, these ectoparasites generally infest microchiropteran hosts,
however, one (1) R. amplexicaudatus was positive with such. This could either be result
of cross contamination due to the repeated use of the bird bags or accidental infestation

because R. amplexiucaudatus uses caves as roosts as well.

These four (4) species can be separated into two, N. allotopa and N. allotopoides,
and N. parvula and N. parvuloides, by the morphology of their anal segment. The anal
segment of the females of the former two (2) is narrow and sharply set off from the
abdomen while the males’ are long and cylindrical with a widening at the base. The anal

segment of the latter two (2) is short and truncate for both sexes.

Meanwhile, the main difference between N. allotopa and N. allotopoides is that
the post genital plate in the former is transversely elliptical with two (2) rows of teeth at
its posterior margin while in the latter it is shaped like a shallow triangle with curved

posterior margin bearing 6-8 widele spaced teeth and 1-2 smaller pre-marginal teeth. On


the other hand, Nycteribia parvula and N. parvukoides can be differentiated by the

presence or absence of a pre-genital plate which is absent in the latter.

Nycteribia allotopa(1.16%, n=2) (APPENDIX G)
Hosts: Miniopterus australis (8.33%, n=2)
Other hosts (Phil): M. schreibersii eschscholtzii, Tadarida luzonus

Distribution (Phil): Luzon, Polilio, Mindanao

Nycteribia allotopoides(0.58%, n=1) (APPEMDIX H)
Hosts: Miniopterus australis (4.17%, n=1)
Other hosts (Phil): M. schreibersii eschscholtzii, Tadarida luzonus

Distribution (Phil): Luzon, Polilio, Mindanao

Nycteribia parvula (1.74%, n=3) (APPENDIX I)

Hosts: Minipterus australis (8.33%, n=2), Rousettus amplexicaudatus (3.13%,

n=1)
Other hosts (Phil):

Distribution (Phil): Luzon, Polilio, Mindanao

Nycteribia parvuloides(1.74%, n=3) (APPENDIX J)
Hosts: Miniopterus australis (12.50%, n=3)
Other hosts (Phil):

Distribution (Phil): Luzon, Polilio, Mindanao

Genus Phthridium

Only one (1) species was collected and identified: Phthridium brachyacantha. The
females of this genus have distinct notch in the middle of the posterior margin of the
second tergite. It can also be distinguished by having an elliptical sixth tergite that has a

pair of long bristles on the posterior margin.

Phthridium brachyacantha(\.16%, n=2) (APPENDIX K)
Hosts: Rhinolophus inops (5.88%, n=1), Cynopterus brachyotis (6.25%, n=1)
Other hosts (Phil): -

Distribution (Phil): Luzon, Mindanao


Genus Penicillida

There were three (3) distinct species that were collected from bats: Penicillidia
acuminate and P. oligacantha were both collected from R. amplexicaudatus and M.

australis while P. dufourii tainani was collected from M. australis.

The most obvious difference between each of these species is that P. dufourii
tainani has a cordiform tergite two meaning that the second tergite has a heart-like shape.
Meanwhile the third tergite of P. oligacantha is divided into 2 eliptical plates while that

of P. acuminate is more broad and has no divisions.

Penicillidia acuminata (1.74%, n=3) (APPENDIX L)

Hosts: Rousettus amplexicaudatus (3.12%, n=1), Miniopterus australis (8.33%, n=2)

Other hosts (Phil): M. schreibersii eschscholtzii, Tadarida luzonus, Rhinolophus

arcuatus exiguous, Emballonura alecto

Distribution (Phil): Luzon, Mindanao, Polilio

Penicillidia dufourii tainani(\.16%, n=2) (APPENDIX M)

Hosts: Miniopterus australis (8.33%, n=2)

Other hosts (Phil): R. amplexicaudatus, Myotis sp.

Distribution (Phil): Luzon


Penicillida oligacantha (1.16%, n=2) (APPENDIX N)

Hosts: Miniopterus australis (4.17%, n=1), R. amplexicaudatus (3.13%. n=1)

Other hosts (Phil): M. schreibersii eschscholtzii, E. spelaea glandifera

Distribution (Phil): Luzon, Mindanao, Polilio

Family STREBLIDAE

A total of 67 streblids were collected from 27 individual bats. With respect to the
entire sample population, the overall prevalence of streblids was 15.70% with a mean

prevalence of three (3) streblids per bat.

The streblids collected in this study were identified using a dichotomous key
provided by Cuy (1980). Eight (8) species of streblids were identified, which belonged to
three genera, mainly Brachytarsina, Megastreabla and Raymondia. The most evident of
the three is Raymondia, having one representative species,Raymondia pseudipagodarum,
because of its prominent dorso-ventrally flattened head and the absence of eyes. The
other two genera have dorso-ventrally convexed head and have eyes. On the other hand,
Megastrebla and Brachytarsina basically differ in size with the former being at least
3mm long and the latter lesser in length. Furthermore, the prescutum and scutum of

Megastrebla is mostly bare while that of Brachytarsinahas dense setae.

Class INSECTA
Order DIPTERA
Superfamily HIPPOBOSCOIDEA
Family STREBLIDAE
Subfamily NYCTERIBOSCINAE

Genus Brachytarsina
B. amboinensis
B. hoogstraali
B. megadermae
B. proxima
B. trianguliceps
B. werneri

Genus Megastrebla
M. parvior
Genus Raymondia

R. pseudopagodarum

Subfamily NYCTERIBIOSCINAE

Genus Brachytarsina


In the study, the genus Brachytarsina is represented by six (6) species, mainly:

B.amoinensis ,B. hoogstraali, B. megadermae, B. proxima, B. trianguliceps and B.

werneri.The simple difference between these is that first, the head of B. hoogstrali is

;similar to its body while that of the others is slightly darker. Furthermore, the scutelum

of B. hoogstraali has a pointed posterior margin. Meanwhile, the eyes of B. trianguliceps

project laterally making it distinct from the other species while the remaining species are

differentiated by their wing morphology.


Brachytarsina amboinensis(2.91%, n=5) (APPENDIX O)

Hosts:Cynopterus brachyotis(6.25%, n=1), Rhinolophus rufus (22.22%, n=2),

Rhinolophus arcuatus, Hipposideros diadema (13.33%,n=2)

Other hosts (Phil): M. schreibersii eschscholtzii, M. australis, M. tristis, R.

amplexicadatus, Hipposideros coronatus

Distribution (Phil): Luzon, Polilio, Mindanao

Brachytarsina hoogstraali(4.07%, n= 7) (APPENDIX P)

Hosts: Myotis horsefieldii, H. lekaguli (5.00%, n=1), R. inops (35.29%, n=6)

Other hosts (Phil): Taphozous philippinensis, C. brachyotis

Distribution (Phil): Luzon, Mindanao

Brachytarsina megadermae(2.91%, n=5) (APPENDIX Q)

Hosts: Rhinolophus inops (17.65%, n=3), R. rufus (22.22%, n=2)

Other hosts (Phil): -

Distribution (Phil): Laguna, Bataan


Brachytarsina proxima(0.58%, n=1) (APPENDIX R)

Hosts: R. inops (5.88%, n=1)

Other hosts (Phil): R. amplexicaudatus, E. espelaea glandifera, R. rufus, R.

arcuatus, H. galeritus

Distribution (Phil): Luzon, Palawan, Mindanao

Brachytarsina trianguliceps(0.5.8%, n=1) (APPENDIX S)

Hosts: R. inops (5.88%, n=1)

Other hosts (Phil): -

Distribution (Phil): -

Brachytarsina werneri(0.58%, n=1)

Hosts: R. rufus (11.11%, n=1)

Other hosts (Phil):

Distribution (Phil):


Genus Megastrebla

Megastrebla parvior( 1.74%, n=3) (APPENDIX T)

Hosts: Eunycteris robusta ,Rousettus amplexicaudatus (6.25%, n=2)

Other hosts (Phil): M. screibersii eschscholtzii, M. australis, H. diadema, E.

spelaea glandifera

Distribution (Phil): Luzon, Leyte, Negros, Cebu, Palawan, Mindanao

GenusRaymondia

Raymondia pseudopagodarum( 0..58%, n=1)

Hosts: Rhinolophus inops (5.88%, n=1)

Other hosts (Phil): R. arcuatus, R. rufus, R. virgo, H. galeritus, M. schreibersii

eschscholizii, M. australis, R. amplexicaudatus, E. spelaea glandifera

Distribution (Phil): Luzon, Palawan, Negros, Mindanao

Family ISCHNOPSYLLIDAE

A total of 37 fleas were collected from two (2) species of bats, specifically 14 R.
amplexicaudatus and one (1) P. jagori,having a total prevalence of 8.72% and mean
intensity of 3 fleas per infested bat. Fleas were identified to be Thaumapsylla breviceps
Rothschild, 1907 and Thaumapsylla longiforceps Traub, 1951 (13 R. amplexicaudatus
and one (1)P. jagori). Identification and descriptions were based on the published work

done by Hopkins and Rothschild (1953) and Traub (1951).

Class INSECTA
Superfamily CEBRATOPHYLLOIDEA
Family ISCHNOPSYLLIDAE
Subfamily THAUMAPSYLLINAE
Genus Thaumapsylla

Thaumapsylla breviceps orientalis Smit, 1954

Thaumapsylla longiforceps Traub, 1951

One of the distinguishing characteristics of members of this subfamily is that its
head is short and that it is higher than it is long, as compared to those of subfamily
Ischnopsylllinae whose head are the longer than high. Members of the genus
Thaumapsylla include T. dina Jordan, 1937, T. breviceps breviceps Rothschild. 1907, T.
breviceps orientalis Smit, 1954, and T. longiforcepsTraub, 1951.7. dinais easily
distinguishable from the others by having three (3) genal spines while the others have
only two (2). These fleas are common parasites of bats from genus Cynopterus,

Rousettous, Pteropus, Acerodon, Hipposideros, Miniopterusand Rhinolophids (Hopkins


and Rothschild, 1953; Bergmans and Rozendaal, 1988; Hastritter and Bush, 2013;

Hastritter and Bush, 2014)

Genus Thaumapsylla

Thaumapsylla brevicepsorientalis Smit, 1954(0.58%, n=1) (APPENDIX U)
Host: Rousettous amplexicaudatus (3.13%, n=1)
Other hosts (Phil): Vespertillionids and Rhinolophids

Distribution (Phil): Luzon (Ilocos, Laguna, Aurora), Mindanao

This species can be differentiated from 7. longiforceps through the morphology of
the male’s claspers and crochet. The body of the male clasper is short and relatively
broader with the movable process having a distinct concave anterior margin. The crochet
is also broader and has curved dorsal and ventral margins and lacking the rounded

expansion at its end.

Thaumasylla brviceps orientalis closely resembles T. breviceps breviceps but can
be differentiated by the apical margin of the male’s claspers. In the former, the apical
margin is slightly concave to straight, while in the latter, the apical margin is distinctly

convex. Female individuals from both are indistinguishable from each other.


Thaumapsylla longiforceps Traub, 1951 (18.14%, n=14) (APPENDIX U)

Hosts: R. amplexicaudates (40.63%, n=13); P. jagori (7.69%, n=1)

Other hosts (Phil): Vespertillionids and Rhinolophids

Distribution (Phil): Luzon (Ilocos, Laguna, Aurora), Mindanao

This species’ clasper has a longer body compared to that of 7. breviceps. The
movable process is longer than broad, also longer than that of 7. breviceps, having a
straight anterior margin and a strongly convexed posterior margin. Meanwhile the crochet
of 7. longiforceps is much more slender and rod-like with its straight ventral and dorsal
margins with the tip of the crochet forming a knob-like expansion. The female of 7.
longiforceps also differs from that of 7. breviceps in terms of the size of the sinus on
strenite VII as well as the birstles on it. In the former, the sinus is larger and the sternite
only has five (5) to six (6) bristles while the latter species has a smaller sinus, with the

sternite bearing seven (7) to 10 bristles.

Statistical analysis between sex and intensity of infestation showed insignificant
results (U=98; p=0.343) meaning that male an females have the same intensities the flea
further suggesting that 7. longiforceps does not prefer any sex or that activities or
behavior different between sexes does not affect intensities and infection rates of T.
longiforceps. There is a positive linear relationship between ectoparasite intensity and

weight of the host but statistical analysis showed it is not significant(r=0.329, p= 0.066)

$1

Family SPINTURNICIDAE

A total of 37 mites were collected from 15 bats resulting in an overall prevalence
of 8.72% and mean intensity of three (3) mites per infested bat. Works published by Cuy
(1979) and, Delfinado and Baker (1963) were used to identify the mite samples. Seven
(7) species belonging to four (4) genera were identified; these wereAncystropus
taprobanius, Ancystropus zeleborii, Meristaspis lateralis, Meristaspis jordanii,
Meristaspis calcarata, Paraperiglischrus rhinolophinusand Spinturnix psi. These mites,
belonging to family Spinturnicidae, mainly parasitize on bats. There were also mites from

family Macronyssidae that were collected but were not identified to the species level.

Class ARACHNIDA
Subclass ACARI
Order MESOSTIGMATA
Superfamily DERMANYSSOIDAE
Family Spinturnicidae Oudemans, 1902

Genus Spinturnix
Spinturnix psiKolenati, 1856

Genus Ancystropus
Ancystropus taprobaniusTurk, 1950
Ancstropus zeleborii Kolenati, 1857

Genus Meristaspis
Meristaspis lateralisKolenati, 1857
Meristaspis jordani Radford, 1947
Meristaspis calcarata Hirst, 1923

Genus Paraperiglischrus
Paraperiglischrus rhinolophinus Koch, 1842


Genus Ancystropus

The genus can easily be identified from the others by having distinctly enlarged
Leg I as compared to its other legs (Delfinado and Baker, 1963). Two (2) species from
the genus were identified: A. taprobanius and A. zeleborii. The main distinguishing
feature of the two is the presence of long sinuous setae on the posterior edges of Leg I of

the former, while the latter has large recurved projection off of its tibia I (Cuy, 1979).

Ancystropus taprobanius(8.72%, n=15)

Hosts: H. diadema (6.67%, n=1), C. brachyotis (12.50%, n=2), R.

amplexicaudatus (37.50%, n= 12)
Other hosts (Phil): -

Distribution (Phil): Cebu, Laguna, Negros

Ancystropus zeleborii(2.91%, n=5)
Hosts: R. amplexicaudatus (15.63%, n=5)
Other hosts (Phil): P. jagori, C. brachyotis

Distribution (Phil): Agusan del Norte, Laguna, Negros, Palawan


Genus Meristastpis

Three (3) species from the genus Meristaspis were identified: M. lateralis, M.
jordani, and M. calcarata. This genus can be identified from the other genera by the
presence of four (4) pairs of setae along the anterior margin of its dorsal shield
(Delfinado and Baker, 1963). Records from the Philippines and other countries have
shown that these mites are commonly found in bats of the geuns Pteropus, Rousettous,

Cynopterus, and other megachiropterans (Cuy, 1979; Wilson and Wodzicki, 1977).

Meristaspis lateralis(16.86%, n=29)
Hosts: C. brachyotis (6.25%, n=1), R. amplexicaudatus (87.50%, n=28)
Other hosts (Phil): E. robusta

Distribution (Phil): Luzon, Palawan, Cebu, Mindanao

Meristaspis jordani(1 1.62%, n=2)
Hosts: P. jagori (15.38%, n= 2)
Other hosts (Phil): Harpionycteris whiteheadi, C. brachyotis

Distribution (Phil): Agusan del Norte, Negros, Laguna


Meristaspis calcarata(0.58%, n=1)

Hosts: R. amplexicaudatus (3.13%, n=1)

Other hosts (Phil): Preropus hypomelanus cagayanus, P. speciousus, P. tablan, P.

vampyrus lanensis

Distribution (Phil): Negros, Palawan, Laguna

Genus Paraperiglischus

Paraperiglischus rhinolophinus(0.58%, n=1)

Hosts: R. inops (5.88%, n=1)

Other hosts (Phil): Rhinolophidae, R. amplexicaudatus

Distribution (Phil): Laguna


Genus Spinturnix

The members of this genus can easily be distinguished from the others by the
presence of a long dorsal peritreme with their legs more or less equal in size (Delfinado

and Baker, 1963).

Spinturnix psi(1.74%, n=3)

Hosts: M. australis (12.50%, n=3)

Other hosts (Phil): M. schreibersii eschscholzii, H. diadema griseus, Myotis sp.

Distribution (Phil): Negros, Cagayan, Quirino, Surigao, Laguna

Family MACRONYSSIDAE

Hosts: H.diadema (6.67%, n=1), M. australis (8.33%, n=2)


4.2.2 GASTROINTESTINAL HELMINTHS

Table 5. The prevalence and mean intensities of each group of GIT helminths collected
from bats from the CURCC, Cavinti, Laguna

Group No. Prevalence No. Mean
Positive Endo Int
Trem 34 (5) 19.77% 443 13
Ces 23 (6) 13.37% 47 2
Nem 30 (6) 17.44% 93 3
Totals 69 39.66% 542 8

*values inside parenthesis () are the number of bat species that the helminth was found in

Out of the 172 bats sampled, 69 of them were infected with GIT helminths.
Gastrointestinal helminths collected were sorted by Class, specifically: Trematoda,
Cestoda and Nematoda, the three common classes of helminths parasitizing animals. A
total of 542 individual parasites were collected and resulting to a mean intensity of eight
(8) GIT helminths per infected bat. The bulk of the mean intensity of the whole sample
was contributed by the trematodes which had a total of 443 collected individuals. Given
this, trematodes had the highest mean intensity (13/ infected bat) as well as prevalence
(n=34; 18.97%) among the three. This is followed by nematodes (3/ infected bat; n=30;
12.64%) while cestodes had the least mean intensity (2/infected bat; n=23; 12.07%). This
was despite both nematodes and cestodes being present in six (6) of the bat species while

trematodes were only found in five (5) bat species.


Aggregation of GIT Helminths



Frequency
a

endo

Figure 6.Distribution of intensities of GIT helminths mostsly showing a slightly
aggregated distribution with most individuals harbouring only 1 to 2 helminths.

There were109 individuals uninfected as seen in the figuring harbouring zero
parasites. With this excluded it is evident that the distribution of the intensities of GIT
Helminths follows a slighlty aggregated distribution with most of the infected bats
harbouring only around one (1) to two (2) individuals. However, this still follows the
described distribution of parasites being normally aggregated with few hosts harbouring

high intensities of helminths.


Weight vs. GIT Helminth Intensity

r= -0.176
60:
[-]
aod
c
oe
40 .
0 we wo 00 0 0 8B ove 0 0 0 MS STS —w acu 8S 6: £88

Figure 7. Negative linear correlation observed between weight and helminth intensity
from bats collected in CURCC, Cavinti, Laguna.

Linear regression analysis showed that there was a significant weak negative
linear relationship (r=-0.176, p=0.021) between gastrointestinal helminth intensity and
bat weight. This suggests that bigger bodied and heavier bat groups, fruigivores and
relatively big insectivores, have lesser gastrointestinal helminths than smaller bodied

bats.


Age vs. GIT Helminth Intensity

Frequency

T T
10 15

Pa
°.
Pa
&

Subadults Adults
GIT Helminth Intensities

Figure 8.Frequency distribution of GIT helminths in subadult and adult bats.

Table 6.Prevalence and Mean Intensity of GIT helminths with respect to age.

Age N__ Positive Total Intensity _ Mean Intensity
Subadult 43 16 (37.21%) 148 10
Adult 129 53 (41.09%) 415 5

Out of the 43 subadults 16 (37.21%) were found to be infected with GIT
helminths having a mean intensity of nine (9) GIT helminths per subadult bat.
Meanwhile, there 53 (41.09%) adult bats, out of 123, that were found to be infected with

helminths and having mean intensities of eight (8) GIT helminths per adult bat. Statistical



analysis showed that there is no significant difference in the prevalence of GIT helminths
between subadults and adults (x= 0.202, p= 0.653).Frequency distribution of mean
intensity of GIT helminths in both age groups showed a non-normal distribution and
showing some aggregation. Mann-Whitney U-test showed that the intensity of GIT
helminths infecting subadults is generally the same with that of adults (U= 2618, p =
0.535) and prevalence of infection between both age groups were not significantly

different (x”=0.202, p=0.653).

Sex vs. GIT Helminth Intensity

&
t

>
c
$
.
»
a)
/
wf LH
| |
i fi : ages
0: | = T ac yi of ——r —+
0 10 5 5 cy 0 20 r) 60 Cy 100
Males Females

GIT Helminth Intensities

Figure 9. Frequency distribution of GIT helminths in male and female bats



Table 7 Prevalence and Mean Intensity of eGIT helminths with respect to sex.

Sex N Positive Total Mean Intensity
Male 91 40(43.96%) 310 5
Female 81 29 (35.80%) 385 13

Frequency distribution shows a non-normal distribution, and further suggesting an
aggregated distribution with respect to sex as a grouping variable. There were more
infected males, 40 individuals with prevalence of 43.96%, compared to that of the
infected females, only 29 (35.80%), but this difference was not significant (x7= 1.186, p=
0.276). There is also an evident difference in the number of collected GIT helminths per
gender, but due to the smaller number of infected females, the mean intensity between
both sexes was males having five (5) GIT helminths per bat and females having 13.
Despite this, Mann-Whitney U-test showed that intensity between both sexes did not
frequently differ from each other (U= 3505, p = 0.532) as well as in the prevalence of

both (x=1.186, p=0.276).


Class TREMATODA

Three (2) genera of trematodes were identified from bat hosts collected from the
CURCC in Cavinti, Laguna. These were Acanthurium sp.,Acanthurium eptesici,
andPlagiorchis sp. The main difference of the three (3) is their shape, with A. eptesici
more obovate, while Plagiorchis is more elongate than Acanthurium sp. Another
prominent difference is the presence of cuticular spines in both Acanthurium while
Plagiorchis has none.Other studies have shown that these parasites are commonly found

in Vespertillionids and Hipposiderids.

Class TREMATODA
Subclass DIGENEA
Order PROSOSTOMATA
Suborder DISTOMATA
Family LECITHODENDRIIDAE Odhner, 1910
Subfamily LECITHODENDRIINAE Luhe, 1901

GenusAcanhturium Faust, 1919

Acanthurium sp.
Acanthurium eptisici Alicata, 1932

Family PLAGIORCHIIDAE Luhe, 1899

Subfamily PLAGIORCHIINAE Pratt, 1902
GenusPlagiorchis Luhe, 1899

Family LECITHODENDRIIDAE

GenusAcanthurium

This genus has been reported in Myotis from Kansas and Nebraska (Nickel,
1999); Acanthurium alicati was observed from Vespertillionid bats in Texas (McAllister,
2007); Acanthurium species from Eptesicus and Pippistrelle bats (Williams, 1957;
Pistole, 1988; Esteben et al., 1991); in Miniopterus natalensis from South Africa (Junker

et al., 2008);

Acanthurium sp.is quite similar to another trematode also infecting bats which is
Prosthoderium sp., but both have a slight difference. Though both have their prostate
mass and genital atrium anterior the acetabulum, the genital atrium of the former is lined
with spines while the latter’s genital atrium is completely devoid of spines. The species
of Acanthurium can be determined either by shape or by the description of the genital
atrium. The genital atrium has spines and different species have differed in the number,
size and shape of the spines. In the samples, the space in the genital atrium was not quite
visible which prevented the identification of the specimen to the species level but some

striations were visible suggesting the presence of spines.

The life cycle of one species of this genus, Acanthurium oregonense Macy, 1939
has already been established which involves a first intermediate host, the snail Oxytrema
silicula (Gould), and a second intermediate host, the larva of the caddisfly, Limnophilus.

This is not a far off picture for the life cycle and transmission dynamics for Acanthurium


in the vicinity of the CURCC because of the presence of a river in the immediate vicinity

of the bats habitat as well as the presence of caddisfly.

Acanthurium sp.(13.95%, n=24) (APPENDNIX V)

Hosts: Hipposideros diadema (6.67%, n=1), Miniopterus australis(70.83%,

n=17), Rhinolophus inops(35.29%, n=6)
Site of Infection: Small intestines

Distribution (Phil): Laguna

Upon initial observation of the external tegument of the worm, the spines are
quite visible sometimes making an impression that the tegument has a thick external
layer. The oral sucker as well as the acetabulum is also easily distinguishable with the
oral sucker positioned at the anterior terminal end and the acetabulum positioned
approximately at the middle portion of the fluke. Below the oral sucker is a visible
bulbous pharynx that leads to the intestinal ceca. There are two (2) testis that are entire
and ovoid in shape and are located at each side of the fluke and is positioned slightly
posterior the acetabulum. Directly above the testis are the masses of vitelline glands. The
ovary is generally located on the right of the fluke and can usually be seen slightly
anterior or posterior the acetabulum. Located at the posterior half of the worm is the

uterus which is often filled with eggs. Observed characters of the fluke coincide with the


description given by Williams (1959). Upon maturation of the eggs, they are egested
through the genital atrium via the genital pore which explains the presence of eggs in the

anterior half.

Acanthurium eptisici Alicata, 1932(1.16%, n=2)(APPENDIX W)

Hosts: Hipposideros diadema (13.33%), Hipposideros pygmaeus (4.76%),

Miniopterus australis (29.17%), Rhinolophus inops (64.71%)

Site of infection: Small intestines

Distribution (Phil): Laguna

Similar to the trematode described previously, the tegument ofA, eptisiciis riddled
with minute spines butd. epfesici can be differentiated by its shape, with it being more
obovate than the previous species and sometimes appearing almost wider than it is long.
Posterior the oral sucker is a muscular pharynx which branches into two short intestinal
ceca. The acetabulum is located approximately in the middle with the prostate mas and
genital atrium located near it. The ovary can be located on the right side of the
acetabulum situated slightly lower. Meanwhile the ovoid testis can be located on both

extreme sides of the body not higher than the acetabulum.


Family PLAGIORCHIIDAE

Genus Plagiorchis

This genus of trematode has been reported in Vespertillionids in Cambodia
(Kifune et al., 2002); in Rhinolophus ferrumequinum from Spain (Esteban, 1999); in
Pippistrellus, Eptesicus, and Myotis (Williams, 1957; Nickel, 1962; Pistole, 1988;

Esteban et al., 2001; Lord et al., 2012)

Plagiorchis sp.Luhe, 1899(5.23%, n=9)(APPENDIX X)

Hosts: Rhinolophus inops(47.06%, n=8), Rhinolophus rufus (11.11%, n=1)

Site of infection: Small intestines

Distribution (Phil): Laguna

The body of Plagiorchis sp. is elongate and seemingly tapering at both ends.
From the oral sucker extends a short esophagus leading to bifurcating ceca that extends
almost the entire length of the fluke. It has an acetabulum positioned well above the
midline of the body. The ovary can be located below the acetabulum and above the two
testis that are positioned either in tandem or one on top the other. The uterus, when

gravid fills almost the entirety of the worm with eggs.


Class CESTODA

Class CESTODA
Order CYCLOPHYLLIDEA
Family HYMENOLEPIDIDAE

Genus Vampirolepis

Vampirolepis sp. (14.53%, n=25)(APPENDIX Y)
Hosts: Hipposideros diadaema (6.67%, n=1), Hipposideros pygmaeus (19.05%,
n=4), Miniopterus australis (25.00%, n=6), Rousettus amplexicaudatus
(15.63%, n=5), Ptenochirus jagori (38.46%, n=5), Rhinolophus rufus

(44.44%, n=4),
Site of Infection: Small intestines
Distribution (Phil): Laguna

This genus is closely related to the tapeworms of genus Hymenolepis and both
belong to the family Hymenolepididae. The scolex is 330 to 350 micrometers wide and
has four suckers that are approximately 100 micrometers in diameter. There is also a
rostellum that was either retracted or egested. The rostellum also has rows of hooks lining

its crown.

There is little information known about the life cycle and transmission dynamics

of these Hymenolepid worms to their bat hosts especially in fruit bats. Suggestions have


been made that these parasites might utilize coleopterans and beetles that feed on guano
as their intermediate hosts. The infection of intermediate hosts is at its larval stages that

are found in guano and the encysted stages are carried over into adulthood.

Cestodes from the genus Vampirolepis have been reported in both frugivorous
and insectivorous bats in countries like China, Brazil, Chile, Japan, South Africa, Kansas
and Nebraska, and Hungary (Sawada, 1966; 1970; 1982; 1985; Sawada et al, 1998;
Noguiera et al, 2004; Wood, 2012; Mufioz et al, 2011;Junker et al, 2008; Nickel, 1999;
Murai, 1976; Jenzen and Howell, 1983) with mean intensity ranging from one to two
adult worms per bat and prevalences ranging from one percent to 30%, depending on the
bat species. New discoveries are still made regarding this genus, in fact, a new species,

Vampirolepis muriae, has been described from bats in China (Makarikova et al., 2012).


PhylumNEMATODA

A total of 30 (17.44%) bats were positive with the presence of nematodes and a
total of 93 individual worms were collected resulting to a mean intensity of three (3)
worms per infected host. From this collected samples, four (4) genera were identified:

Nycteridostrongylus, Strongylacantha and Toxocara.

Phylum NEMATODA
Class SECERNENTEA
Order ASCARIDIDA
Family TOXOCARIDAE
Genus Toxocara

Toxocara pteropodis

Class CHROMADOREA Inglis 1983
Order RHABDITIDA Chitwood, 1933
Family ANCYLOSTOMATIDAE
Genus Strongylacanhta
Family TRICHOSTRONGYLIDAE Leiper 1908
Subfamily MOLINEINAE Skryabin and Schultz, 1937

GenusNycteristrongylus Baylis, 1930

These four (4) genera are easily distinguishable from each other with most
prominent being Toxocara mainly because of its size, with the other two (2) being much
smaller. Meanwhile the other twoare almost similar in size but are easily separated from

each other by distinct morphological differences in their cephalic/ anterior


regions.Nyceridostrongylushas a prominent bursa along its cephalic region while

Strongylacantha has prominent hook like protrusions in its anterior tip.

Family TRICHOSTRONGYLIDAE

Genus NYTERIDOSTRONGYLUS

Nycteridostrongylus sp. Baylis 1930 (8.14%, n=14)(APPENDIX Z)
Hosts: Miniopterus australis (50.00%, n= 12), Hipposideros diadema(6.67%,

n=1), Rhinolophus rufus (11.11%, n=1)
Site of infection: Small intestines

Distribution (Phil): Laguna

One species, Nycteridostrongylus unicollis Baylis, 1930 is commonly found in
Miniopterus schreibersii Kuhl, 1817 and Miniopterus blepotis Temminick, 1840 in
Australia (http://www.environment.gov.au) and in Miniopterus australis(33.33%
prevalence)from Sabah, East Malaysia (Wong and Anderson, 1986) and Miniopterus
fuliginosus from Ta- pinh , Vietnam (Meszaros, 1973). The data from this study as well
as the past researches suggests that this nematode is a common parasite of bats of genus

Miniopterus.


These nematodes were commonly found in the small intestines. They have a
dorsal esophageal tooth at the cephalic extremity. The cephalic extremity is also
somewhat enclosed within a bursa. The worms also have a prominent cervical organ of
fixation, perhaps a derivative of the cuticle, which can be easily observed at the
anteriorextremity of the worms. This structure looks like an expanded flap of originating
from the anterior and enlarging into a bulbous flap with visible striations. The eggs are
also characteristic of strongylids having thin shells and are approximately 75- 100

micrometers in length.

The female has prominent spines at posterior extremity and are about 6.59 + 1.46
mm long while the males are 4.75 + 0.50 mm long and have prominent copulatory bursa
that is 0.1 + 0.0016 mm long.. The rays of the copulatory bursa are arranged in a 3-2
manner with the third and fourth rays almost as long as each other and are separated. The
spicule, 0.55+ 0.37 mm long, can also be observed either retracted within the males or in

some cases egested.

Family ANCYLOSTOMATIDAE
Genus Strongylacantha
Strongylacantha sp. (4.07%, n=7)(APPENDIX AA)

Hosts: Rhinolophus rufus(33.33%, n=3), Hipposideros diadema (20.00%, n=3),

Rhinolophus inops (5.88%, n=1)

Site of infection: Small intestines

Distribution (Phil): Laguna

This genus has been reported as common parasites of Rhinolophids. In
fact in a study by Esteban et al. (1999), Strongylacantha glycirrhiza Benden, 1973was
collected from Rhinolophus ferrumequinum from provinces in Spain; Kagei and Sawada
(1973) collected Strongylacantha pretoriensis Ortlepp, 1932 from the same bat species;
while in a paper by Meszaros (1973), Strongylacantha longicaudata and Stronylacantha
rhinolophi were collected from R. affinis and R. sinicus from Ta- pinh, Vietnam

respectively.

Family TOXOCARIDAE

Genus Toxocara

Toxocara pteropodis(25.00%, n=8) (APPENDIX BB)

Hosts: Rousettus amplexicaudatus(25.00%, n=8)
Site of Infection: Small intestines, occasionally Large intestines

Distribution (Phil): Laguna

A total of 35 worms were collected from eight (8) of the 32 collected samples.
The total prevalence of Toxocara in R. amplexicaudatus is 25.00% with a mean intensity
of four (4) worms per bat. There is one case of hyper infection where in one bat had 17

individual worms. Toxocara sp. was only observed in R. amplexicaudatus.

The worms were milky-white in color and having same characteristics with other
worms from the same genus. Male and female Toxocara were morphologically distinct
from each other with males having highly curved tails while the females had none.
Females were also generally larger and longer with an average length of 106.60 + 8.68
mm as compared to the males which had average length of 57.00 + 4.9mm. The worms
have three distinct lips which were observed upon close examination of the anterior end.
The reproductive organs, copulatory spicule and vulva, are also present and clearly

visible upon examination of the worms posterior tip


Prociv (1983) further studied the transmission dynamics of this parasite in
Pteropus poliocephalus (Australian Grey-headed Flying- fox). Transmission of these
parasites was via oral route with adults either eating fruit contaminated with fecal
material or through coprophagy. Coprohagy has been observed in animals, especially in
herbivores, as a supplement for vitamins B 12 and other B vitamins (Mickelsen, 1956, as
cited in Prociv, 1983). Meanwhile, juveniles can acquire larval stages of this parasite
through the milk of infected females. Third stage larvae (L3) of T. pteropodis has been
collected from the mammae of infected bats. Furthermore, there was no recorded
migration of larvae in the lungs, not like in 7. canis and T catti, but there was reported
migration of larvae in their host’s liver. Adults were found in the small intestines of the

bats.

There was no significant difference in infection rates of Toxocara between sexes

of R. amplexicaudatus (U=109, p=0.464) as well as across body sizes (r=0.180, p=0.325)

4.3 CASES OF COINFECTION



4.3.1 CO-INFECTION AMONG ECTOPARASITES

Table 8 . Table showing co-infection of parasites focusing on a mix of only two groups of
ectoparasites

Ectoparasites
Nye Streb Fleas Mites Ticks
Nye 4 6 20 3
Streb 4 1 5 0
Fleas 6 1 16 3
Mites 20 = 5 16 6
Ticks 3 0 3 6

*also worth noting are 10 individuals having three groups and | individual having 4 groups infesting it at
the same time (not shown in figure).

There were also cases of co-infection of ectoparasites where in one bat individual
may harbour multiple groups of parasites. From the samples collected, it was seen that
mites were mostly associated with other ectoparasites having 20 bats infected with at
least both mites and nycteribiids and 16 bats infested with at least both mites and fleas.
The table (Table 8) only shows association between two groups of ecto parasites but
these pairwise associations may have other groups involved. In fact, when taking into
account associations involving more than two (2) of these ectoparasite groups, 11 bats
were found to be infected with three (3) groups of ectoparasites and one (1) bat infected
with four (4) with all associations (11) involving the association with mites, and 10 of

them involving Nycteribiids.


4.3.2 CO-INFECTION AMONG GIT HELMINTHS

Table 9. Table showing co-infection of parasites focusing on a mix of only two groups of

helminths
GIT Helminths
Trem Ces Nem
Trem 2 9
Ces 2 2

Nem 9 2

*also worth noting are 2 individuals having the three (3) groups at the same time (not shown in figure).

Cases of co-infection between the helimnth groups were also present in 13
infected bats. The most common combination was trematodes and nematodes which was
present in nine (9) individuals. There were also two (2) individuals that had all the three

(3) groups of helminths present.


4.3.3 CO-INFECTION OF ECTOPARASITES AND GIT HELMINTHS

ectos

endo

Figure 8.Weak positive linear correlation observed between ectoparasite and GIT
helminth intensity from bats collected in CURCC, Cavinti, Laguna.

Linear regression analysis showed that there seems to be a significant weak
positive linear relationship (r=0.225, p=0.003) between gastrointestinal helminth intensity
and ectoparasite intensity. This suggests that as the observed ectoparasite intensity from

the bat samples increased, GIT helminth intensity also increased.

4.3 PARASITE FAUNA PER HOST SPECIES

paroa}}oo Jaquinu jenyoe ay} SI 3 Uay) aArveyuasosdau (]) aUO AyUO st a4ay) BOUTS SoUdTeAaId URDU ay} JOU SI SIsayaesed ay) apisul
anjea ‘dnoss ureyas ay) pey  SuIyeoIpUl UaNIIM sem sod peaisul aoua|eAaid eB UdAIZ Jou aJam (Z) OM) JO (1) BUO AJUO Jo azis ajdwies B YWM 2SOU} +»

(s)z6"09 = (S)Z6"0T (s)spe — (S)oS*LZ == (EDLLG (Dzs'st — (D9S'eZ TIO

(1)sod (0)0 (0)0 (1) sod (0)0 (1) sod (0)0 (T=u) eysngor suajoXung

(z)sod (0)0 (0)0 (0)0 (0)0 (Z) sod (0)0 (1=U) snyenoze snydoyoutyy .

(p)sod (0)0 (0)0 (0)0 (0)0 (p) sod (0)0 (1=U) Uplayjasioy SHOAW |, »

(0)0 (0)0 (0)0 (0)0 (0)0 (00 (0)0 (Z=u) Weyosy suajoXuojdey

(eso. (DLT (Dlr — (9)00°Sz (0)0 (Dees  (Zoo0'0s — (pZ=U) sIfesne snaydoruryy
(p)er'9L = (ZES EZ (00 (LI)88°¢ (0)0 (2788s = (7) 88°S ~— (LZ 1=¥) sdour snydoyoury 5
(L)pr'by (0)0 (0)0 (00 (00 (L)pr'by (0)0 (6=U) snyny snydjouryy z.
(g)so'6r = (€)00°S 1 (0)0 (0)0 (0)0 (19L'b (0)0 (1Z=u) snoewsAd sosopisoddiy] I
(L)L9°99— (6)L9°9b (0)0 (p)EC€I (0)0 (D299 (0)0 (¢]=u) ewaperp sorapisoddiyy °
()00°st ~— (00°01 (0)0 (0)0 (0)0 (1)00°s (0)0 (0Z=") 11NBeyaq soraprsoddipy
(2se"es (0)0 (00 (sest  (£)69'L (169°L (1)80'EZ (ET =) WOBef snsydouAg cs
(e)sz'89 = (1)S79. (0)0 (9)0¢°Z1 (0)0 (S79 = (Z)00'0S_~—- (91 =") SHOAYDeIQ sn4aydoukD &
(8)8896  (Z)88z (SOT PL (S)67HH (DIL'Sh (ILS ~— (OOS (ZE=U) SMepnedixajdure snnesnoy |S

180, dBAIV'T] Sy SoA svalq q2.S 24N salnaas

(IA) (%) AONA TVA Ad ALISVUVdO.LOT

“PUNE “NUIARD “QOUNO Woy payoajjoo satsads eq ay} JO Yowa Jo Sayisesedo}da JO saouaeAaid ay} JO MAIAIIAO UY “OT FGeL


Table 11. An overview of the prevalences of GIT helminths of each of the bat species

ENDOPARASITES PREAVALENCE (%) (MI)

SPECIES

Trematoda Cestoda__ Nematoda Total
2 Rousettus amplexicaudatus (n=32) 0(0) 15.63(3) 25.71(4) 40.63(4)
A Cynopterus brachyotis (n=16) 0(0) 0(0) 6.25(3) 6.25(3)
f Ptenochirus jagori (n=13) 0(0) 38.46(1) 0(0) 38.46(1)

Hipposideros lekaguli (n=20) 0(0) 0(0) 0(0) 0(0)
Hipposideros diadema (n=15) —13.33(11) 6.67(2) 26.67(1) 40.00(5)
: Hipposideros pygmaeus (n=20) —_5.00(1) 15.00(1) 0(0) 19.05(2)
: Rhinolphus rufus (n=9) — 33.33(3) 22.22(4) 44.44(2) 66.67(3)

Rhinolophus inops (n=17) — 64.71(6) 0(0) 5.88(1) 64.71(6)

Miniopterus australis (n=24) 75.00(20) 25.00(2) 50.00(4) 95.83(18)

**Haplonycteris fischerii (n=2) 0(0) 0(0) 0(0) 0(0)
**Myotis horsefieldii (n=1) 0(0) 0(0) 0(0) 0(0)
**Rhinolophus arcuatus (n=1) 0(0) 0(0) 0(0) 0(0)
**Eunycteris robusta (n=1) 0(0) 0(0) 0(0) 0(0)

Total 18.97(13) _12.64(2) 12.073) _39.66(8)

** those with a sample size of only one (1) or two (2) were not given a prevalence instead pos was written
indicating it had the certain group, value inside the paraenthesis is not the mean prevalence since there is only
one (1) representative then it is the actual number collected

MI= Mean intensity


A total of 172 bats were sacrificed and collected in the vicinity of the Cavinti
Underground River and Cave Complex (CURCC) located in Cavinti. Sixty-four (64) of
these were fruit bats belonging to 5 species: Rousettous amplexicaudatus (n=32),
Cynopterus brachyotis (n=16), Ptenochirus jagori (n=13), Eunycteris robusta (n=1) and
Haplonycteris fischerii (n=2) while 108 were insectivores: Myotis horsefieldii (n=1).
Hipposideros lekaguli (n=20), H. diadema (n=15), H. pygmaeus (n=21), Rhinolophus

rufus (n=9), R. inops (n=17), R. arcuatus (n=1) and Miniopterus australis (n=24).

Statistical analysis showed that prevalence of ectoparasites were different from
each other with Ro. amplexicaudatus (96.88%)having the highest prevalence followed by
R. inops(76.47%) and M. australis (70.83) (x°=54.086, p<0.001). Ranking of intensities
using Kruskal-Wallis H-test showed that R. amplexicaudatus had the most ectoparasites,
with mean rank= 134.75, followed by H. diadema (94.40) and R.inops (93.44).
Meanwhile, the three that had lowest were P. jagori (66.77), H. pygmaeus (46.17) and H.

lekaguli (44.85) (x?= 69.410, p< 0.001).

With regards to GIT helminths, it was found that M. astralis (95.83%) had the
highest prevalence followed by R. rufus (66.67%) and R. inops (64.71%) (x?=60.347,
p<0.001). Kruskal-Wallis H-test showed that M. australis had the highest mean rank
(139.44) followed by Rhinolophus inops (109.74) and Rhinolophus rufus (99.83). The
three with lowest intensity were H. pygmaeus (61.88), Cynopterus brachyotis (54.66) and

H. Iekaguli (49.50) (x= 73.587, p< 0.001).

With regards to the overall parasitic infection of the bats, it was found that

Miniopterus australis (Mean rank= 122.48) had frequently more parasites than the other


bats. This was closely followed by Rosettous amplexicaudatus (122.45), and Rhinolophus
inops (103.15) for the three(3) most infected bat species. The bats with the least parasitic
load were Hipposideros lekaguli (33.00) and Hipposideros pygmaeus (41.69) O?=

85.816, p<0.001).

If the total samples were grouped based on their diet or foraging behaviour, then a
total of 64 frugivores and 108 insectivores were caught. Out of 108 insectivores, 69
(63.89%) were found positive with parasites while 53 (82.82%) out of the 64 frugivores
were positive. For the insectivores, 16 (14.81%) were positive with GIT helminths only,
19 (17.59%) were positive with ectoparasites only and 34 (31.48%) had both groups of
parasites. Meanwhile, there were three (3) (4.69%) frugivores that had GIT helminths
only, 34 (53.12%) having ectoparasites only and 16 (25.00%) having both groups of

parasites.

Statistical analysis showed that frugivores (MI=6) were infected with more
ectoparasites than insectivores (MI=4) (U=2130.50, p < 0.001); there is also a significant
difference in prevalence with frugivores having higher prevalence (x7=14.118, p<0.001).
The same statistical analysis showed that there was significant difference in the levels of
infection of GIT helminths between frugivores (MI=3) and insectivores (MI=10)with
insectivores being more infected (U=2709.500, p= 0.008); insectivores also have

significantly higher prevalence (x?=4.614, p=0.032).


4.3.1 FRUGIVORES

Frugivore species caught and sacrificed included Rousettous amplexicaudatus
(n=32), Cynopterus brachyotis (n= 16), and Ptenochirus jagori (n= 13). Statistical
analysis showed that Ro. amplexicaudatus had the highest prevalence of ectoparasite
among frugivores (x?=38.722, p<0.001). Kruskal-Wallis H-test of ectoparasite mean
intensity showed that Ro. amplexicaudatus individuals frequently had the most
ectoparasites out of all the frugivores, with mean rank of 42.98 It is followed by C.

brachyotis (19.97 )then P. jagori (15.08)(x? = 31.629, p, 0.001 ).

For GIT helminths, Ro. amplexicaudatushad the highest prevalence (x?=6.289,
p=0.043), it also had the highest mean rank in terms of helminth intensity while P. jagori
came in second and C. brachyotis last (x= 5.940, p= 0.050), suggesting that R.
amplexicaudatus frequently had the most number of GIT helminths among frugivores.
Pair-wise analysis of GIT helminth intensity per frugivores species that intensities of R.
amplexicaudatus and C. jagori were the only ones that were significantly different from
each other (U= 168, p= 0.0168). Further suggesting that intensities observed for P. jagori

frequently did not differ from Ro. amplexicaudatus.


Table 12. Prevalence of each species of ectoparasite and GIT helminth found in three (3)
species of fruit bats collected in the vicinity of CURCC Cavinti, Laguna.

PREVALENCE (%)
SPECIE:
s C. brachyotis P. jagori R.amplexicaudatus
ECTOPARASITES 68.75 53.85 62.50
Nycteribiids 23.08 23.08 50.00
E. inermis - - 12.50
E. philippinensis - - 34.38
E. sundaica - - 3.13
L.brevicula 43.75 15.38 -
L. haplotes - 7.69 5
L. simulans 6.25 7.69 -
N. parvula - - 3.13
Pe. acuminate - - 3.13
Pe. oligacantha - - 3.13
Ph. brachyacantha 6.25 - -
Streblids 6.25 - 6.25
M. parvior - - 6.25
B. amboinensis 6.25 - -
Mites 12.50 15.38 96.88
A.taprobanius 6.25 - 37.50
A. Zeleborii - - 15.63
M. calcarata - - 3.13
M. lateralis 6.25 - 87.50
M. jordani - 15.38 -
Fleas - 7.69 43.75
T. b. orientalis - - 3.13
T. longiforceps - 7.69 40.63
Ticks - - 15.63
GIT HELMINTHS 6.25 38.46 40.63
Cestodes - 38.46 15.63
Vampirolepis sp. - 38.46 15.63
Nematodes 6.25 - 25.00
Toxocara sp. - - 25.00
TOTAL 68.75 69.23 100.00


Cynopterus brachyotis

There were 16 individualsof C. brachyotis caught and 11 of them had parasites
(10 male and 6 female). This resulted to an overall parasite prevalence of 68.75%.
Ectoparasites were present in 10 (62.50%) of them with a mean intensity of three (3)
ectoparasites per bat. Meanwhile, only one (1) (6.25%) bat had GIT helminths; it had
three (3) nematodes. One (1) individual out of the 16 was positive for both ectoparasite
and GIT helminth(n=1; 6.25%) and only an individual nematode was collected, whose
identity is still unknown due to structural damage to the worm. Statistical analysis
showed that there was no significant difference in total parasite (U= 29.00, p= 0.958),
ectoparasite (U= 29.00, p= .911) and GIT helminth (U= 27.00, p= 0.439) loads between
males and females. There was also no linear correlation between all test variables and

body weights of C. brachyotis sampled.

Ectoparasites collected included: three (3) Nycteribiid species from two (2)
genera (68.75%, n=11): Leptocyclopodia brevicula (43.75%, n=7), Phthridium
brachyacantha (6.25%, n=1), Leptocyclopodia simulans (6.25%, n=1); one (1) streblid
(n=1; 6.25%): ; and two (2) species of mites belonging to two genera (12.50%,
n=2):Ancystropus taprobanius (6.25%, n=1) and Meristaspis lateralis ( 6.25%, n=1) .
Some larvae were also observed on some of the bats. It was found that there was no
significant difference between the levels of infestation of each of the ectoparasite species

between males and females of C. brachyotis.


Ptenochirus jagori

A total of 13 P. jagori, eight (8) males and five (5) females, were caught and
sacrificed and nine (9) of them had parasites. Overall parasite prevalence was at 69.23%;
ectoparasites were present in four (4) (30.77%) of them, with a mean intensity of two (2)
ectoparasites per bat while three (3) (15.38%) bats had GIT helminths only with a mean
intensity of one (1) GIT helminth per bat. Three (3) out of 13 bats had both ectoparasite
and GIT helminth infections. For total parasitic load, statistical analysis showed that
females (mean rank= 9.60) had frequently more parasites than males (mean rank= 5.38)
(U=7, p= 0.047) but when tested separately for ectoparasite and GIT helminth load, both
males and females had no significant differences in intensity of infection. Further
analysis of the relationship of body weight with total parasite, ectoparasite and GIT
helminth load showed an increasing trend for body weight vs. total parasite (r= 0.165, p=
0.591) and ectoparasite (load r= 0.283, p=0.349), while body weight vs. GIT helminth
load showing a decreasing trend (r= -0.064, p= 0.835). However, linear regression

analysis showed the correlations to be insignificant

Ectoparasite species collected included: three (3) Nycteriibidae (n=3; 23.08%):
Leptocyclopodia brevicula (15.38%, n=2), Leptocyclopodia simulans (7.69%, n=1),
Leptocyclopodia haplotes (7.69%,n=1);;andone (1) flea (n=1, 7.69%):Thaumapsylla
longiforceps ; and one mite species (15.38%, n=2):Meristaspis jordani. Some larvae were
also observed on some of the bats. Statistical analysis on each species was not done

because of the relatively small sample size of hosts that were positive for each species.

Meanwhile, all of the five (5) individuals found positive for GIT helminths only
had the cestode Vampiroepis sp.(38.46%, n=5). Statistical analysis on the difference in

helminth intensity between sexes was insignificant (U= 11.00, p= 0.13).

Rousettus amplexicaudatus

All in all, 32R.amplexicaudatus, 19 males and 13 females,were sacrificed and all
of them were positive with parasites. Overall parasite prevalence was at 100% with 19
(59.38%) of them having ectoparasites only and one (1) of the bats had GIT helminths
only (3.13%) with 12 (37.50%) bats positive with both ectoparasite and GIT helminth
infections at the same time.There was no significant difference in overall parasite
intensity between sexes (U=73, p=0.054) and body weight (r=0.215, p=0.238). When
analysed separately per group, there was no significant difference in intensity GIT
helminths (U=108, p=0.502) between sexes but there was significant difference when it
comes to ectoparasite infestation (U= 62.5, p= 0.018), with males (mean rank= 19.71)
being relatively more infested than females (mean rank= 11.81). There was also a slight
positive linear relationship between ectoparasites(r=0.128, p=0.485) and GIT helminths

(r=0.201, p=0.270) with body weight but statistical analysis show it was not significant.

Ectoparasite species collected included: six (6) Nycteriibid species from three (3)
genera (50.00%, n=16): Penicillida oligacantha (3.13%. n=1), Penicillidia
acuminata(3.13%, n=1), Eucampsipoda philippinensis (34.38%, n=11), Eucampsipoda
inermis (12.50%, n=4), Eucampsipoda sundaica (3.13%, n=1), Nycteribia parvula
(3.13%, n=1); Streblidae(6.25%, n=2): ; two (2)Flea speciesfrom one (1) genus (43.75%,
n=14): Thaumapsylla longiforceps(40.63%, n=13)and T. breviceps orientalis(3.13%,

n=1); four (4) mite species from two (2) genera (96.88%, n=31):Ancystropus

taprobanius(37.50%, n=12),  Ancystropus  zeleborii(15.63%, n=5), Meristaspis
lateralis(87.50%, n=28), Meristaspis calcarata(3.13%, n=1); Ticks(5.63%, n=51). Some
larvae of bat flies were also observed on some of the bats.Statistical analysis on the
difference in intensity of infestation of each of the ectoparasite species between males

and females of R. amplexicaudatus was insignificant.

Majority of the helminths collected were Nematodes (25.00%, n=8): Toxocara
sp.; there were also some Vampirolepis sp. (15.63%, n=5) that were collected. Further
statistical analysis showed that the difference in intensity of infection of each of the

helminth species between males and females of R. amplexicaudatus was insignificant.


Table 13. Prevalence of each species of ectoparasite and GIT helminth found in six (6)
species of insect bat collected in the vicinity of CURCC Cavinti, Laguna.

PREVALENCE (%)

SPECIES H. H. H. M. R. rufus R. inops
diadema____lekaguli _ pygm. austr.
Ectoparasites
Nycteribiid
E. philippinensis - - - 4.17 - 2
Pe. acuminate - - - 8.33 - S
Pe. oligocantha - - - 4.17 - S
Pe. d. tainani - - - 8.33 - Ss
N. allotopa - - - 8.33 - =
N. allotopoides - - - 4.17 - -
N. parvula - - - 8.33 - -
N. parvuloides - - - 12.50 - -
Streblid
B. amboinensis 13.33 - - - 11.11 -
B. hoogstraali - 5.00 - - - 35.29
B. megadermae : - - - 11.11 17.65
B. proxima - - - - - 5.88
B. trianguliceps a - - - - 5.88
B. werneri - - - - - 1.
R. pseudopagodarum - - - - - 5.88
Mites
A. taprobanius 6.67 - - - - -
S. psi - - - 16.67 - -
P. rhinolophionus - - - - - 5.88
Macronyssidae 6.67 - - 8.33 - -
Ticks - - - 4.17 - -
GIT Helminths
Trematodes
Acanthurium sp. 6.67 - - 70.83 - 35.29
A. eptesici 13.33 - 4.76 29.17 - 64.71
Plagiorchis - - - - 11.11 47.06
Cestodes
Vampirolepis 6.67 - 19.05 25.00 - -
Nematoda
Nycteridostrongylus 6.67 - : 50.00 11.11 -
Strongylacantha 20.00 - - - 33,33 5.88
TOTAL 73.33 15.00 33.33 100.00 88.89 82.35



4.3.2 INSECTIVORES

Insectivore species caught and sacrificed included Hipposideros diadema (n= 15),
H. lekaguli (n= 20), H. pygmaeus (n=20), Miniopterus australis (n= 24), Rhinolophus
inops(n= 17) and R. rufus (n=9). Kruskal- Wallis H- test of ectoparasite intensity further
showed that R. inops caught frequently had the most number of ectoparasites infecting it,
with a mean rank of 69.09 (x?= 56.243, p, 0.001 ). It was followed by H. diadema
(67.57), M. australis (62.46), R. rufus (55.67), H. pygmaeus (36.62) and lastly H. lekaguli
(35.70). Eta squared value is 0.5356 suggesting that species of insectivore sampled
contributes 53.56% to the variations in mean intensity of ectoparsites of insectivores
collected. Further pairwise analysis using Mann-Whitney U-test revealed that the top four
(4) bat species had intensity values that were not significant (p>0.05) from each other.
This suggests that these species were parasitized more by ectoparasites. The two (2) latter
species had p-values significantly greater than 0.05 suggesting that these two species

were least parasitized by ectoparasites.

Statistical analysis of GIT helminth intensities of insectivores showed that
Miniopterus australis had the highest intensity of GIT helminths (mean rank= 84.33)
followed by Rhinolophus inops (mean rank= 65.03) then Rhinolophus rufus (mean rank=
58.39), Hipposideros diadema (mean rank= 46.50) and Hipposideros pygmaeus (mean
rank= 35.64) with Hipposideros lekaguli ranked last (mean rank= 28.50) because no
helminth was collected from them (= 56.243; p< 0.001). Further pairwise comparison
of the intensities of GIT helminths from each species showed that the intensities between

individuals of Hipposideros pygmaeus and Hipposideros diadema (U= 122.50; p= 0.154),


Hipposideros diadema and Rhinolophus rufus (U= 48.50; p= 0.223), Hipposideros
diadema and Rhinolophus inops (U= 82.00; p=0.069), and Rhinolophus inops and
Rhinolophus rufus(U= 57.00; p= 0.282) were not frequently different from each other

suggesting that these species had fairly the same levels of GIT helminth infections.

Hipposideros diadema

A total of 15 H. diadema were sacrificed, which included three (3) male and 12
female bats. Of these 11 were positive with parasites (73.33%) with five (5) having
ectoparasites only (33.33%), one (1) having GIT helminths only (6.67%) and five (5)

having both groups of parasites (33.33%).

Ectoparasites collected included: one (1) __ streblid: © Brachytarsina
amboinensis(n=2; 13.33%); two (2) distinct groups of mites (n=2): Ancystropus
taprobanius (6.67%, n=1) and mites from family Macronyssidae (6.67%, n=1) . Some

larvae were also observed on some of the bats.

Meanwhile, trematode prevalence was at 13.33% (n=2) which
included:Acanthurium sp(6.67%, n=1) and Prosthodendrium sp. (13.33%, n=2); cestode
prevalence was at 6.67% (n=1) with a total of two (2) Vampirolepis sp. collected;
nematode prevalence was at 26.67% (n=4) which included:Nycteridostrongylus

sp.(6.67%) and Strongy;acanthi sp. (20.00%, n=3) .

Statistical analysis showed that there was no significant difference in total parasite

(U= 29.00, p= 0.958), ectoparasite (U= 29.00, p= .911) and GIT helminth (U= 27.00, p=


0.439) loads between males and females. Though graphs show a decreasing trend for
body weight vs. total parasite and ectoparasite load and an increasing trend for body
weight vs. GIT helminth load; however, statistical analysis showed there was no linear
correlation between all test variables and body weights of H. daidema sampled ( r= -

0.132, p= 0.639; r= 0.210, p= 0.453; r=0.032, p= 0.910)

Hipposideros lekaguli

All in all, 20 individuals from this species were collected which was composed of
nine (9) males and 11 females. Ectoparasites were the only parasites collected and were

present in only three (3) individuals.

Only one (1) mature ectoparasitewas collected and it belonged tofamily Streblidae
(n= 1; 5%). The other ectoparasites counted could not be identified because theu were
still larvae. There were no helminths collected from this species. Overall parasite
prevalence and intensity from H. lekagli was very low with almost all individuals

uninfected.

Hipposideros pygmaeus

A total of 21 H. pygnmaeus were collected which was composed of six (6) male
and 15 female bats. Of these, seven (7) were infected with parasites (33.33%): three (3)
with ectoparasites only (14.29%), three (3) with GIT helminths only (14.29%) and only

one (1) having both groups (4.76%).


One (1) bat had one (1) trematode, Prosthodendrium sp. (4.76%); four(4) of them

had Vampirolepis sp(19.05%); and there were no nematodes collected.

Statistical analysis showed no difference in total parasite intensity (U= 34.50,
p=0.328), infestation of ectoparasite only (U= 43.00, p= 0.820) and infection with GIT

helminths only (U= 34.00, p= 0.211) between male and female bats.

Graphs show a positive relationship between body weight and GIT helminths as
well as with total parasite load, but only slightly positive. Meanwhile there was an
observed negative relationship between body weight and ectoparasites. However,
statistical analysis showed that these relationships are insignificant (3= 0.229, p= 0.319;

r=0.018, p= 0.937; r= 0.065, p= 0.779)

Miniopterus australis

A total of 24 individuals from this species was collected and sacrificed. This
number includes 13 males and 11 females. The entirecollections of M. australis sacrificed
had parasites with one (1) individual having ectoparasite only (4.17%), five (5) having

GIT helminths only (20.83%) and 18 having mixed infections (75.00%) of both groups.

Ectoparasites collected included: eight (8) species from Nycteriibidae (n=12;
50.00%): Penicillida oligacantha (4.17%, n=1), Penicillidia dofourii tainani (8.33%,
n=2), Penicillidia acuminate (8.33%, n=2), Eucampsipoda philippinensis (4.17%, n=1),

Nycteribia allotopa (8.33%, n=2), Nycteribia parvula (8.33%, n=2), Nycteribia


allotropoides (4.17%, n=1), Nycteribia parvuloides (12.50%, n=3); Mites (n=6; 25.00%):

; Ticks(n=1; 4.17%): . Some larvae were also observed on some of the bats.

On the other hand, there were 18 (75.00%) individuals that were positive with the
trematode Acanthurium sp. ; six (6) of them had the cestodeVampirolepis sp. (25.00%);

and 12 (50.00%) of them had the nematode Nycteridostrongylus sp.

Analysis of total parasite load between sexes showed that females (mean rank=
15.86) were more parasitized than males (mean rank= 9.65) (U= 34.50, p= 0.031).
Looking at the parasitic infections separately, males and females did not differ in terms of
ectoparasite load (U= 59, p= 0.453) but for GIT helminths, females (mean rank= 16.27)

had more helminths than males (mean rank= 9.31) (U= 30.00, p= 0.015).

There was also significant positive linear correlation between body weight and
each of the following: total parasite load (r= 0.640, p= 0.001), ectoparasite intensity (r=

0.459, p= 0.024) and GIT helminth intensity (r= 0.603, p= 0.002)

Rhinolophus inops

Seventeen (17)R. inops were caught and sacrificed, all of which are females. Of
these, 14 (82.35%) were found to have parasites, with three (3) having ectoparasites only
(17.65%), one (1) with GIT helminths only (5.88%) and 10 individuals infected with both

(58.82%).

Ectoparasites collected included: Streblidae(n=10:

58.82%):Brachytarsinahoogstraali (35.29%), B. megadermai (17.65%), B. proxima


(5.88%), B. trianguliceps (5.88), B, werineri (11.11%) and B. pseudopagodarum (5.88%)
; one (1) Mite: Ancystropus taprobanius (n=1; 5.88%) . Some larvae were also observed

on some of the bats.

Meanwhile a total of 11 (64.71%) were positive for the trematode Acanthurium
eptesici , eight (8)(47.06%) with Plagiorchis sp., six (6) with Acanthurium sp. and only

one (1) bat was positive with the nematode Strongylacantha sp.

Statistical analysis of the relationship of sex and parasite load was not done
because all samples were female. Meanwhile, there was an observed negative linear
relationship between body weight and each of total parasite, ectoparasite and GIT
helminth load. However only Body weight vs. total parasite load (r= -0.505, p= 0.039)

and body weight vs. GIT helminths (r= -0.596, p= 0.012) were found to be significant.

Rhinolophus rufus

A total of nine (9) specimens, composed of seven (7) male and two (2) females,
were collected and sacrificed. From these, eight (8) were seen to have harboured parasites
(88.89%) with two (2) individuals having ectoparasites only (22.22%), four (4) having

GIT helminths only (44.44%) and two (2) having both groups (22.22%).

Ectoparasites collected were only fromStreblidae(n=2; 22.22%):B. amboinensis
(11.11%) and B. megadermae (11.11%). Some larvae were also observed on some of the

bats.


Tests to determine the relationship of sex with parasite intensity was not done
because results may favour one sex since there is only a small sample size and numbers
favour the females. However, it was found that there is a negative linear relationship
between total parasite load and body weight (r= -0.399, p= 0.288) as well as with
ectoparasite load and body weight (r= -0.560, p= 0.117) while GIT helminth intensity and
body weight (3= 0.318, p=0.404) had a positive linear relationship. Despite this, all

relationships are found to be insignificant.


4.3.3 HOST-PARASITE ASSOCIATIONS PER COLLECTION SITES

The caves that were sampled and had existing bat colonies were the Cathedral
cave, the main attraction and tourist destination in the area, Minalokan, Kalaw and two
(2) unnamed caves. A total of 31 bats were collected form Cathedral cave which was
composed of seven (7) Hipposideros lekaguli, six (6) Hipposideros pygmaeus, six (6)
Hipposideros diadema, eight (8) Miniopterus australis, and one (1) each of Rhinolophus
rufus, Rhinolophus inops and Rhinolophus arcuatus. Meanwhile, 37 individuals were
collected from Minalokan cave which included 13 Hipposiderus lekaguli, seven (7)
Hipposideros pygmaeus, one (1) Hipposideros diadema, and 16 Miniopterus australis.
Kalaw cave yielded a total of 13 bats, seven (7) Hipposideros pygmaeus, two (2)
Hipposideros diadema, and four (4) Rhinolophus rufus. Only four (4) bats, one (1) Myotis
horsefieldii and three (3) Rhinolophus rufus, were collected in the first unnamed cave
while 16 Rhinolophus inops were collected in the second one. The rest of the remaining
72 individuals were caught in mist nets set up around the base camp: 32 Rousettous
amplexicaudatus, 16 Cynopterus brachyotis, 13 Ptenochirus jagori, six (6) Hipposideros
diadema, onq (1) Rhinolophus rufus, 2 Haplonycteris fischerii and one (1) Eunycteris
robusta.

Of the five caves sampled, Cathedral cave had the most number of species caught
while Minlaokan cave had the most number of individuals caught. Statistical analysis
showed that there was no significant difference in the levels of infection of GIT
helminths with respect to collection site (caves only) = 6.942, p=0.139). However, the
same analysis showed that the levels of infestation of ectoparasites of bats caught from

Unnamed cave 2 (Mean rank= 69.72) was frequently higher compared to bats from other


Table14.Prevalence of Ectoparasite and GIT Helminths with respect to bat species and
each of their respected collection sites.

COLLECTION PARASITE PREVALENCE
sie No. of bats No. of Total Ecto Endo Both(%)
bats (%) only(%) only(%)
positive
Cathedral cave 31 17 54.84 12.90 19.35 22.58
H. lekaguli 7 1 14.28 14.28 : a
H. pygmaeus 6 2 33.33 - 33.33 5
H. diadema 6 4 66.67 16.67 33.33 16.67
M. australis 8 8 100.00 - 37.50 62.50
R. rufus 1 1 100.00 100.00 - -
R. inops | - - - - -
R.arcuatus 1 1 100.00 100.00 - -
Minalokan cave 36 20 55.56 11.11 13.89 30.56
H. lekaguli 13 2 15.38 15.38 - -
H. pygmaeus 7 3 42.86 14.29 14.29 14.29
H. diadema i} - - - - -

M. australis 16 16 100.00 6.25 25.00 68.75
Kalaw cave 13 8 61.54 30.77 15.38 15.38
H. pygmaeus 7 2 28.57 28.57 - -

H. diadema 2) 2 100.00 50.00 50.00 -

R. rufus 4 4 100.00 25.00 25.00 50.00
Unnamed cave 1 4 4 100.00 25.00 75.00 -

R. rufus 3 3 100.00 - 100.00 -

My. horsefieldii | 1 100.00 100.00 - -
Unnamed cave 2 16 14 87.50 18.75 6.25 62.50

R. inops 16 14 87.50 18.75 6.25 62.50
Campsite vicinity 71 58 81.69 52.11 4.23 25.35

Ro.amplexi 32 32 100.00 59.38 3.13 37.50

C. brachyotis 16 in 68.75 62.5 - 6.25

P. jagori 13 9 69.23 30.77 15.38 23.08

H.diadema 6 5 83.3 50.00 - 33.33

Rrufus 1 0 - - - -

H. fischerii 2 0 - - - -

E. robusta 1 | 100.00 100.00 - -



caves. This was followed by Kalaw cave (53.92), Cathedral cave (47.50), Minalokan
cave (45.77) and lastly Unnamed cave 1 (42.13) (x= 10.202, p=0.0307). Further pairwise
analysis of the intensities of ectoparasites in bats collected from the caves revealed that
ectoparasite intensity from unnamed cave 2 was only significantly different from
intensities recorded in Cathedral cave (U= 143.00, p= 0.013) and Minalokan cave (U=
140.50, p= 0.001).

Further observations on the common species found in the caves shows that H.
lekaguli which was collected in both Cathedral cave and Minalokan cave was only
infected with ectoparasites and had almost the same levels of ectoparasite prevalence

(14.28% and 15.38% respectively).


Table 15. Ectoparasite species and their prevalence per collection site

PARASITES PREVALENCE PER COLLECTION SITE (%) __

Cath Min __Kalaw_ Unnl__Unn2__—Camp

ECTOPARASITES

Nycteribiids
E. philippinensis - 2.78 - . o 7
E. inermis - - - - a a
E. sundaica - - - a D 5
L. brevicula - - - - - 12.68
L. simulans - - - - - 2.82
L. haplotes 5 = = 5 5 1.41
Ph. brachyacantha :
Pe. oligocantha 6.45
Pe. tainani - a
Pe. acuminate 3.23 2.78 - - - 1.41
M. allotopa 3.23 2.78 = [ 2 =
M. allotopoides 3.23 - Ss
N. parvula 3.23 2.78 - - - 1.41
N. parvuloides 9.68 2.78 S S a o

Streblids

M. parvior 2.82
R. pseudopagodarum -

B. amboignensis 12.90 -
B. hoogstraali - 2.78 -
B. megadermae - - 23.08 - 17.65 -
B. proxima - - - - 5.88 -
B. trianguliceps - - - - 5.88 -
B. werneri - - - - 11.11 -

Fleas
T. b. orientalis - - - - - 3.13
T. longiforceps - - - - - 40.63

Mites
A. taprobanius 3.23 - - - - 18.31
A. zelebori - - - - - 7.04
M. lateralis - - - - - 40.85
M. jordani . - - - - 2.82
M. calcarata - - - - - 1.41
P. rhinolophinos - -
S. psi - 11.11 - - - -
Macronyssidae 6.45 2.78 - - = 5

Ticks : 2.78 : : : 7.04


Table 16. GIT Helminth prevalence per collection site

Parasites PREVALENCE PER COLLECTION SITE (%) _

Cath Min  Kalaw_Unnl__Unn2__ Camp

GIT HELMINTHS

Trematoda
Acanthurium sp. 16.13 33.33 - - 35.29 1.41
Acanthurium eptesici 12.90 13.89 38.46 - 47.06 1.41
Plagiorchis sp. - - - 25.00 64.71 -
Cestoda
Vampirolepis sp. 16.13 13.89 7.69 25.00 - 15.49
Nematoda
Nycteridostrongylus sp. 16.13 22.22 7.69 - - 2.82
Strongylacantha sp. 6.45 - 15.38 50.00 5.88

Toxocara sp. - - - - - 25.00

V. DISCUSSION

5.1 Diseases and Wildlife

Detection and monitoring of infectious diseases of wildlife has always posed a
challenge for researchers. In fact, in the Philippines, there has been little effort in
cataloguing and monitoring diseases of our endemic and non-endemic species. Disease
causing pathogens such as parasites and viruses are mostly being overlooked during
biodiversity surveys when in fact, information on such would prove extremely useful for
wildlife ecologists and conservationists. Hudson (2005) states in his paper that
understanding the relationship of host and parasite at the individual level would provide a
clear picture in better understanding population dynamics, ecological interactions and

how changes in community structure could influence an ecosystem.

It is a well-known fact that it diseases and their monitoring is an important aspect
in studying a population especially in monitoring population dynamics because it
contributes to several population functions such as morbidity and mortality rate. This is
well observed when looking at how we humans deal with diseases that affect our own
populations. The same effort should be done with diseases of wildlife because such
pathogenic agents have various effects on the physiology and behaviour, overall fitness,
movement, social interactions, and home range of their hosts or afflicted individuals
(Dobson and Carper 1992; Scott 1988; Loreau et al., 2005). This further reflects on the
population because these effects further reflect on the individual’s growth rate.

reproductive rate and mortality (Gomez, 2013; Scott, 1988).


Information on the properties of host-parasite interactions is important in
monitoring the impact of changes in the habitat on pathogens and its transmission in
wildlife. Such changes could occur due to anthropogenic efforts, both positive and
negative, or through natural causes such as climate change. Another important change to
consider in a habitat is the movement of species in and out, because together with this
host movement is the probable introduction of novel diseases or increase in host

availability changing transmission dynamics of some diseases (Sasal et al., 2000).

5.2 Host-Parasite Associations of Bat Populations in CURCC

Parasitism, like any other interspecific relationship has several determinants that
control the nature of the host-parasite associations, but first we need to define parasitism.
Parasitism in simple terms is the relationship between two species where in one species,
the parasite, benefits to the detriment of the other, the host. These two are then affected
by their external biotic and abiotic environment, the characteristics of the parasite and

characteristics of the host.

For the external environment, this includes factors such as weather, topography,
and the biotic and abiotic components of the immediate surroundings as well as whether
the environment fulfils the requirements for the survival of the parasite as well as its host.
Environmental conditions are also important for the development of ectoparasites
especially those that have stages that are not on their bat hosts. For example, in this study,
the presence of the river along the habitat of the bats increases the availability of

arthropods, like the caddis fly, which have an aquatic phase in their life cycles. These


arthropod larvae are then exploited by trematodes like Acanthurium sp. as their
intermediate hosts. These arthropods are then preyed upon by insectivorous bats, thus, the

presence of trematodes.

Characteristics and habits of the host as well as the parasites are also important in
determining the kind of host-parasite interaction. Factors such as host’s immediate
characteristics (sex, age and body size) as well as their habits (diet, foraging and roosting
behaviour, etc.) could define the parasitic fauna and degree of parasetemia (Cross et al.,
2009; Dick and Paterson, 2007). Characters of the parasite, such as host specificity,

pathogenicity and transmission dynamics affects the degree of host-parasite relationship.

Population factors such as the hosts’ population density, composition.
territoriality and level of inter-group movement and contact also play a role in
determining host-parasite interaction within populations (Cross et al., 2009; Guegan et al,

2005).

5.2.1 Aggregation in Host Populations

The frequency distribution of intensities of parasites from bats was taken and
analyzed, resulting to an Index of Discrepacy (D) of 0.717. When the value of D reaches
close to 1.00 the data is more aggregated, thus, the distribution of parasites in bats in

CURCC, Cavinti, Laguna is aggregated.

The general distribution of parasites in host populations is typically aggregated
with most individuals being negative or have low intensities, while only a few individuals

are highly parasitized (Holt and Boulinier, 2005; Anderson and May, 1978); This feature


was also observed in studies of parasites in bat populations (Esteban, 2001) as well as in
most animal populations which was showed in a meta-analysis done by Shaw et al.
(1998). Aggregation or over dispersion of parasites within host populations is an
important aspect in controlling host and parasite population densities (Anderson and
May, 1978) as well as in maintaining a balance within populations because a normal
distribution of parasites in a host population, given the parasite is moderately pathogenic,
would mean a decrease in the overall productivity of the animals because most of the
hosts are infected. If the parasite, however, is highly pathogenic, this would result to high
mortality rates and decimation of population numbers. If these highly pathogenic
parasites, on the other hand, are aggregated in distribution, then only a number of hosts
will die and the effect of the parasite on host population density will be minimal and
contained. The containment of such pathogenicity of parasites is further amplified
through responses of populations to diseases, one of which is isolation of infected
individuals from the healthy ones. This aggregated distribution of parasites ensures the
persistence of the parasites in the environment because it also ensures the persistence of

its host populations.

Several factors may have caused this aggregation, this includes: (1) host
population properties; (2) aggregation/distribution of parasitic stages in its hosts habitat,
(3) climatic conditions and, characteristics and topography of the environment (Shaw,

1998).

Different properties of the individual hosts in a population directly affect
distribution of the host. These population characters include differences in behaviour,

isolation of infected hosts, host range, intra/inter- population competition and degree of


predation. Characters of individuals within a population include age, degree of sexual
maturity, sex, weight/size and dominance. These individual properties have direct
implications to the susceptibility of individuals to diseases with others being more
susceptible or exposed creating differences in degree of parasetemia within the
population further causing aggregation of parasites with parasites being more successful

in individuals with the same traits.

Moreover, aggregation of larval stages of parasites, which includes aggregated
distribution of vectors and intermediate hosts in an area, directly affect the distribution of
the adults as well, especially for parasites whose larval or adult forms are not mobile.
This is because there is greater probability of transmission of parasites or its larval stages
in areas wherein their IH’s or vectors and larval stages are more abundant than in areas
where these are sparse or their distribution are in patches. A group of hosts that are in the
area are more likely to be more infected with parasites compared to hosts in another area
where these larve and vectors/IH’s are not present, thus causing aggregated parasite

distribution within a host population.

Meanwhile, characters of the environment such as climate and differences in
topography, such as presence of bodies of water and vegetation, directly affect parasite
survival and chances of finding suitable hosts. Parasites are thus successful in areas

where their larval stages or species that help its life cycle are also successful.


5.2.2 Parasite Fauna of Bats

Both R. amplexicaudatus and M. australis were highly parasitized harbouring 16
and 15 species of parasites respectively while R. inops had 11 species of parasites. This
result was congruent with results of Gay et al.’s (2014) meta-analysis on parasites of bat
in Southeast Asia, wherein these three (3) were among those with high number of
parasite assemblages. Furthermore, the high prevalence of parasites in M. australis in this
study was the same with the study done by Wood (2012) on Miniopterus natalensis,
wherein he reported 97.00% prevalence for ectoparasites and 95.00% prevalence for
endoparasites. Meanwhile, Hipposiderids and C. brachyotis (for helminths) had low
prevalence and levels of infections. However according to Gay et al.’s (2014) paper, C.
brachyotis belongs to the top ten species of which have several parasite species

associated with them.

Several mechanisms might have caused the high levels of parasetemia in both R.
amplexicaudatus and M. australis. The parasites in the highly infected individuals may
have been co-evolving with their hosts for quite a period of time further developing
interactions that are almost non-detrimental to their hosts allowing these bat species to
harbour such high intensities of parasites. These long-term parasite- host interactions
have the potential to resemble some mutualistic relationships (Holt and Boulinier, 2005).
The mechanism behind this is that virulence is a phenotype that tends to get weeded out
because some of the hosts die out before the virulent trait gets passed on; on the other
hand moderately or less virulent parasites leans slightly towards the survival of the host

as well as the longevity and persistence of the parasite within the host population. The


less virulent parasite tends to succeed and pass on its trait and through generations of

interactions with its host, may lead to avirulence.

This transition, from parasitic to mutualistic, would seem to be beneficial to the
host, but it is most beneficial to the parasite because the well-being of the host also
translates to the well-being and perseverance of the parasite species; increased longevity,
productivity and fitness of host and host populations translates to persistence and ensure

the continuous survival of its parasites.

Furthermore, host systems have the ability to control the allocation and re-
allocation of its energy and sometimes permitting the persistence of parasitic infections,
lowering immune response, while prioritizing other activities such as reproduction and
growth (Tinsley, 2005). By increasing focus and energy allocation on growth and
reproduction, they could counteract the detrimental effects of parasitism, at both the
levels of the individual and population because this correlates with an increase in host

population productivity.

Looking at the helminth distribution in host species, trematodes were observed
only in insectivores; this is mainly caused by differences in diet. Moreover, trematodes
had high prevalence and intensities in their bat hosts; their high prevalence could have
resulted from the presence of aquatic habitat throughout the sampling site allowing for
abundance in arthropod intermediate host whose larvae are aquatic (Esteban, 2001) while
high intensities could have resulted from an increase in infected IH as well as from high
foraging activity and high consumption of infected arthropods (Watve and Sukumar,

1995).


Nematodes, on the other hand were present in both frugivores and insectivores,
they were of different species. Both Nycteridostrongylus and Strongylacantha are

naturally found in insectivores while Toxocara pteropidis is found in pteropodids.

Meanwhile an explanation on the lack of parasites or low levels of infection in
Cynopterus (low GIT helminth prevalence)and Hipposideros in the CURCC could be
loss of parasites of the said hosts within the immediate area that was either caused by the
individual or combined pressures of increased host immunity due to repeated and long
term interactions and/or changes in the climate resulting to conditions that are not
favourable for the parasite’s fitness and survivability of adult and larval stages (Tinsley,
2005) further leading to mass extinction of parasites; thus, during the course of time, only
a handful or no parasites were able to co-evolve side by side with these species.
Furthermore, previous unpublished surveys on C. brachyotis in Puting Bato, Polilio and
Mt. Makiling, Los Bafios, Laguna had similar results, wherein there was no helminth
species observed. This further suggests the plausibility of increased host immunity in C.

brachyotis but further investigations should be done.

Loss of parasites of a certain species, in an area, has been documented, especially
those involving human intervention. It was either there were increased host immune
response through acquired immunity, transmission route of the parasite has been blocked
off, as well as introduction of other animals and/or parasites. Examples of this loss of

parasites have been cited in a paper by Tinsley (2005).

Another explanation for such low parasite prevalence and diversity in these bats is

that the parasites of other bat species have become highly adapted to their hosts that they


are no longer compatible with other hosts thus exhibiting high levels of host specificity.
In a situational context, say that C. brachyotis or the Hipposiderids were late colonizers
of the area compared to the other bats, and during the time they colonized the area they
were not able to bring their natural parasites with them, the high host specificity of the
ectoparasites of the other bats made it impossible for them to successfully infect C.
brachyotis and Hiposiderids, even though they were novel infections and these bats were
in close association with each other. Or, say the other bats were the late colonizers, and
that C. brachyotis and hipposiderids, the earlier colonizers, have experienced parasite
extinction, and though the new bat species carry novel parasites, they failed to establish

in their new host.

5.2.3 Host Specificity
Host specificity is mainly determined and controlled by both the host’s and
parasites, phylogenetic background, body sizes, morphologies and feeding behaviours

(Freeland, 1983 as cited in Sukhdeo and Hernandez., 2005; Dick and Patterson, 2007).

In this study, host specificity was observed in both Nycteribiid and Streblids in
both the frugivores and insectivores. In the frugivores, nycteribiids of the genus
Eucampsipoda, Nycteribia and Penicillidia were observed in R. amplexicaudatus while
nycteribiids of the genus Leptocyclopodia were observed in both C. brachyotis and P.
jagori. For the insectivores, nycteribiids from genus Eucampsipoda, Penicillidia, and
Nycteribia were only found in M. australis. Meanwhile the streblids from genus

Brachytarsina are mostly found in Rhinolophids. Most of these host-parasite interactions


between bat and batfly are similar with the accounts compiled by Cuy (1980) and the

study done by Alvarez (2012) on Mt. Makiling.

Host specificity has many driving factors but all have the same component which
is a long period of time where in several generations of the host and parasites interact. In
the paper by Dick and Patterson (2007), Combes (1991) proposed a concept which he
called ‘Filter Concept’ which promotes the evolution of host specificity of parasiteic
relationships. This concept further involves two (2) filters, the Encounter Filter (EF) and
the Compatibility Filter (CF). Dick and Patterson (2007) further added a third filter, the
Reproductive Filter (RF). These three (3) filters can be observed and applied in this

specific study.

We first take the case of the insectivores. Even though M. australis and the
Hipposiderids were found roosting in the same caves (Table 13), where in there was
observed mixing of species within caves, bat flies were only observed in M. australis.
These batflies deposit their larvae on the cave substrate where in it develops into an adult;
the adult then needs to find a suitable host to feed on. Despite the availability of other
hosts within the cave, batflies were most prevalent and diverse in M. australis. Here, we
could infer that these species of batflies are not compatible or cannot survive on the other
hosts due to morphological, physiological and immunological reasons. This further

proposes the presence of a Compatibility Filter (CF).

Rhinolophus inops, on the other hand, were only found in one (1) of the unnamed
caves (Table 13) and was the only bat species observed in that cave. Consequently, this

bat species had the most diverse and high prevalence of streblids. These streblids are


isolated in the specific cave since the distribution of parasites in a specific area is
dependent on the availability and distribution of their hosts (Holt and Boulinier, 2005).
Furthermore, since most of the streblid population was in that cave, and because of the
biology and ecology of these batflies, the chance for their newly hatched adults to
encounter other hosts became slim. Through generations of interaction, these batflies
could develop a monoxenous relationship with this bat species or species close to it
because of the lack of other host species. The absence of these streblids in the other caves
could have been caused by an Encounter Filter (EF) where in isolation of parasites due to
isolated distribution of its hosts limits its encounter with other hosts. This isolation,
through generations of host and parasite, would further strengthen host specificity in the

host-parasite interaction.

Meanwhile, those who managed to find their way to a new how species and a way
to survive on their accidental hosts, thru adaptation or mutation and/or bypassing the EF
and CF by chance, will find themselves both isolated and unable to find a mate either
because of the EF acting on individuals of the opposite sex or other individuals could not
survive on the new host species (CF). Therefore, these isolated individuals were not able
to pass the traits that made them able to successful in their new host. This isolation

represents a Reproductive Filter (RF), since they could not reproduce.

5.2.4 Distribution of hosts and Parasites per Site
The parasites, Pe.acuminate, M. allotopa, N. parvula, and N. parvuloides were

found in M. australis from both Cathedral and Minalokan caves (Table 14). These


parasites, along with other parasites of M. australis, were not tagged to any other cave
mainly because their definitive host was not collected in those caves. This host based
distribution is in accord with a paper by Holt and Boulinier (2005) wherein he stated that
the distribution of parasites in an area is highly dependent on the availability of their
hosts and their distribution. This could be further observed in the case of the streblids
wherein majority of the streblids were tagged to the cave where R. inops was collected.

This is also applicable in the case of the helminths.

Eventhough M. australis shared the caves with hipposiderids and Rhinolophus,
the high host specificity of the nyteribiids caused the low level of ectoparasite infestation

in the other bat species.

Furthermore, the similarities in ectoparasites of M. australis in both caves could
suggest within species interactions (e.g. mating across colonies) as well as roost
switching/usage or simply that these parasites have already established themselves in
those habitats because their hosts consistently use these caves as roosting sites. This
could also imply host movement from cave to cave where in introduction of parasite to an
area is a consequence of host movement. In fact several studies have linked ectoparasites
with roost fidelity of bats (Lewis, 1995; Dick and Patterson, 2006; Bartonicka, 2008;
Gikas, 2011). Further information about the caves suggest that these caves are connected
by smaller chambers which increases the plausibility of close association between the

bats of different roosts.


This host based distribution of parasites is an important aspect and affects several
dynamics in host-parasite interactions, one of which is the development of host

specificity.

5.2.5 Ectoparasite-GIT Helminth Co- infection

Correlation analysis showed that there is a weak positive linear relationship
between ectoparasite intensity and GIT helminth intensity (r= 0.225; p=0.003). This
would mean that bats that have high intensities of ectoparasites also experience high
levels of helminth infections. This, however, was not the same in Gay et al.‘s paper

(2014) wherein they found no correlation.

Macroparasites such as ectoparasites and helminths most of the time increase the
rate of morbidity rather than mortality, with mortality only resulting from severe
immunocompetence or super infections. This decrease in morbidity would further reflect
on the host’s fitness making it increasingly susceptible to secondary infections (Moller,
2005). For example, hosts whose fitness has been lowered and are experiencing increased
stress by the presence of parasites, say some ectoparasites, would have lower activity
levels because of the change in energy allocation of the host. Parasites alter energy
allocation of their hosts, with the hosts investing more on grooming and immune
response; grooming (Kunz, 1982) and increasing immune response is a costly activity
(Rigby,2002). Effects of this change in energy allocation would further manifest itself in
such a way that the host would not be able to effectively forage so, and in the case of

insectivores, would lead them to select those insects that are easier to catch. Furthermore,


parasitic infections either physically stress or physiologically alter their hosts either
weakening them or altering their behaviour making them more available to predators
(Moller, 2005; Brown et al., 2005). So basically the already stressed bats, due to their
ectoparasite burden, might have been selecting prey that are easier to catch because they
are infected as well. This is a possible explanation for the high helminth intensities in

Miniopterus and Rhinolophus which is in conjunction with high ectoparasite intensities.

Another hypothesis is that these ectoparasites themselves are the intermediate
hosts of some of the helminth species. It is known that some cestodes species,
Vampirolepis is one of them, as their intermediate hosts. The hosts might have ingested
these ectoparasites, like fleas, during grooming leading to infection. Thus, high intensities
of ectoparasites led to higher intensity of helminth infection. This is more applicable to

frugivores because they do not specifically target arthropods for sustenance.

5.2.6 Diet

Herbivores generally have lower parasite loads and lesser parasite species
infecting them while solitary hosts have more parasite loads and species diversity than
gregarious hosts (Watve and Sukumar, 1995). In this study, frugivores had same
intensities of GIT helminths with insectivores, but on the contrary, the opposite was
observed with respect to the ectoparasites with frugivores being more infected (x?=
18.975, p < 0.01). On the other hand, insectivores, M. australis and R. inops showed high

prevalence and species diversity of GIT helminths.


A possible reason why only a handful of helminth species infect frugivores is
because of their diet. To fully understand why diet plays an integral part in the parasite
fauna of host, we first need to understand how these parasites exploit its surroundings for
transmission. Helminth transmission is either direct or indirect. In direct transmission, the
host either ingests the eggs, larvae or adult directly. These life stages are either deposited
or contaminate food material or fomites that the hosts ingest. Furthermore, some larval
stages of helminths directly infect the host through penetration of its skin, this can be
observed in helminths such as Schistosoma sp. and Ancylostoma. Meanwhile, indirect
transmission involves another organism other than the parasite’s definitive host (DH)
acting either as a vector or intermediate host (IH). The vectors mainly act as a shuttle of
the parasite transporting or transmitting these parasites to their final host. The
intermediate host, on the other hand, act as a nursery for the larval stages of the parasites
where in these larval stages develop into their infective stages as well as increase in
numbers. These IH either release the infective stages, which directly invade the DH, or
are the ones ingested by the DH. These two (2) transmission routes are different, but have
similar points in such a way that one route involves the oral route where in the parasites

exploit their DH’s need to forage and ingest food.

With that in mind, it means that diet comprised mainly of the IH of helminths
would translate to higher prevalence and intensities of helminths. The main diet of
herbivores, which include frugivores, are plant material and plant derivatives such as
flowers, fruits and nuts, however, there are not that many helminths which are known to

use fruits as their intermediate hosts (IH). Helminths that infect herbivores are usually


those that have direct life cycles, helminths whose eggs and larvae contaminate food

material of herbivores. An example of such is Toxocara and other strongylids.

Meanwhile several helminths, mostly trematodes and cestodes, utilize arthropods
as IH or vectors. This can be observed in the study wherein, as stated earlier, trematodes
were only observed in insectivores. Arthropods are the main diet of insectivores. This
accounts for the presence of trematodes and cestodes in insectivores. However, the
cestode Vampirolepis, which also utilizes arthropod intermediate hosts, was observed in

frugivores as well.

Its presence in frugivores suggests a much more complex transmission dynamics
because frugivores do not specifically target arthropods for their diet. An explanation was
stated in Nogueira et al.’s (2004) paper wherein he cited sources that frugivores have
been thought to have ingested insects as a protein supplement; however, he further
stressed the importance for further studies on the transmission of such group of parasites
in frugivores. Simply put, arthropods were ingested by R. amplexicaudatus and P. jagori
accidentally while the arthropods were also feeding on fruits. This accidental ingestion
could have involved host manipulation, where in the parasite or its larval stage
manipulates either the behaviour of the host and/or its phenotypic characteristics (Moller,
2005) to increase the probability of reaching its definitive host. The intermediate hosts
behave in such a way that they are more accessible to their definitive hosts; changes in
the IH’s habits include, changes movement, changes in physiology, like increase in
photosensitivity, and other traits, or changes in the IH’s external characteristics making

the IH resemble fruits and making them migrate to areas where fruits are naturally found.


Host manipulation by the parasite basically increases the chances that the parasite
encounters its final host. This host manipulation has been observed in the trematode
Dicrocoelium lanceatum in its ant host, where in the larvae changes the habits of ants.
The infected ants were observed to be going against its natural program and moving

towards the ends of grass blades making this them more available for herbivores.

Furthermore, Acanthurium eptesici and Acanthurium sp. were observed in four
and three species of bats respectively. The overlap in trematode species may be due to
similarities in diet as well as overlaps in foraging area. In fact diet studies have shown
that these three genera, have common prey in their diet, them being Coleopterans,
Hymenopterans and Lepidopterans (Fukui et al, 2008). Furthermore, these parasites
might have utilized multiple IH’s so much so that despite the difference in diet of these
insectivores, the presence of their larval stages in multiple species of arthropod IH’s
enable them to infect multiple bat species. Meanwhile, the differences in intensities and
prevalence of these trematodes in each bat species could be explained by their feeding
habits. Generalist feeders, those with wide array of prey species, tend to have a more
diversity of parasites associated with it as compared to a specialist feeder (Price, 1990 as
cited in Junker et al., 2008). A study showed that rhinolophids and vespertillionids are
considered as generalist feeders with a wide variety of prey species while hipposiderids
are somehow specialist predators with prey preferences depending on the time of the
month and bulk of diet being Coleopterans (Fukui et al., 2008; Pavey and Burwell, 1997).
Meanwhile Plagiorchis sp. was only observed in Rhinolophus inops, which could have

resulted from a difference in diet with the other insectivores.


One of the other implications of difference in diet is the difference in gut
morphology. In terms of gut complexity, it was observed that frugivores have a much
more complex and longer digestive tract compared to that of the insectivores. This is
connected to their diet, because it is harder to digest plant material as compared to
animal/insect protein. By basic analysis using species density/diversity-area relationship,
predictions would show that a more complex gut could accommodate a higher
density/diversity of parasites because of there is a more diverse niche present (Guegan et
al., 2005). However, the contrary was observed in the study, there was no observed
difference in the intensities of GIT helminth between frugivores and insectivores:
however, more species of parasites and higher intensities were observed in insectivores,
with six (6) helminth species infecting them and M. australis harbouring approximately
18 helminths per infected bat. This result was similar with the compiled findings of
Watve and Sukumar (1995) wherein they found a negative correlation between gut

complexity and parasite diversity.

5.2.7 Weight

Weight was used as a representative for bat size with the assumption that the
bigger bat the higher the recorded weight. To better grasp the relevance of host size we
need to see it via the perspective of the parasite. For this study, only ectoparasite
diversity and densities follow the species-area relationship predictions in frugivores while
it is the other way around for insectivores with the smaller M. australis harbouring more

extoparasites.


Correlation analysis of ectoparasite intensity with bat size had a weak positive
linear relationship (r= 0.284, p< 0.001) suggesting that bigger bats are slightly more
infested with ectoparasites than smaller ones. This is further supported by the data that
the bigger bats, Rousettus amplexicaudatus (134.75), Hipposideros diadema (94.40) and
Rhinolophus inops (93.44) had the highest mean ranks in terms of ectoparasite intensity
(= 69.41, p< 0.01). A bigger host means there is a larger surface area for ectoparasites
to colonize (Morand, 2000 in Lindenfors, 2007). To the parasite, its host is a habitat, a
landscape that of which it exploits for resources for survival (Guegan et al., 2005), thus,
to a parasite, the bigger the host, the bigger the habitat and more chances for survival;
thus, bigger bodied hosts, tend to have higher carrying capacities which can support

larger populations of ectoparasites.

On the other hand, correlation between GIT helminth intensity with host size
showed a weak negative relationship (R= -0.1.76, p= 0.021) meaning bigger bats had
lower intensities of helminths. This result differs from the mathematical assumptions,
using energetic equivalence rule, published by George-Nascimento et al. (2004) stating
that helminth parasite intensity increased with host body size; but this current study had
similar observations wherein bigger hosts allowed for bigger parasites. Furthermore,
larger animals tend to consume more food because of the increased energy requirements
needed to maintain activity of a larger. This increase in foraging activity connected to
body size could increase the chances that hosts could ingest more parasite larvae

(Lindenfors, 2007).

Miniopterus australis had the highest intensity of GIT helminth among all bat

species (49.50) (x2= 73.587, p< 0.001) even though it was the smallest of all the bat


species. This was because of the high intensity of trematodes (MI=20) and nematodes

(MI=4) collected.

Toxocara pteropodis collected were the biggest helminths found with some
infected hosts having their intestines stretched to accommodate the worms. Toxocara
pleropodis is several times larger in size when compared with any of the other GIT
helminths of insectivores. Common thought would suggest that a larger habitat could
support larger individuals because it could provide more resources. This could explain
why these bigger nematodes were only observed in R. amplexicaudatus. This size
relationship between parasite and host was observed in a study done by Barber (2004)
showing that larger hosts can accoodate larger parasites and that parasites grow bigger in

larger hosts.

Meanwhile, the high helminth intensity of trematodes Acanthurium and
Plagiorchis in M. australis and R. inops, and even the nematodes is mainly connected
with host diet because as said earlier, herbivores have lower parasite loads and parasite

species involved with them.

This increases the probability of infection by parasite because of the increase in
exposure to IH (prey species of the host) as well as the increased activity due to foraging
(Watve and Sukumar, 1995); this however, is controlled by differences in the diet of

animals which was stated earlier.


5.2. 8 Sex

Statistical analysis showed that there is no difference in ectoparasite intensity (x2=
1.576, p = 0.209) and GIT helminth intensity (x= 0.391, p = 0.532) between males and
females. This was congruent with studies on different bat populations (Lord,2012; Wood,

2012).

There are mixed views on the correlation between sex and _host-parasite
interactions. General thought based on difference in physiology would show that males
should be more infected than females. Androgenic hormones have been proven to have a
certain degree of immunosuppressive effect, making males more susceptible to parasitic
infections compared to females (Poulin and Forbes, 2012) while the female estrogenic
hormones have the ability to increase immune response to some helminth infections
(Lord, 2012). Males also experience lots of stress during breeding season which also

contributes to immunosuppression in males (Cross et al., 2009).

However, several studies have reported that female bats have more parasites than
males (Okafor et al., 2004; ). This is backed up by a paper by Kunz (1973) wherein he
stated that adult female bats or developing females have higher rates and longer periods
of foraging activity and thus consume more food as compared to male bats ( as cited in
Okafor et al, 2004) as well as their increased food intake during pregnancy (Junker et al.,
2008). Increase in foraging activity, especially in insectivorous bats, as said previously;
increases the probability of infection because of the increase in exposure of the bat host

to parasite larvae in their arthropod IH (Watve and Sukumar, 1995).


5.2.9 Age

Statistical analysis of the data showed that sub-adults generally have more
ectoparasite than adults (x?=31.523, p<0.001). Meanwhile there was no difference
between intensities of GIT helminths between sub adults and adults (x2= 0.386, p=
0.535). These results go against the general assumption that older individuals have larger
bodies because of growth and that larger individuals should harbour more ectoparasites
and endoparasites. Furthermore, older individuals have been exposed to these pathogens

for a longer period and that adults are more active as compared to younger individuals.

Several mechanisms cause differences in the levels of infection and prevalence of
parasites between age groups of hosts. The difference in parasite prevalence and intensity
between age groups of bats theoretically would differ mainly because of differences in
energy allocation due to physiological and behavioural changes and energy requirements
due to growth and maintenance of bigger bodies. One of the greatest adaptations of bats
is their development of flight; and common thought would make us infer that upon
development of flight, there is also a change in energy allocation and requirement in bats
because flight is a very taxing activity. This, in addition to increase in energy requirement
as maintenance for growth/ larger bodies as well as for reproduction upon onset of sexual
maturity and other activities would increase the bats need to forage. This increase in
foraging, in congruence with the physiological changes stated in the previous part (5.2.)
as a consequence of sexual development and maturation, would tend to increase exposure
and susceptibility of hosts to parasites, further inferring that adults should have higher
prevalence and intensities of parasites (Watve and Sukumar, 1995; Poulin and Forbes,

2012: Lord, 2012; Cross et al., 2009; Okafor et al., 2004).


Meanwhile, other notions suggest that long term and constant exposure to such
disease causing agents could result to resistance, resulting to tolerance to high intensities

of parasetemia, or immunity which could result to low levels of infection.

V. SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

A total of 172 bats collected from the Cavinti Underground River and Cave
Complex (CURCC) located in Cavinti, Laguna within a span of 10 days. A total of 13
species were identified, which included: Rousettous amplexicaudatus (n=32), Cynopterus
brachyotis (n=16), Ptenochirus jagori (n=13), Eunycteris robusta (n=1), Haplonycteris
fischerii (n=2), Myotis horsefieldii (n=1), Hipposideros lekaguli (n=20), H. diadema
(n=15), H. pygmaeus (n=21), Rhinolophus rufus (n=9), R. inops (n=17), R. arcuatus
(n=1) and Miniopterus australis (n=24).

There were 122 bats that were found to be positive with parasites resulting to an
overall parasite prevalence of 70.93%. From this total number infected, 53 (30.81%)
individuals had ectoparasites only, 19 (11.05%) had GIT helminths only while 50 bats
(29.07%) had both groups of parasites infecting them. Further analysis showed that there
was a weak negative correlation between levels of infestation of ectoparasites and GIT
helminth intensity.

A total of 31 ectoparasite species were collectedwhich included: (Nyctaribiidae)
E. inermis, E. philippinensis, E. sundaica, L. brevicula, L. haplotes, L. simulans, N.
allotopa, N. allotopoides, N. parvula, N. parvuloides, Pe. acuminata, Pe. dofouri tainani,
Pe. oligacantha, Ph. Brachyacantha,(Streblidae) B. amboinensis, B. hoogstrali, B.
megadermae, B. proxima, B. trianguliceps, B. werneri, M. parvior, R. pseudopagodarum,
(Ischnopsyllidae) 7. longiforceps, T. breviceps orientalis, (Spinturnicidae) Spinturnix psi,
Ancystropus taprobanius, Ancstropus zeleborii, Meristaspis lateralis, Meristaspis jordani,

Meristaspis calcarata, Paraperiglischrus rhinolophinus


There were seven (7) species of GIT helminths collected: Acanthurium sp.,
Acanthurium epetsici,Plagiorchis sp.,Vampirolepis Sp., Toxocara
pteropidis,Nycteridostrongylus sp., and Strongylacantha sp.

Body weight had opposite effects on parasite intensity of ectoparasites and GIT
helminths. For GIT helminths, there was a weak negative correlation with body weight
while there was a weak positive correlation for ectoparasites. This is due to the fact that
larger bodied animals have more space to be colonized and most commonly have a higher
threshold of infection and can sustain higher numbers of parasites. Another explanation
for the lowered helminth may be due to the fact that adults are generally less infected
than younger individuals and adults have larger sizes. Another reason might be the diet of
the bats, fruit bats have larger bodies than insectivores and fruit bats have generally less
helminths than insectivores because of their diet and behaviour.

Statistical analysis for differences in intensities of both ectoparasite and GIT
helminth with respect to weight and sex of the batshowed that differences were
insignificant. Age of the bats was the only significant factor in affecting intensity of
ectoparasites, insignificant for GIT helminths.

Meanwhile, among the top three most infected species with respect to GIT
helminths, were insectivores which suggest that intensity of infection with GIT helminths
is influenced by diet.Furthermore, their diet exposes them to a wider variety of parasites
compared to frugivores. Ectoparasites on the other hand, were well distributed among all
bat species with Streblids being the most commonly observed andRousettus

amplexicaudatus being the most infested bat. Interestingly, fleas were only observe intwo


(2) frugivore species, suggesting that behaviour, foraging and other characteristics also
influence the parasite fauna infecting bats.

Rousettus amplexicaudatus was also the most infected species among all the
frugivore species while Rhinolophus inops and Miniopterus australis were the most
infected among all insectivore species caught.

The fact that Cynopterus brachyotis and Hipposideros lekaguli being the two
species least infected despite the fact that their family members had high levels of
infection suggests that these two species might have evolved physiological and
behavioural factors that lead to such. Further investigations on such mechanisms are
recommended. In conjunction with this, the effects of the parasite on host behaviour and
physiology should also receive focus, especially those with high intensities and
prevalence of parasites. This would show mechanisms in the host-parasite relationship
that lead to resistance, tolerance and further evolution of mutualism.

Another worthy recommendation is time-line studies on the seasonality of
infections in the bats. It is well known that timing is important for successful
transmission and survival of parasites, like in conjunction with rainy season or
availability of hosts in response to changes in climate (Tinsley, 2005). In fact, seasonal
variation in parasite diversity and density has been observed in several studies in other
countries(Lord, 2012) . Furthermore, some parasites are more prevalent and have higher
numbers in response to certain host timelines, say mating season of bats. In connection
with this, Fukui et al. (2008) found that the diet of certain bat species differ depending on

the month. This change in diet could alter the species diversity of parasites in their bat


hosts. These areas should also be studied to have clearer pictures on the timing of external
interventions in case of population-threatening infections.

Further studies on the zoonotic potential of bat parasites is also essential because
of the range and dispersion capability of bats as well as their ability to survive near or in

manmade ecosystems such as orchards and plantations.

VI. REFERENCES

ALVAREZ, J. DV. 2012. Ectoparasite Diversity and Host-parasite Associations of Bats
(Mammalia: Chiroptera) in Mount Makiling , Laguna, Philippines. University of
the Philippines Los Bafios (Unpublished Thesis)

ANDERSON, R. M. and MAY, R. M. 1978. Regulation and Stability of Host-parasite
Population Interactions.Journal of Animal Ecology. Vol 47, pp. 219-247

BARTONICKA, T. 2008. Cimex pipistrelli (Heteroptera, Cimicidae) and the dispersal
propensity of bats: an experimental study. Parasitology Research Vol. 104 Issue
1 pp 163- 168 (accessed from http://link.springer.com on Dec 2014)

BERGMANS, W. and ROZENDAAL, F. G. 1988. Notes on the Collections of Fruit Bats
from Sulawesi and Some Off-lying Islands (Mammalia,Megachiroptera). Zool.
Verh. Leiden. Vol. 248, pp. 3-74

BROWN, F. J., On the Excretory System and Life History of Lecithodendrium
chilostomum (Mehl.) and other Bat Trematodes, with a Note on the Life History
of Dicrocoelium dendriticum (Rudolphi) (abstract) (retrieved from
http://journals.cambridge.org/action/display
Abstract?fromPage=online&aid= 1676528 on March 8, 2014)

BROWN, S. P., ANDRE, J., FERDY, J., and GODELLE, B. 2005. Subverting Hosts and
Diverting Ecosystems: An Evolutionary Modelling Perspective. In Parasitisms
and Ecosystems: Chapter 9. Eds. THOMAS, F., RENAUD, F. and GUEGAN
J.F. Oxford University Press. Pp 145-147

CROSS, P. C.. DREWE, J., PATERK, V., PEARCE, G., SAMUEL, M. D., and
DELAHAY, RJ. 2009. Wildlife Population Structure and Parasite
Transmission: Implication for Disease Management.Springer. Tokyo. Pp 9- 29

CUY, L. S. 1980*. Nycteribiidae (Diptera) of the Philippines. Kalikasan, Philipp. J.
Biol.9 (2-3). Pp. 145-168

CUY, L. S. 19808. Nycteriboscinae (Diptera: Streblidae) of the Philippines. Kalikasan,
Philipp. J. Biol. 9(2-3). Pp. 145- 168

CUY, L. S. 1979. Synopsis of Philippine Spinturnicidae (Acarina: Mesostigmata).
Kalikasan, Philipp. J. Biol. 8(2) pp. 162-172

DELFINADO, M. D. and BAKER, E. W. 1963.Mites of the Family Spinturnicidae from
the Philippines. Pacific Insects 5 (4) pp 905-920


DICK, C. W. and PATTERSON, B. D., 2006. Bat Flies: Obligate Ectoparasites of Bats.
In: MORAND, S., KRASNOV, B., POULIN, R. (Eds.), Micromammals and
Macroparasites: From Evolutionary Ecology to Management: Chapter 11.
Springer Verlag Publishing, Tokyo, pp. 179-194

DICK, C. W. and PATTERSON, B. D. 2007. Against All Odds: Explaining High Host
Specificity in Dispersal-prone Parasites. International Journal of Parasitology
vol 37 pp. 871- 876 (Accessed from www.sciencedirect.com on January 2015)

DOBSON A, CARPER R. 1992. Global warming and potential changes in host parasite
and diseasevector relationships. In: Globalwarming and biodiversity, Peters RL,
Lovejoy TE,editors. Yale University Press, New Haven, Connecticut.

ESTEBAN, J. G., AMENGUAL, B. and COBO, J. S. 2001. Composition and Structure
of Helminth Communities in Two Populations of Pipistrellus pipistrellus
(Chiroptera: Vespertillionidae) from Spain. Folia Parasitologica vol. 48, pp 143-

ESTEBAN, J. G. BOTELLA, P., TOLEDO, R. and OLTRA-FERRERO, J. L.
1999.Helminth Fauna of Bats in Spain. IV. Parasites of Rhinolophus
ferrumequinum (Schreber, 1774) (Chiroptera: Rhinolophidae). Research and
Reviews in Parasitology. 59 (1-2) pp. 57-687

FUKUI, D., OKAZAKI, K. and MAEDA, K., 2009. Diet of three sympatric insectivorous
bat species on Ishagaki Island, Japan. Endang Spec Res. Pp 1-12

GAY, N., OLIVAL, K. J., BUMRUNGSRI, S., SIRIAROONRAT, B., BO, M. and
MORAND, S. 2014. Parasite and Viral Species Richness of Southeast Asian
Bats: Fragmentation of Area Distribution Matters. International Journal for
Parasitology: Parasites and Wildlife Vol. 3, pp. 161-170

GEORGE-NASCIMENTO, M., MUNOZ, G., MARQUET, P. A., and POULIN, R.
2004.Testing the Energetic Equivalence Rule with Helminth Endoparasites of
Vertebrates. Ecology Letters Vol. 7. pp. 527-531

GIKAS, N. S. 2011. Effects of Ectoparasites and Reproductive Class on Roost-Switching
Behavior of Indiana Bats (Myotis sodalist).Indiana State University, Terre
Haute, Indiana. (Graduate Thesis) (Accessed from

http://scholars.indstate.edu/handle/10484/3734 on December 2014)

GUEGAN, J.F., MORAND, S., and POULIN, R. 2005. Are there general laws in parasite
communit ecology? The emergence of spatial parasitology and
epidemiology.InTHOMAS, F., RENAUD, F. and GUEGAN  J.F
(Eds.).Parasitisms and Ecosystems: Chapter 2..Oxford University Press. Pp 22-


HASTRITER, M. W. and BUSH, S. E. 2013. Description of Lentistivalius philippinensis,
new speciesof flea (Siphonaptera, Pygiosyllomorpha, Stivaliidae),and new
records of scodipterinae (Streblidae) on bats and other small mammals from
Luzon, The Philippines. ZooKeys 260 pp. 17-30

HASTRITER, M. W. and BUSH, S. E. 2014. Description of Medwayella independencia
Siphonaptera,Stivaliidae), a new species of flea from Mindanao Island, the
Philippines nd their phoretic mites, and miscellaneous flea records from the
Malay Archipelago. ZooKeys 408 pp. 107-123

HEANEY, L.R. AND J.C. REGALADO, JR. 1998. Vanishing Treasures of the Philippine
Rain Forest. The Field Museum Chicago m,, USA. pp.96.

HEANEY, L. R., D. S. BALETE, M. L. DOLAR, A. C. ALCALA, A. T. L. DANS, P. C.
GONZALES, N. R. INGLE, M. V. LEPITEN, W. L. R. OLIVER, P. S. ONG,
E.A. RICKART, B. R. TABARANZA, JR., & R. C. B. UTZURRUM. 1998. A
Synopsis of the mammalian fauna of the Philippine Islands. — Fieldiana:
Zoology, new series 88: 1-61

HOLT, R. and BOULINIER, T. 2005. Ecosystems and Parasitism: the Spatial
Dimension. In THOMAS, F., RENAUD, F. and GUEGAN J.F
(Eds.).Parasitisms and Ecosystems: Chapter 5. Eds. Oxford University Press. Pp
68-84

HOPKINS, G. and ROTHSCHILD, M. 1953. An Illustrated Catalogue of the Rothschild
Collection of Fleas (Siphonoptera) in the British Museum (Natural History)
with Keys and Short Descriptions for the Identification of Families, Genera,
Species and Subspecies. London. Vol. 6 pp.

HUDSON, P. 2005. Parasites, Diversity and the Ecosystem.In THOMAS, F., RENAUD,
F. and GUEGAN J.F (Eds.).Parasitisms and Ecosystems: Introduction. E
Oxford University Press. Pp 1-12

INGLE, N. R and HEANEY, L. R.1992.A Key to the Bats of the Philippine
Islands. FIELDIANA.Zoology No. 69. Pp. 7-25

JENZEN, L. A. and HOWELL, K. M. 1983.Vampirolepis schmidti sp. n. (Cestoidea:
Hymenolepididae) from Triaenops persicus (Hipposideridae) of Tanzania. Proc.
Helminthol. Soc. Wash. Vol. 50 no. 1, pp 135-137

JUNKER, K., BAIN, O. and BOOMKER, J. 2008. Helminth Parasites of Natal Long-
fingered Bats, Miniopterus natalensis (Chiroptera: Miniopteridae) in South
Africa. Onderstepoort Journal of Veterinary Reasearch Vol. 75, pp. 261-265

KAGEI, N. and SAWADA, I. 1973. Helminth Fauna of Bats in Japan XIII. Annotationes
Zoologicae Japonenses. Vol 46, no. 1. pp 49-52


KUNZ, T. H. 1982. Roosting Ecology of Bats.In Kunz, T. H. (Ed.). Ecology of Bats:
Chapter 1. Plenum Press, New York pp 1-51

KIFUNE, T., HARADA, M., and YOSHIYUKI, M. 2002.Trematode Parasites of Three
Cambodian Bats. Med. Bull. Fukuoka Univ. Vol. 29 no. 3. Pp 127-130

LAFFERTY, K. D. and KURIS, A. M. 2005.THOMAS, F., RENAUD, F. and GUEGAN
J.F (Eds.).Parasitism and Environmental Disturbances. In Parasitisms and
Ecosystems: Chapter 7. Oxford University Press. Pp 113-123

LEWIS, S. E.. 1995. Roost Fidelity of Bats: A Review. Journal of Mammalogy Vol. 76
No. 2. Pp 481- 496 (Accessed from: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1382357 on
Dec 2014)

LINDENFORS, P., NUNN, C. L., JONES, K. E., CUNNINGHAM, A. A., SECHREST,
W. and GITTLEMAN, J. L. 2007. Parasite Species Richness in Carnivores:
Effects of Host Body Mass, Latitude, Geographical Range and Population
Density. Global Ecology and Biogeography. Vol. 16 pp 496-509

LOREAU, M., ROY, J.and TILMAN D. Linking Ecosystem and Parasite Ecology. In
THOMAS, F., RENAUD, F. and GUEGAN J.F (Eds.).Parasitisms and
Ecosystems: Chapter 1. Oxford University Press. Pp 13-21

MAKARIKOVA, T. A., GULYAEV, V. D., TIUNOV, M. P. and FENG, J. 2012. A New
Species of Cestode, Vampirolepis muraiae n. sp. (Cyclophyllidea:
Hymenolepididae), from a Chinese Bat. Syst Parasitol. Vol. 82. Pp. 29-37

MESZAROS, F. 1973 .Parasitic Nematodes of Bats in Vietnam. I. Parasit. Hung. Vol 6
pp 149- 167

MERCEDES, D. D. and BAKER, E. W. 1963.Mites of the Family Spinturnicidae from
the Philippines. Pacific Insects 5(4) pp. 905- 920

MCALLISTER, C. T., BURSEY, C. R. and DOWLER, R. C. 2007.Acanthurium alicatai
(Trematoda: Lecithodendriidae) from two species of bats (Chiroptera:
Vespertilionidae) in Southwestern Texas. pp 597- 600

MOLLER, A. P. 2005.Parasitism and the Regulation of Host Populations.In THOMAS,
F., RENAUD, F. and GUEGAN J.F (Eds.).Parasitisms and Ecosystems:
Chapter 3. Oxford University Press. Pp 43-53

MUNOZ, P., FEDES, F., RAFFO, E., GONZALEZ-ACUNA, D., MUNOZ, L., and CID,
C. 2011. New Report of Parasite Fauna of the Free-tailed bat (Tadarida
brasiliensis, Geoffroy, 1842) in Chile. Vet Res Commun. Vol 35. Pp 61-66

MURAI, E. 1976.Cestodes of Bats in Hungary.Parasit. Hung. Vol. 9, pp 41-52


NICKEL, P. A. 1962.A Survey of the Internal Helminths in Bats of Kansas and
Nebraska. Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas, (unpublished thesis)

NOGUEIRA, M. N., de FABIO, S. P. and PERACCHI, A. L. 2004. Gatrointestinal
Helminth Parasitism in Fruit-eating Bats (Chiroptera, Stenodermatinae) from
Western Amazonian Brazil. Rev. Biol. Trop. Vol 52, no. 2, pp387-392

OKAFOR, F. C., IGBINOSA, I. B., and EZENWAJI, H. M. G. 2004. Helminth Fauna of
Tadarida (Chaeraphon) nigeriae (Thomas, 1913) (MICROPCHIROPTERA:
MOLLOSIDAE). Animal Research International. Vol. 1 no. 1. Pp. 64-69

PADGETT, D.A. and GLASER, R. 2003. How stress influences the immune response.
TRENDS in immunology. 24(8): 444-448

PAVEY, C. R. and BURWELL, C. J. 1997. The Diet of the Diadem Leaf-nosed Bat
Hipposideros diadema: Confirmation of a Morphological-based Prediction of
Carnivory. J. Zool. Lond. Vol 243, pp 295-303

PISTOLE, D. H. 1988.A Survey of Helminth Parasites of Chiropterans from Indiana.
Proc. Helminthol. Soc. Wash. Vol. 55 no. 2, pp. 270-274

PRASAD,V. 1969: Bat mites (Acarina: Spinturnicidae) mainly from south-east Asia and
the Pacific region, ACAROLOGIA:  11(4):657-677(Accessed from
http://www.bugz.org.nz on January 2015)

PROCIV, P. 1983. Observations on the transmission and development of Toxocara
pteropodis (Ascaridoidea: Nematoda) in the Australian Grey-Headed Flying-
Fox,Pteropus poliocephalus (Pteropodidae: Megachiroptera). Parasitology
Reasearch, vol 69(6) pp. 773-781 (Abstract only

POULIN, R. and FORBES, M. R. 2012. Meta-analysis and Research on Host-Parasite
Interactions: Past and Future. Evol Ecol, vol. 26 pp. 1169-1185

RIFKIN, J. L., NUNN, C. L., and GARAMSZEGI, L. Z. 2012. Do Animals Living in
Larger Groups Experience Greater Parasitism? A Meta-Analysis. The American
Naturalist.Vol. 180 no. 1. pp. 70- 82 (accessed from: http://digital.csic.es/ on
Dec 2014)

RIGBY, M. C., HECHINGER, R. F., and STEVENS, L. 2002. Why Should Parasite
Resistnace be Costly? TRENDS in Parasitology vol. 18 no. 3. Pp 116-120

RUSSO, D., CISTRONE, L. and JONES, G. 2005. Spatial and temporal patterns of roost
use by tree-dwelling barbastelle bats Barbastella barbastellus. ECOGRAPHY:
28. pp. 769- 776 (Accessed from: http://www.parcoabruzzo.it/ on Dec 2014)

SASAL, P., DURAND, P., FALIEX, E., and MORAND, S. 2000. Experimental approach
to the importance of parasitism in biological conservation. Mar Ecol Prog Ser
198: 293-302


SAWADA, I. 1966. On a New Tapeworm, Vampirolepis isinensisFound in Bats with th
Table of the Morphological Features of Tapeworms in Vampirolepis. Japan. J.
Med. Sci. Biol. Vol. 19, pp. 51-57

SAWADA, I. 1970, Helminth Fauna of Bats in Japan VII. Bull. Nara U. Educ. Vol. 9 no.
2, pp. 73-80

SAWADA, I. 1982. Helminth Fauna of Bats in Japan XXV. Annotationes Zoologicae
Japonenses. Vol. 55 no. 1. Pp. 26-31

SAWADA, I. 1985. Vampirolepis shirotanii sp. n. (Cestoidea: Hyenolepididae), with
Records of Known Cestodes, from Bats of Japan. Zoological Science Vol. 2 pp
405-409

SAWADA. I., HARADA, M. and WU, Y. 1998. Cestode Parasites of Some Bats from
the People’s Republic of China. Parasitology International.Vol 47. Pp 149-156

SCOTT, M.E. 1988. The impact of infection and disease on animal populations:
Implications forconservation biology. Conserv.Biol. 2:40-56.

SEDLOCK, J. L. “Ecology, Community Organization and Conservation of Insectivorous
Bats in the Philippines.” Ph. D. Dissertation, University of Illinois, 2001.

SEDLOCK, J. L., WEYANDT, S. E., CORPORAN, L., DAMEROW, M., HWA, S. H.
and PAULI, B. 2008. Bat diversity in tropical forest and agro-pastoral habitats
within a protected area in the Philippines. Acta Chiropterologica, 10(2): 349-

SHAW, D. J., GRENFELL, B. T. and DOBSON, A. P. 1998.Patterns of Macroparasite
Aggregation in Wildlife Host Populations. Parasitology, Cambridge University
Press, Vol. 117, pp. 597-610

SUKHDEO, M. V. K. and HERNANDEZ, A. D. 2005. Food Web Patterns and the
Parasites Perspective.In THOMAS, F., RENAUD, F. and GUEGAN J.F
(Eds.).Parasitisms and Ecosystems: Chapter 4.Oxford University Press. Pp 54-

TRAUB, R. 1951. Fleas Collected by the Chicago National History Museum Expedition
to the Philippines. Proceedings of the Biological Society of Washington. Vol.
64 pp. 1-24

TINSLEY, R. C. 2005. Parasitism and Hostile Environments.In THOMAS, F.,
RENAUD, F. and GUEGAN J.F (Eds.).Parasitisms and Ecosystems: Chapter 6.
Oxford University Press. Pp 85-87; 107-109


WATVE, M. G. and SUKUMAR, R. 1995. Parasite Abundance and Diversity in
Mammals: Correlates with Host Ecology. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA vol. 92 pp
8945-8949)

WILLIAMS, R.R. 1959. Some Helminth Parasites from Bats with Descriptions of Two
New Species of Acanturium Faust 1919 (Trematoda: Lecithodendriidae).
Unpublished Thesis

WILSON, N. and WODZICKI, K. 1977. Ectoparasites from Fruit bats and Rats on Niue
Island.New Zealand Journal of Zoology. Vol. 4, pp. 383-380

WONG, P. L., ANDERSON, R. C. 1986. Nycteridostrongylus uncicollis Baylis, 1930
(Nematoda: Trichostrongyloidea) from Miniopterus australis witkampi
(Megachiroptera) from Sabah, East Malaysia. Annales de Parasitologie
Humaine et Comparée. Vol. 61 (1) pp. 71-75 (ret. From
http://www.cabdirect.org on Nov. 29, 2014)

WOOD, S. 2012. Geographic Distribution and Composition of the Parasite Assemblage
of the Insectivorous bat, Miniopterus natalensis (Chiroptera: Miniopteridae), in
South Africa. The University of Cape Town, Private Bag X3, Rondebosch. pp.
31-32; (Unpublished Thesis)
