
UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS

Master of Science in Forestry

AILENE A. ALCALA

COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF DIVERSITY OF MOSSES ALON
ALTITUDINAL GRADIENTS IN SIPIT AND MAKILING TRAILS,
MT. MAKILING FOREST RESERVE

MANUEL L. CASTILLO, Ph.D.
Adviser

Date: December 28, 2016

This thesis can be made available to the general public GEsbr NO

This thesis can be accessed only after consultation with the author and | YES or(WO)
thesis adviser

This thesis can be accessed only by those bound by confidentiality YES or NO
agreement


COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF DIVERSITY OF MOSSES ALONG
ALTITUDINAL GRADIENTS IN SIPIT AND MAKILING TRAILS,
MT. MAKILI FOREST RESERVE

AILENE ANTONIO ALCALA

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF THE GRADUATE SCHOOL
UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE
DEGREE OF

MASTER OF SCIENCE
(Forestry: Forest Biological Sciences)

DECEMBER 2016

(00 A
STI-17-0769

The thesis attached hereto, entitled “COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF DIVERSITY OF
MOSSES ALONG ALTITUDINAL GRADIENTS IN SIPIT AND MAKILING TRAILS,
MT. MAKILING FOREST RESERVE” prepared and submitted by AILENE ANTONIO
ALCALA, in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of MASTER OF SCIENCE

(FORESTRY: FOREST BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES) is hereby accepted.

el
PAS 7 ABRIGO, JR. NATHANIEL C}/BANTAYAN
lember, Guidance Committee lember, Guidagtce Committee
03 Samusry 17 63 anuGry 2017
Date Signed Date Signed

{Guidance Committee
93 arwary 2017
Date Signed

Accepted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of MASTER OF SCIENCE
(FORESTRY: FOREST BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES).

JUAWNCHO B. BALATIBAT
Chair, Departipent of Forest Biological Sciences

OP January 20/7
Date Signed

JOSE V. CAMACHO/IR.
Dean, Graduate School
University of the Philippines Los Bafios

Date Signed ~

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

The author was born on March 31, 1978 in Brgy. Anos, Los Baftos, Laguna. She is the
third child among the five children of Dominador M. Antonio, Jr.t and Leonita D.C. Juniot.

She finished her primary education at Bemnaldo N. Calara Elementary School in 1990 and
secondary education at Los Bafios College of Fisheries in 1994. In the same year, she took a non-
degree education which is a Forest Ranger Certificate (FRC) in UPLB under the College of
Forestry (now College of Forestry and Natural Resources) with the help of Socialized Tuition
and Financial Assistance Program (STFAP). In 1996, she took a Bachelor's Degree in Forestry.
‘fier graduation, she worked as a Research Assistant in ERDB. From 2004-2012, she worked as
Sales Executive in a different companies. In 2013, she was involved in a Protected Area
Management Effectiveness (PAME) project funded by Deutsche Gesellschaft fur Internationale
Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH. And in 2014, she worked as a Research Assistant in
Environmental Forestry (ENFOR) under Agus-Tagoloan River Basin Project funded by DENR.

In 2014, she was awarded a DOST scholarship to pursue a Master of Science in Forestry major in

Forest Biological Sciences at University of the Philippines Los Bafios.

AILENE awl

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMEN

The author wishes to express her heartfelt appreciation and profound gratitude to the
following persons who helped in various ways in the completion of this study:

DOST-ASTHRDP-NSC for providing the scholarship to pursue her Master's Degree.

Dr. Manuel L. Castillo. chairman of the guidance committee, for his invaluable advice,
guidance. patience. kind, understanding and encouragement during her study.

Prof. Pastor L. Malabrigo, Jr. and Dr. Nathaniel C. Bantayan, guidance committee
members. guided and allowed the study to take place in Mt. Makiling Forest Reserve.

Prof. Juancho B. Balatibat, who helped and guided the author during the study.

Leilani Castillo, Bonifacio Pasion, Zhereeleen Meneses, Jiro Adorador, Jeferson
Boncodin, Lariza Ann Bautista and Clark Jerome Jasmin, for their help and assistance during the
conduct of the study and writing the manuscript.

Eugene Lorence R. Logatoc, assisted the author in specimen identification.

For the rest of persons who became part of her life that she failed to mention here, thank
you very much! You know yourselves.

To my husband Ramil and children namely: Airam Seatiel, Gabriel Oceanus and Maria
Gaia Leolinn whose love and affection kindled my inspiration to finish the study. I owe my
happiness and success to them and this piece of work is dearly dedicated.

To Almighty God and Savior all the praises and thanksgiving are offered to You! Thank
you very much for You destined me to be here on this world, for giving me a chance to live in
this life. For your inspirations, strength and endless blessings at all times. Without You, this

work could have not been completed. Thanks be to God.

CHAPTER

Hl

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Title Page

Approval Page

Biographical Sketch

Acknowledgement

Table of Contents

List of Tables

List of Figures

List of Appendices

Abstract

INTRODUCTION
Background of the Study
Objectives
Scope and Limitations

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE
Bryophytes and Allies: An Overview
Moss Taxonomy: A Brief History
Factors Influencing Moss Diversity
Importance of Mosses
Moss Diversity in the Philippines

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Description of the Study Area
Field Methods

Voucher Specimens and Species Identification

Data Analysis

Evaluating Moss Flora Species Richness and
Composition Between Trail Communities

CHAPTER

IV

Determining the Distribution of Moss Species Along
an Altitudinal Gradients

Determining the Influence of Environmental Variables
to Moss Flora Diversity and Composition

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Species Richness Along Makiling Trail
Species Richness Along Sipit Trail
Comparison of Trail Communities in MMFR
Shared Species of Moss Along Altitudinal Gradients
Unique Species of Moss Along Altitudinal Gradients
Key to the Families of Mosses

Key to the Species Collected from Makiling and Sipit
Trails, MMFR
Distribution of Moss Species Along Altitudinal Gradients
Species Richness of Moss Along Trail Communities
Moss Flora Species Richness and Comparison Analysis

Influence of Environmental Variables to Moss Flora
Diversity and Composition

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
RECOMMENDATIONS
LITERATURE CITED
APPENDIX

vi

PAGE
27

28

29
29
35
41
50
51
53
35

145

145
150
151

157
162
163
170

yaue

LIST OF TABLES

List of species collected and habitat of mosses in Makiling trail,
MMER.

List of species collected and habitat of mosses in Sipit trail,
MMER.

List of moss species found in Makiling (MKL) and Sipit (GSS)
trails.

List of moss flora family found in Makiling and Sipit trails.

Percentage of moss flora in the Philippines and Mt. Makiling.
Top five moss species in Makiling and Sipit trails.

Pairwise comparison between response and explanatory
(environment) variables based from Pearson's r correlation
coefficient test.

Multiple linear regression for species richness, Shannon diversity
H, and abundance in relation to trail communities, elevation,
temperature, relative humidity (RH) and light intensity.

42

47
48
50
152

154

17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

LIST OF FIGURES

Location of Mt. Makiling in reference to Philippine Map.
Measured two-meter distance from the trail (left and right).
The Modified Belt Transect Method.

Sampling sites in Sipit trail.

Sampling sites in Sipit trail.

Sampling sites in Makiling trail.

Sampling sites in Makiling trail.

Stand-up Technique in air drying bryophyte specimen.

(A) Re-examined the collected samples microscopically
using (B) dissecting and (C) compound microscope.

(B)

Instruments used in obtaining temperature and RH, light
intensity and altitude (from left to right) — digital thermo-
hygrometer, light meter and GPS.

Species composition of families encountered in Makiling
Trail, MMFR.

Species composition of families encountered in Sipit Trail,
MMEFR.

Map showing location of plots along Sipit and Makiling
trails.

Shared and unique families of moss in Sipit and Makiling
trails.

Number of shared species of mosses in Sipit and Makiling
trails, MMFR.

Number of unique species of mosses in Sipit and Makiling

trails, MMFR.
Eurynchium asperisetum (C. Mull.) Bartr.

Rhynchostegiella menadensis (Lac.) Bartr.
Calymperes erosum C. Mull.

Calymperes graeffeanum C. Mull.
Calymperes subintegrum Broth.
Calymperes subserratum M. Fleisch.
Calymperes tahitense (Sull.) Mitt.
Calymperes tenerum C. Mull.

viii

26

34

40

4

49

SI

52

58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65

FIGURE

39
40
41
42
43

45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53

Mitthyridium cf. flavum
Svrrhopodon aristifolius Mitt.

Syrrhopodon loreus (Lac.) Reese

Dicranodontium fleischerianum W. Schultze-Motel
Dicranoloma assimile (Hampe) Par.

Dicranoloma brevisetum (Dozy & Molk.) Paris
Dicranoloma blumii (Mull. Hal.)Paris

Leucoloma molle (C. Mull.) Mitt.

Fissidens crenulatus var. elmeri (Broth.) Iwats. & Suzuki
Fissidens hollianus Dozy & Molk.

Fissidens hyalinus Hook. & Wils.

Fissidens laxus Sull. & Lesq.

Fissidens zippelianus Dozy & Molk.

Fissidens zippelianus var. robinsonii (Broth.) Iwats. &
Suzuki
Funaria hygrometrica Hedw.

Chaetomitriopsis glaucarpa (Reinw.) Fleisch.
Chaetomitrium beccarii Dix.

Ectropotheciella distichophylla (Hampe) Fleisch.
Ectropothecium dealbatum (Reinw. & Hornsch.) Jaeg.
Ectropothecium elegantipinnatum (C.Mull.) Jaeg.
Ectropothecium falciforme (Dozy & Molk.) Jaeg
Ectropothecium perminutum Broth ex Bartr.
Isopterygium bancanum (Lac.) Jaeg.
Isopterygium sp.

Isopterygium pendulum Dix. ex Bartr.
Glossadelphus zollingeri (C. Mull.) Fleisch.
Taxiphyllum taxirameum (Mitt.) Fleisch.
Trachythecium micropyxis (Broth.) Bartr.
Vesicularia dubyana (C. Mull.) Broth.

84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98

FIGURE PAGE

$4 Vesicularia montagnei (Bel.) Broth. 99
$8 Fesicularia reticulata (Dozy & Molk.) Broth. 100
56 Hypnodendron dendroides (Brid.) Touw. 102
57 Hypnodendron reinwardhii ssp. caducifolium (Herz.) Touw. 103
58 Arthrocormus schimperi (Dozy & Molk.) Dozy & Molk. 104
59 Exostratum blumei (Nees ex Hampe) Ellis 105
60 —_Leucobryum neilgherrense Mull. Hal. 106
61 —_Leucobryum scalare C. Mull. ex Fleisch. 107
62 Leucophanes candidum (Schwaegr.) Lindb. 108
63 —_Leucophanes octoblepharioides Brid. 109
64 Barbella compressiramea (Ren. & Card.) M. Fleisch. 112
65 Barbella pendula (Sull.) M. Fleisch. 113
66 Floribundaria floribunda (Dozy & Molk.) Fleisch. 114
67 Floribundaria thuidioides Fleisch. 5
68 Meteorium miquelianum (C. Mull.) Fleisch. ex Broth. 116
69 Himantocladium plumula (Nees) Fleisch. 7
70 Homaliodendron exiguum (Bosch & Lach) Fleisch. 118
71 Homaliodendron flabellatum (Sm.) Fleisch. 119
72 Homaliodendron microdendron (Mont.) Fleisch. 120
73 Neckeropsis lepineana (Mont.) Fleisch. 121
74 Pinnatella mariei (Besch.) Broth. 122
78 Pogonatum camusii (Ther.) Touw 124
76 Pogonatum piliferum (Dozy & Mol.) Touw. 125
71 Hyophila rosea Williams 126
78 Garovaglia elegans (Dozy & Molk.) Hampe ex Bosch & 127
79 Garovagla plicata ssp. punctidens (Williams) During 128
80 Jaegerina luzonensis Broth. 129
81 Prerobryopsis crassicaulis (C. Mull.) Fleisch. 130
82 Acanthorrynchium papillatum (Harv.) Fleisch. 133

FIGURE
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
ol
92
93
94
95,

96

97

98

99

100

Acroporium sigmatodontium (C. Mull.) Fleisch
Acroporium sp.

Brotherella sp.

Meiothecium attenuatum Broth,

Taxithelium gottscheanum (Hampe ex C. Mull.)
Taxithelium instratum (Brid.) Broth.

Taxithelium nepalense (Schwaegr.) Broth.
Stereophyllum anceps (Bosch & Lac.) Broth.
Lorentzia bifaria (Bosch & Lac.) Buck & Crum
Lorenizia velata (Mitt.) Buck & Crum.

Thuidium cf glaucinum

Number of species found in Sipit and Makiling trails.

Altitudinal structure of moss species in MMFR using (a)
species richness and (b) Shannon diversity H’.

Altitudinal structure of moss species in MMEFR using (a)
species abundance and (b) composition.

Non-metric multidimensional scale (NMDS) ordination of
community composition relative to species abundance in
Makiling trail (red plots) and Sipit trail (green plots).
Non-metric multidimensional scale (NMDS) ordination
showing the effect of trail communities, elevation,
temperature, relative humidity (RH) and light intensity to
species composition in Makiling trail (red plots) and Sipit
trail (green plots). Blue text indicates explanatory
(environmental variables). Blue arrow indicates the strength
of effect for each explanatory variable.

General trends between species diversity and environmental
parameters in Sipit trail.

General trends between species diversity and environmental
parameters in Makiling trail.

xi

135
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
143
144
146
148

149

151

155

156

156

LIST OF APPENDICES

APPENDIX PAGE

A R statistical codes used in data analysis. 170

ABSTRACT

ALCALA, AILENE A. University of the Philippines Los Baflos, December 2016.
Comparative Analysis of Diversity of Mosses Along Altitudinal Gradients in Sipit

and Makiling Trails, Mt. Makiling Forest Reserve.

Major Professor: Dr. Manuel L. Castillo

One of the essential parts of ecosystem diversity are the mosses. Mosses are often
used as plant indicators for climate change due to their sensitivity to environmental
changes. There is a lack of bryophyte literature in Mt. Makiling, hence, there is a need
for published works documenting the moss flora of Mt. Makiling. This study aimed to
evaluate moss species richness, composition and distribution along the altitudinal
gradients of Makiling and Sipit trails. It also intended to determine the effects of the
different environmental factors to moss flora diversity in Mt. Makiling. The study was
conducted in Mt. Makiling Forest Reserve (MMEFR) to compare the diversity of mosses
along an altitudinal gradients in the Sipit and Makiling trails. Sampling plots were
established every 100 masl elevation. Moss specimens were collected inside a 100 m?
plot and were re-examined under dissecting and compound microscope. Quantitative
determination of light intensity, relative humidity and temperature was undertaken.

A total of 77 moss species belonging to 17 families were identified in plots
established in two forest trails in MMFR, with 43 and 48 species from Makiling and
Sipit trail, respectively. In Makiling trail, the highest species diversity was found in 900
mas| while in Sipit trail, the most diverse quadrat was observed in 1,000 masl. Sampling
plots located at higher elevations tend to have more number of species compared to the
sampling plots at lower elevations. Low species richness in lower elevation can be
explained by more disturbance compared with higher elevation. Furthermore, species
richness, diversity and abundance increases with increasing elevation, RH and light
intensity. In contrast, higher temperature decreases species richness, diversity and
abundance. Moss species did not differ between trail communities, and not affected by
changes in temperature, RH and light intensity. In general, moss diversity is positively
affected by increasing elevation in both trails. This is also supported by correlation
analysis on moss species composition for the two sampling sites while sudden decreases
in diversity in sampling plots located at 600 mas! and 900 masl (Sipit Trail) and 800
mas! and 1,000 masl (Makiling Trail) could simply be due to the presence of canopy
gaps or disturbances in the site.

xiii

CHAPTERI

INTRODUCTION

Background of the Study

One of the significant components of ecosystem biodiversity are mosses
(Bryophyta) and an important part of species diversity (Grytnes er al., 2006; Steel er al.,
2004) and, in a few cases, plant biomass in forests (Frego, 2007; Jeschke and Kiehl,
2008). Recent studies show that mosses provide several ecosystem functions such as: 1)
soil improvement (Belnap e/ al., 2003; Zhao ef al., 2009), nutrient biogeochemical
cycling (Frego, 2007; Turetsky, 2003), water retention (Beringer ef al., 2001), plant
colonization (Uchida er al., 2002), seed germination (Jeschke and Kiehl, 2008), seedling
development or growth (Turetsky, 2003), and forest restoration (Delach and Kimmerer,
2002). Unlike its vascular counterparts, this plant group remained to be poorly studied
due to difficulties in identification, fewer specialists, less literatures on bryophyte
taxonomy in tropical areas and high costs. (Ah-Peng ef al., 2007).

Research shows that mosses exhibit significant and observable changes in
diversity patterns along latitudinal and altitudinal gradient than vascular plants (Andrew
et al., 2003). Therefore, these are deemed ideal candidates for altitudinal studies in
recent years (Andrew ef al., 2003). Due to its sensitivity to environmental changes,

mosses used as indicator species in climate change (Gignac, 2001). Therefore, diversity,

richness and distribution studies increased and focused on the moss’ credibility as an
indicator species (Ah-Peng. 2007: Grau ef al., 2007).

Mossy forests are located on the uppermost part of the mountain, occurring at
high altitudes in widely distributed areas. It is characterized by a persistent low-level
cloud cover. generally found at the canopy level, and the atmosphere is saturated with
moisture all through the year (Brown, 1919).

Mt. Makiling Forest Reserve (MMFR) is a favorable locality for the study as it is
regarded as one of the best known biological areas and one of the 18 centers for plant
diversity in the Philippines. The different physical types of vegetation is similar to those
natural on many, if not most, mountain peaks rising from the lowlands in moist tropical
regions. At the higher altitudes of Mt. Makiling, the trees are shorter and several
epiphytes are observed. At an elevation of 1,000 meters, the trees are thickly covered
with mosses (Brown, 1919).

The climate of MMER and the nearby country is distinctly monsoon in nature.
The relative humidity in most parts of the Philippines is comparatively high at all
seasons of the year, and it is evident in the region where MMFR is situated. According
to Brown (1919), the relative humidity increases as higher elevations are reached. Also,
the wind velocity rises as the increasing altitudes, but when there is a great increase in
humidity the rate of evaporation decreases. The temperature also decreases with
increasing altitudes, when there is a small range at any given elevation.

With the above characteristics of the MMFR, the vegetation around its range

exhibit richness reflecting the diversity of the montane and mossy forests.

Objectives

This study aimed to compare the diversity of mosses along an altitudinal
gradients in the Sipit and Makiling trails of the Mt. Makiling Forest Reserve.
Specifically. the study aimed to:

1) evaluate the species richness and moss composition between the two study sites;
2) determine the distribution of moss species along an altitudinal gradients of the
study area; and

3) find out the environmental variables affecting the moss diversity and composition.

Scope and Limitations

This study is only limited to the assessment of moss abundance, diversity and
composition in Makiling and Sipit trails of Mt. Makiling Forest Reserve (MMER) and its
relationship with different environmental factors such as temperature, relative humidity
and light intensity using R analysis. The maps used for this study were generated using
ArcGIS 10.1.

The data for this research is limited to one season collection (dry season).

Moreover, this study does not cover the analysis for substrate specificity of mosses.

CHAPTER II

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

Bryophytes and Allies: An Overview

Bryophytes is a collective term for small, simple, spore-bearing, non-vascular
plants characterized as having a dominant gametophyte generation and unbranched diploid
sporophytes that remain attached to the maternal gametophyte throughout their life span;
thus, are characterized to have a heteromorphic life cycle (Shaw and Beer, 1999). Recently,
they include approximately 24,000 species worldwide, and was divided into three separate
division namely: Bryophyta (mosses) with 15,000 species, the Hepatophyta (liverworts)
with 8,500 species, and the Anthocerotophyta (horworts) with approximately 100 species
(Azuelo, 2010).

Bryophytes, which arose about 470 mya, are one of the primary lineages of land
plants (Embryophytes), came after the first known terrestrial ancestor related to modem-
day charophycean algae evolved on land, and before the arrival of Tracheophytes or
vascular plants (Lewis and McCourt, 2004). The plant transition from water to land was
accompanied by major morphological, developmental, and physiological innovations most
markedly expressed by the multicellular diploid phase intercalation into the altemation of
generation (Kenrick, 1994; Bateman ef al., 1998; Graham et al., 2000; Renzaglia et al.,

2000; Hemsley and Poole, 2004).

Moss Taxonomy: A Brief History

Johann Hedwig in 1801, initiated the description and classification of moss
diversity using microscopic characters, recognized 35 moss genera based on characters
of the sporophyte peristome and gametophyte sexuality. Starting from the eighteenth
century. most classification systems followed the system of Bridel-Brideri (1826-1827)
who emphasized the position of the perichaetium as well as the position of the
sporophyte which may either be terminal (acrocarpous) or lateral (pleurocarpous) on
gametophyte shoot modules. It described 91 acrocarpous and 31 pleurocarpous genera
using this system.

Modern taxonomic treatments were introduced following the observations of
peristome development and structure by Philibert (1884-1902). The influential floras of
Fleischer (1904-1923) and Brotherus (1924; 1925) emphasized the use of peristome
architecture in moss classification. This remained dominant until the application of more
advanced and precise evolutionary methodologies and the use of molecular phylogenies
in the recent past (Buck and Goffinet, 2000). Today, approximately 845-866 genera of

mosses are recognized (Crosby ef al., 1999).

Factors Influencing Moss Diversity

Studies has been conducted to determine factors influencing mosses richness and
distribution pattern. Some researchers indicated that moss species significantly respond
with macroclimatic factors related to light intensity, temperature, humidity, cloud cover,

mist, and rainfall (Frahm, and Ohlemiiller, 2001; Porley and Hodgetts, 2005). Site

factors, such as age, forest composition, and substrate characteristics (e.g., pH and
nutrient status), are also found strongly related to moss species richness and composition
(Pharo and Beattie, 2002; Batty ef al., 2003). Vellak er al. (2003) inferred that tree layer,
especially the distance to the nearest tree. is the dominant factor that influences the
diversity and distribution of ground and field-layer species. Moreover, previous study
suggested that the factors operating at smaller scales (microclimate and microhabitats)
should be studied to understand the underlying mechanisms (Pentecost, 1998). However,
these factors can be associated with altitudinal shifts, therefore, studies across altitudinal
gradient can provide understanding about moss community structure (Andrew et al.
2003). Measurement of climatic factors such as temperature, humidity and light intensity
along a vertical gradient reveal that there is strong desiccation stress in the
canopy of the lowland forests which seems to be responsible for the low species
diversity (Leon and Engwald, 1997), thereby, related to species distribution pattern.
Over the past century, botanists have studied patterns of species richness along
elevational gradients without agreeing on a definitive pattern and without being able to
satisfactorily account for the various patterns they did find. Based on climatic parallels
with latitude, species richness was thought to decrease with increasing elevation (Stevens,
1992), but recent evidence suggests that, although diversity does decrease at high
elevations, the trend is generally not monotonic. A number of well-designed studies on
both plants and animals have documented a unimodal pattern, with a mid-elevation peak

in richness patterns (Terborgh, 1977; McCoy, 1990).

Rahbek (1995) suggested that the lack of a mid-elevation peak in many other
studies may be caused by a failure to study complete gradients or to account for sampling
effort or sample area, there is more land area in lowlands than at higher
elevations (Rosenzweig, 1995; McCain, 2004).

Factors suggested to explain the species richness in mid-elevation peaks include
intermediate productivity (Rosenzweig, 1995), maximum humidity (Rahbek, 1995), and
an upslope mass effect for certain taxa (Kessler, 2001) and the mid-domain effect or
MDE (Colwell & Lees, 2000), The mid-domain effect arises from geometric constraints
on species ranges within a bounded domain (Colwell & Lees, 2000; Colwell ef al., 2004).
Based on chance alone, the likelihood of the elevational ranges of many species
overlapping is higher at mid-elevations than for the lower and higher elevations
producing a richness “bulge” that is either not driven by environmental gradients or
amplifies or distorts an environmentally driven mid-domain richness peak. The mid-
domain effect thus emerges from the assembly of species ranges that may, individually,

be determined by underlying evolutionary, ecological or historical effects.

Importance of Mosses

Mosses play a significant role in the ecosystem and served as biological indicator
of climate change due to its sensitivity to environmental change (Azuelo ef al., 2010). It
also play an important role in the forest vegetation by giving a good soil structure, soil

stability and water retention (Bates, 2000).

Mosses have many ecological functions. and as well as pharmacological
importance. One group. belonging to the peat mosses (Sphagnum L.), perform an
important role in the global biogeochemical cycling of carbon where they represent a
large reservoir of sequestrated carbon in the form of northem boreal peatlands (Wieder
and Vitt, 2006).

Mosses are also valuable in controlling erosion and hydric cycling. In semi-arid
woodlands, bryophytes play important roles as colonizers and soil stabilizers in areas
where soil surface conditions have declined as a result of increased infiltration (Eldridge,
1993).

In terms of medicinal use, several ethnobotanical species of bryophytes have
reported in traditional Chinese medicine. This include Sphagnum, Marchantia, and
Polytrichum. Chemical analysis has revealed that most bryophytes, including Sphagnum,
have antibiotic properties (Banerjee, 1974). Dried Sphagnum is, therefore, an excellent
surgical dressing because of its absorptive qualities (absorbing more liquid than cotton
pads) and its ability to prevent infection. Because of these properties, it was used
extensively during World War I (Richardson, 1981). The Chinese, Europeans, and
North Americans have also used bryophytes as medicine (Saxena and Harinder, 2004).
In many of these cases, a scientific bases has been identified to justify the uses of the
bryophytes such as some liverworts and moss extracts have antibacterial,
antifungal, antiviral activity, detoxicant and antitumor (Wu, 2007). Recently, there
have been 150 ethnobotanical species of bryophytes reported to be more interesting

both because of their relative rarity, lowly and small growth plants and for the

insights they can provide about the relation between people and the medicinal

value it can give (Haris, 2008).

Moss Diversity in the Philippines

In the Philippines. the moss checklist of the Philippines (Tan and Iwatsuki, 1991)
enumerates 700 species, under 228 genera belonging to 55 families, including a number
of mosses from Mt. Makiling. In Mindanao Island, a total of 187 genera and 314 species
of mosses, 50 of which are known only from this island. The rest are found also in
Luzon and the islands of the Visayas. Among the 50 species of Philippine mosses
known from Mindanao, 4% are widespread in the tropics, 60% are Malesian taxa, 21%
have an Australasian link, 10% have a Bomean link, and only 6% have a continental
Asiatic connection. Clearly, the moss flora of Mindanao has a strong southern and
Australasian influence compared to other large islands in the country (Tan, 1998).

Region and site specific studies on moss diversity have been conducted in the
Philippines over the recent years. The study of Hipol ef al. (2007) on the moss flora of
Mt. Pulag, Benguet revealed that the area caters 58 species in 28 families distributed
across the pine forest, mossy forest, and mountain peak grassland. Linis (2011) found out
that the moss flora of Bicol Peninsula consists of 292 species in 124 genera. Additionally,
the moss flora of Catanduanes Island was found to consist of 47 species in 36 genera.
The moss flora of these areas was identified to have a close affinity with Luzon.
Noteworthy are the collection and identification of Acroporium convolutum (Bosch &

Sande Lac.) M. Fleisch., previously reported for the Philippines but without a

10

documented locality. and Calymperes couguiense Besch.. Leptotrichella sumatrana
(Dixon) Ochyra, Papillidiopsis macrosticta (Broth. & Paris) W. R. Buck & B. C. Tan,
Physcomitrium sphaericum (C. F. Ludw.) Firnr., and Sematophyllum phoeniceum (Mull.
Hal.) M. Fleisch. which are new Philippine records. The moss flora of Mindoro, as
discussed by Linis (2009). is composed of 282 species in 128 genera and 39 families and
has a close affinity to that of Luzon. Noteworthy is the presence of Distichophyllum
noguchianum Tan, a Philippine endemic. Similarly, Tan (1996) discussed the moss flora
of Palawan and its affinities. It was found out that 192 moss species in 88 genera
compose the islands moss flora, having more affinity to the moss floras of the
Philippines, Java, and Lesser Sundas than to Borneo. Linis (2010) in his paper on the
moss flora of Camiguin Island found out that 126 species of mosses in 66 genera and 29
families thrive in the island, representing 17.36% of moss species in the Philippines.
Noteworthy is the identification of Aerobryopsis cochlearifolia Dix. on the island, a new
geographic record for the Philippines. The paper also highlighted the affinity of the
Camiguin moss flora to that of Mindoro and Luzon as well as the role of Mindanao on
moss species richness of the island. The study of Lubos (2010) on three mountains in
Mindanao, each catering a number of moss species, revealed that Mt. Kalatungan caters
109 species while Mt. Matutum and Mt. Malambo caters 59 and 20 species, respectively.
Highlighted in the paper is the role of anthropogenic activities on the degradation of
mountain ecosystems which affects floral diversity especially moss diversity. The study
of Azuelo et al. (2010) on the moss flora of Mt. Kitanglad in Bukidnon revealed that 326

moss species in 70 genera and 29 families is catered by the mountain.

In the case of Mt. Makiling, it was reported that the mountain caters 155 species
(Tan and Iwatsuki, 1991). Botanically, the mountain is extensively studied in terms of
vascular flora as exemplified by the works of Pancho (1983), Pancho and Gruezo (2006),
Gruezo (2000), Lambio and Buot (2006), Abraham ef al. (2010). In terms of cryptogams,
the publication of Tan (1982) serves as the only example. In view of this, there is a need

for published works documenting the moss flora of Mt. Makiling.

CHAPTER II

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Description of the Study Area

Mt. Makiling is located at 121°11° East longitude and 14°08’ North latitude
(Figure 1). It is situated in south-central Luzon, with a distance of 65 km southeast of
Manila, on the south shore of Laguna de Bay, which is the largest freshwater body in the
Philippines, and on the border between the provinces of Laguna and Batangas. It is a
dormant volcano, perhaps extinct. The crater is no longer distinct, but a small portion
remains, consisting of three fragments of almost equal height and it was designated as
peaks 1, 2, and 3, Mt. Makiling is surrounded by regions with sharply alternating wet
and dry seasons, so its immediate vicinity has a mild climate. In terms of soil type, Mt.

Makiling soils are classified as clay-loam type, which were derived from volcanic ash.

The Mt. Makiling Forest Reserve is subdivided into four subwatersheds namely:

the Molawin-Dampalit, Cambantoc, Tigbi, and the Greater Sipit.

The study was conducted in two sites: Greater Sipit Subwatershed and Makiling
trail, Peak 2, along an altitudinal gradient from 300 masl to 1000 masl. According to
Lapitan ef al. (2010), the Greater Sipit subwatershed can be described as tong-like
structure (Sipit) of the mountain. In this part of Mt. Makiling, the Caldera or a cauldron-

like volcanic feature can be located. According to volcanologist, it is usually molded by

13

the breakdown of land following a volcanic eruption. This feature further displays the
volcanic nature of Mt. Makiling along the Mudspring in the Molawin-Dampalit

subwatershed.

PHILIPPINES

Figure 1. Location of Mt. Makiling in reference to Philippine Map.

15

The summit area of Greater Sipit subwatershed is relatively “untouched”, mossy.
where water springs naturally. Occuring the Sipit is the major body of water in this part
of forest reserve. This subwatershed is the source of water that supports water

requirement of three municipalities of the provinces of Batangas.

Field Methods

Prior to the collection proper, a reconnaissance survey was conducted in the study
area along an altitudinal gradient as a confirmatory step to verify the presence of mosses
in the area. Using the Global Positioning System (GPS), the elevation and geographical

location of the sampling plots were determined.

For the collection proper, altitudinal transect plots using modified Belt Transect
Method were laid out in a left to right manner parallel to the existing trail (as transect
line). Plots were laid out starting at 300 masl to 1,000 masl. From the trail, a two-meter
length or distance was measured to the left and two meters to the right (Figure 2).
Sixteen (16) sampling plots of 10 m x 10 m in size (0.01 ha) were established (Figure 3).
Within each sampling plot, observations and collection of samples were done inside a
100 m? plot. Photos of sampling sites are presented in Figures 4 to 7. The substrate plays

an important role in defining the existence of community types in mosses.

Figure 2.

Measured two-meter distance from the trail (left and right).

16

10m

Dimension of individual plot

Plots along the transect line
100 mas!

Figure 3. The Modified Belt Transect Method.

Figure 4, Sampling sites in Sipit trail. a & b. 300 masl; ¢ & d. 400 masl; e & f. 500
mast; g & h. 600 mast.

Figure 5. Sampling sites in Sipit trail. i & j. 700 masl; k & 1. 800 masl; m & n. 900
mast; o & p. 1,000 masl.

19


20

Figure 6. Sampling sites in Makiling trail. a & b. 300 masl; c & d. 400 masl; e & f.
500 masl; g & h. 600 masi.

21

Figure 7. Sampling sites in Makiling trai
900 mast; o & p. 1,000 mas!

& j. 700 masl; k & 1. 800 masl; m & n.

22

In collecting specimens, a good quality hand lens and scalpel were used. In
collecting mosses, readily available collection packets will be used following the 10%
rule. This rule simply states that only 10% or less must be collected from a population
from a certain substrate. The small moss mats were lifted from the substratum and the
collected specimen was placed directly into a small folded paper packet in order to
consistently obtain the same types of data about each specimen collected and put in a zip
lock bag.

The field data included items such as type of habitat, type of substrate (ground,
rock or tree), moisture and shade condition, elevation, direction of exposure, date and
collector’s name were noted on the front flap of the collecting packet. In drying the
specimens, the stand-up technique was used (after Shevock ef al., 2014) (Figure 8). All
moss species encountered in the field were photo-documented using a high resolution

camera.

23

Figure 8, Stand-up Technique in air drying bryophyte specimen.

Voucher Specimens and Species Identification

The collected samples were re-examined microscopically in the Forest Biological
Sciences (FBS), CFNR-UPLB laboratory, using a dissecting (20x) and compound
microscope (40x) (Figure 9). The samples were identified using recent taxonomic
treatment for mosses. Bartram’s Mosses of the Philippines was used in identifying the
specimens. If identification was difficult to attain, specimens were placed in the most
possible taxa and verified by an expert for proper species identification. The morphology
and diagnostic characters such as characters of the stem, stem leaves, branch leaves,
capsule, seta and the calyptra (if present) were used for classification. Identified

specimens were deposited to the Museum of Natural History Herbarium (CAHUP).

Figure 9, (A) Re-examined the collected samples microscopically using (B)
dissecting and (C) compound microscope.

24

25

Data Analysis

All analyses were performed in R statistical software ver. 3.2.1. R is a free and
open source programming software which incorporates comprehensive method of
analyzing data that surpasses most other statistical software because of its availability in
different fields of studies (Tippmann, 2015). All R codes (functions) for analysis in this

study were listed in Appendix Table 1.

Four (4) response variables and five (5) explanatory variables were selected in
data analysis.

Response variables:

1. Species richness (alpha diversity) - continuous variable, the total number
of species in each sampling plots. R package vegan use the function specnumber() to
extract species richness from species community data matrix.

2. Species diversity H’ (Shannon Diversity H’ index) — continuous variable,
diversity measure base from Shannon diversity H’ index formula: H’ = -),(pi x log(pi)),
such that pi = ni/N, wherein ni is the abundance of species I while N is the total number
of individuals. R package vegan use the function diversity() to calculate shannon
diversity H’ from species community data matrix.

oF Species abundance — continuous variable, total number of individuals in
each sampling plots.

4. Species composition - continuous variable, species identity in each

sampling plots, defined by ordination scores (Non-metric multidimensional scores).

26

Explanatory variables:

trail.

v

5.

ing trail and Sipit

Trail communi ‘ategorical variable for sites, Mal
Elevation — continuous variable, altitudinal location of the sampling plots.
Temperature (°C) — continuous variable.

Relative Humidity (RH) — continuous variable.

Light intensity - continuous variable.

GPS. light meter and digital thermo-hygrometer were the instruments in

obtaining elevation. light intensity. temperature and RH. respectively (Figure 10).

ing temperature and RH, light
itude (from left to right) - digital thermo-
hygrometer, light meter and GPS.

27

Evaluating Moss Flora Species Richness
and Composition Between Trail Communities

NMDS ordination technique was used to determine moss compositional pattern.
NMDS is an indirect gradient analysis and a rank-based approach which attempts to
represent, as closely as possible. the pairwise dissimilarity between objects in a
dimensional space. In this method, a “map of plots” was constructed in community
composition space using a community dissimilarity matrix based from Euclidean
distances. Communities that have very similar species composition appeared as points
near each other whereas communities that have very different species compositions will
further away from each other on the ordination plot. The R vegan package used the

function metaMDS() to calculate NMDS distance scores.

Determining the Distribution of Moss.
Species Along an Altitudinal Gradients

The distribution of moss species along an altitudinal gradient were determined
and plotted each species richness, species diversity H (Shannon diversity), and
abundance against elevation. Species turnover analysis was presented to interpret moss
flora composition along altitudinal gradient using the R package codyn with the function
tumover(), which calculates total tumover as well as the proportion of species that either

appear or disappear between altitudinal sampling plots in each trail communities.

28

Determining the Influence of Environmental
Variables to Moss Flora Diversity and Composition

Pearson's r correlation coefficient and multiple linear regression (MLR) analyses
were used to determine the explanatory variables influencing moss flora diversity
(richness, diversity H, and abundance). The R statistical software calculates Pearson's r

correlation coefficient using the function cor(data.frame,method="pearson”).

MLR models test the relationship between two or more explanatory variables (x)
and a response variable (y) by fitting a linear equation to observed data. Unlike
correlation analysis, the explanatory variables in MLR can be continuous or categorical,
and MLR test for cause-effect relationship. The R statistical software calculates multiple
linear regression using the function Im(y~x1 + xn...), which follows the original multiple
linear regression model formula: Y = BO + B1X1 + B2X2 + e: where BO is the intercept.
Bl and B2 are partial regression coefficients. B1 represents the change in the mean
response corresponding to a unit change in X1 when X2 is held constant. B2 represents
the change in the mean response corresponding to a unit change in X2 when X1 is held

constant, and ¢ is the estimate error.

The effects of environment variables to species composition was determined,
then fit environmental variables to NMDS ordination plot using the envfit() function in R

package vegan.

CHAPTER IV

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Species Richness Along Makiling Trail

There were forty-three (43) species, in 14 families and 29 genera encountered in
Makiling trail. MMFR from different elevations starting from 300 masl up to 1,000 mas!.
Table 1 shows the list of species collected from the site and its habitat where mosses are

located.

Table 1. List of species collected and habitat of mosses in Makiling Trail, MMFR.

NO. OF HABITAT/
SCIENTIFIC NAME FAMILY
INDIVIDUALS suBSTRATE
‘Acroporium sp. ‘Sematophyllaceae 1 Tree, bark
Arthrocormus schimperi (Dozy &  Leucobryaceae 7 Tree, fallen/dead
Molk.) Dozy & Molk.
rotten log

Barbella compressiramea (Ren. & — Meteoriaceae 2 Tree, trunk
Card.) M. Fleisch.
Barbella pendula (Sull.) M. Fleisch. Meteoriaceae 1 Rock
Brotherella sp. Sematophyllaceae 5 Tree log; branch
Calymperes subintegrum Broth. Calymperaceae 6 Tree, trunk
Calymperes subserratum M. Fleisch. Calymperaceae 1 Tree, log, branch
Calymperes tenerum C. Mull. Calymperaceae 1 Tree, fallen/dead

Jrotten log


Table 1. Continued...

SCIENTIFIC NAME FAMILY

30

NO. OF HABITAT/
INDIVIDUALS  gupsTRATE

Dicranoloma blumii (Mull.
Hal.)Paris Dicranaceae

Ectropothecium dealbatum (Reinw.
& Horsch.) Jaeg. Hypnaceae
Ectropothecium —_elegantipinnatum

(C.Mull.) Jaeg. Hypnaceae

Exostratum blumei (Nees ex Hampe)

Ellis Brachytheciaceae

Fissidens crenulatus var.  elmeri

(Broth.) Iwats, & Suzuki bed

Fissidens hollianus Dozy & Molk. — Fissidentaceae
Fissidens hyalinus Hook. & Wils. _ Fissidentaceae
Fissidens laxus Sull. & Lesq. Fissidentaceae

Fissidens zippelianus var. robinsonii

(Broth.) Iwats. & Suzuki Fissidentaceae

Floribundaria floribunda (Dory &

Molk.) Fleisch. Meteoriaceae

Garovaglia elegans (Dozy & Molk.) Pterobryaceae
Hampe ex Bosch & Lac.

Himantocladium —plumula (Nees)

Fleisch. Neckeraceae

Homaliodendron exiguum (Bosch &
Lach) Fleisch.

Homaliodendron flabellatum (Sm.) Neckeraceae

Neckeraceae

Tree, fallen/dead/

2 rotten log

Tree, base
Tree, fallen/dead/
rotten log

Tree, trunk;
5 fallen/dead/rotten

log
3 Rock; Soil, humus

Tree,fallen/dead
Arotten log
1 Rock

Tree, trunk;
2 fallen/dead/rotten
log

1 Soil

Tree, trunk;

2 fallen/dead/rotten
log

5 Tree, trunk; fallen

Idead/rotten log

Tree, bark

Tree, trunk

1 Tree, fallen/dead/


Table 1. Continued...

31

NO. OF HABITAT/
SCIENTIFIC NAME FAMILY woivipUALS
uu SUBSTRATE
Fleisch. rotten log
. Tree,
Hisprodendron  dendroides (Bid) sry pnodendraceae 2 fallen/dead/rotten
7 log
Isopterygium bancanum (Lac.) Jaeg.  Hypnaceae 1 Tree, base
Tree, fallen/dead/
Isopterygium sp. Hypnaceae 2
rotten log
Tree, trunk;
Jaegerina luzonensis Broth. Pterobryaceae 4 fallen/dead/
rotten log
Tree, branch;
Leucoloma molle (C. Mull.) Mitt. Dicranaceae 10 trunk; fallen/dead/
rotten log
Tree, fallen/dead/
Leucophanes candidum Leucobryacese
(Schwaegr.)Lindb. 3 rotten log
Tree, fallen/dead/
Leucobryaceae
Leucophanes octoblepharioides Brid. 1 rotten log
Lorentzia bifaria (Bosch & Lac.) Rock; Soil litter;
Buck & Crum Thuidiaceae 6 Tree, trunk
Lorentzia velata (Mitt.) Buck & Tree, trunk; Soil
Crum Thuidiaceae 2 litter
Meiothecium attenuatum Broth. Sematophyllaceae 1 Rock
Meteorium miquelianum (C. Mull.) \eteoriaceae Tree, fallen/dead/
Fleisch. ex Broth. 1 rotten log
Mitthyridium cf flavum Calymperaceae 1 Tree, bark
Neckeropsis lepineana (Mont.) . Neckeraceae 1 Tree, trunk


32

Table 1. Continued...

NO. OF HABITAT/
SCIENTIFIC NAME FAMILY 2
INDIVIDUALS guBSTRATE
Fleisch
Pinnatella mariei (Besch.) Broth. Neckeraceae \ Tree, trunk
Pogonatum camusii (Ther) Touw _Polytrichaceae 1 Tree, trunk

Pogonatum piliferum (Dozy & Mol.)
Touw. Polytrichaceae 1 Tree, trunk

Riymchostegiella menadensis(L€°:) rachytheciaceae

Bartr. 1 Tree, trunk
Tree, fallen/dead/
Syrrhopodon aristifolius Mitt. Calymperaceae 1
rotten log
Sprrhopodon loreus (Lac.)Reese _Calymperaceae 1 Tree, trunk
Tree, fallen/dead/
Thuidium cf glaucinum Thuidiaceae I
rotten log
Total 94
In Figure 11, the most represented families are Calymperaceae (6 spp.);

Fissidentaceae and Neckeraceae (5 spp.); Hypnaceae, Leucobryaceae and Meteoriaceae
(4 spp.); Sematophyllaceae and Thuidiaceae (3 spp.); Dicranaceae, Polytrichaceae and
Pterobryaceae (2 spp.); and Brachytheciaceae, Hookeriaceae and Hypnodendraceae with
1 species each.

Most of the representative species of Calymperacae (Calymperes subintegrum
Broth.; C. subserratum M. Fleisch.; C. tenerum C. Mull.; M. cf flavum, Syrrhopodon

aristifolius Mitt. and S. loreus (Lac.) Reese); Fissidentaceae (Fissidens crenulatus var.

33

elmeri (Broth.) Iwats. & Suzuki: F. hollianus Dozy & Molk.; F. hyalinus Hook. & Wils.;
F, laxus Sull. & Lesq. and F. zippelianus var. robinsonii (Broth.) wats. & Suzuki) and
Neckeraceae (Himantocladium plumula (Nees) Fleisch., Homaliodendron exiguum
(Bosch & Lach) Fleisch.: H. flabellatum (Sm.) Fleisch.; Pinnatella mariei (Besch.) Broth.
and Neckeropsis lepineana (Mont.) Fleisch.) are anchored to tree barks, trunks, branches
and dead/fallen logs. The Makiling trail is characterized by forested track side, thereby
having a relatively humid environment. The presence of the trees which act as substrate
for the representative species of the three families, together with the favourable
microenvironment, allows for these species to flourish.

Based on the data shows in Table 1, different families were located on tree (trunk,
branches, bark, base, dead logs) and a little or few families were located on rock and soil.
There are 88.37% of moss species thrive on trees, 9.30% on rock and 2.33% located on
soil. Most of the species of mosses thrive on trees this is because they can get more water
and nutrients on it. Forest trees contribute greatly to the growth of bryophytes especially

mosses (Goffinet and Shaw, 2009).

34

Hypnodenaracoae

Figure 11. Species composition of families encountered in Makiling Trail, MMFR.

The most dominant species found in Makiling trail are Leucoloma molle (C.
Mull.) Mitt. Arthrocormus schimperi (Dozy & Molk.) Dozy & Molk., Calymperes
subintegrum Broth. and Lorentzia bifaria (Bosch & Lac.) Buck & Crum. These species
belongs to family Dicranaceae, Leucobryaceae, Calymperaceae and Thuidiaceae,
Tespectively.

Leucoloma molle (C. Mull.) Mitt. can be found in higher elevations (1,000, 900,
800 and 700 masl) and Arthrocormus schimperi (Dozy & Molk.) Dozy & Molk.can be

located in 1,000 and 900 masl. While Calymperes subintegrum Broth. can be found in

35

700 and 600 masl and Lorentzia bifaria (Bosch & Lac.) Buck & Crum can be found in
lower elevations (600, 400 and 300 masl). Obviously, abundance of mosses was
observed in higher elevations than in lower elevations. In this study, abundance increase
with increasing altitudes. Relative moisture increases as altitude increases (Myers ef al.,
2000). Abundance are more likely because of their relatively moisture conditions that is

suitable habitat for bryophytes.

Species Richness Along Sipit Trail

In Sipit trail, there were forty-eight (48) species, with 16 families and 32 genera
from 300 masl to 1,000 mas! elevation. Table 2 shows the list of species collected from

the sites and its habitat.

Table 2. List of species collected and habitat of mosses in Sipit trail, MMFR.

NO. OF HABITAT/

SCIENTIFIC NAME FAMILY
INDIVIDUALS suBSTRATE

‘Acanthorrynchium papillatum (Harv.)

Font ‘Sematophyllaceae A Tree, bark
Acroporium sigmatodontium (C. Mull.) sematophyllaceae Motet rock
Fleisch. 1

Arthrocormus schimperi (Dozy & Leucobryaceae Fi Tree, bark
Molk.) Dozy & Molk.

Calymperes erosum C. Mull. Calymperaceae 1 Moist rock

Calymperes graeffeanum C. Mull. Calymperaceae 2 Moist rock


Table 2. Continued.

36

NO.OF HABITAT/
SCIENTIFIC NAME FAMILY
INDIVIDUALS SUBSTRATE
Calvymperes subintegrum Broth. Calymperaceae 1 Moist rock
Calymperes tahitense (Sull.) Mit, Calymperaceae 1 Moist rock
Calymperes tenerum C. Mull. Calymperaceae 2 Tree, trunk; Rock
Tree, fallen/dead/
Chaetomitriopsis glaucarpa (Reinw.) ree, Kallenice
Fleisch. Hookeriaceae 1 rotten
Chaetomitrium beccarii Dix. Hookeriaceae 1 Tree, base
Dicranodomtium fleischerianum W. Moist rock; Tree,
Schultze-Motel Dicranaceae 2 base
7 Tree, fallen/dead/
Dicranoloma assimile (Hampe) Par. Dicranaceae
1 rotten
Dicranoloma brevisetum (Dozy & Moist rock; Tree,
Molk.) Paris Dicranaceae 5 fallen/dead/rotten
Ectropotheciella distichophylla Tree, bark; Moist
(Hampe) Fleisch. Hypnaceae 6 rock
Ectropothecium falciforme (Dozy & Tree, bark; Moist
Molk.) Jaeg. Hypnaceae 3 rock
Ectropothecium perminutum Broth ex
Barr Hypnaceae 1 Soil

Eurynchium asperisetum (C. Mull.)
Bartr.

Fissidens crenulatus var. elmeri
(Broth.) Iwats. & Suzuki

Fissidens hollianus Dozy & Molk.

Fissidens zippelianus Dozy & Molk.

Fissidens zippelianus var. robinsonii
(Broth.) Iwats. & Suzuki

Brachytheciaceae

Fissidentaceae

Fissidentaceae

Fissidentaceae

Fissidentaceae

Tree, fallen/dead/

4 rotten; Moist rock
2 Soil; Moist rock
1 Soil

Tree, fallen/dead/

1 rotten

1 Moist rock


37

Table 2. Continued...

NO. OF HABITAT/

SCIENTIFIC NAME FAMILY IniVIDUALS a

Floribundaria floribunda (Dory &

Molk.) Fleisch. Meteoriaceae 1 Moist rock
Floribundaria thuidioides Fleisch. Meteoriaceae 2 Soil
Funaria hygrometrica Hedw. Funariaceae 1 Moist rock
Garovaglia plicata ssp. Tree, fallen/dead/
punctidens( Wiliams) During Plerobryaceae 3 rotten
Glossadelphus zollingeri (C. Mull.)
Fleisch, Hypnaceae 1 Moist rock
Homaliodendron microdendron (Mont) \e-beraceae Tree,
Fleisch, 4 fallen/dead/rotten
Hyophila rosea Williams Pottiaceae 1 Moist rock
Hypnodendron reinwardti ssp.
cadueifolium (Herz.) Touw. Hypnodendraceae 1 Tree, bark
Isopterygium pendulum Dix. ex Bartr. Hypnaceae 2 Moist rock
Jaegerina luzonensis Broth. Prerobryaceae 1 Moist rock
Leucobryum neilgherrense Mull. Hal.  Leucobryaceae 1 Tree, base

Tree,
Leucoloma molle (C. Mull.) Mitt, Dicranaceae S fallen/dead/rotten
Leucophanes candidum (Schwaegr.) Tree trunk, base;
Lindb. Leucobryaceae 3 fallen/dead/rotten
Leucophanes octoblepharioides Brid.  Leucobryaceae 1 Tree, trunk
Lorentzia bifaria (Bosch & Lac.) Buck
&Crum Thuidiaceae 2 Moist rock
Pterobryopsis crassicaulis (C. Mull.) Tree, bark; Moist
Fleisch. Prerobryaceae 5 rock
Stereophyllum anceps (Bosch & Lac.) Tree, trunk; Moist
Broth. Stereophyllaceae 6 rock


38

Table 2. Continued...
HABITAT/
NO. OF
SCIENTIFIC NAME FAMILY pIVIDUALS  supgTRATE
Svrrhopodon aristifolius Mitt. Calymperaceae 2 Tree, bark
Taxiphyllum taxirameum (Mitt.) Fleisch. Hypnaceae 1 Tree, trunk
Taxithelium gottscheanum (Hampe ex Tree, branch;
C. Mull.) Sematophyllaceae 3 Moist rock
Tree,
fallen/dead/rotten;
Taxithelium instratum (Brid.) Broth. Sematophyllaceae 10 Moist rock; Soil
Taxithelium nepalense (Schwaegr.)
Broth. Sematophyllaceae 1 Moist rock
Trachythecium micropyxis (Broth.)
Bartr. Hypnaceae 1 Moist rock
Vesicularia dubyana (C. Mull.) Broth. Hypnaceae 3 Moist rock
Tree,
Vesicularia montagnei (Bel.) Broth.  Hypnaceae 1 fallen/dead/rotten
Tree,
Vesicularia reticulata (Dozy & Molk.) fallen/dead/rotten;
Broth. Hypnaceae 3 Moist rock
Total 105

The most represented families are Hypnaceae (10 spp.); Calymperaceae (6 spp.);
Leucobryaceae and Sematophyllaceae (5 spp.); Dicranaceae and Fissidentaceae (4 spp.);
Prerobryaceae (3 spp.); Hookeriaceae and Meteoriaceae (2 spp.); and Brachytheciaceae,
Funariaceae, Hypnodendraceae, Neckeraceae, Pottiaceae, Stereophyllaceae and
Thuidiaceae with one species each family (Figure 12). Family Hypnaceae can be found

in both high and low elevations and this is same with family Calymperaceae,

39

Leucobryaceae and Sematophyllaceae. These families are distributed in low and high
elevations because of wind dispersal of spores. It might be blown by the wind from a
higher to lower place. This was explained in the study of Johansson e7 al. (2015), that
higher proportion of the spores reached high altitudes through wind speed.

Most represented species of Hypnaceae (Ectropotheciella distichophylla (Hampe)
Fleisch, Ectropothecium falciforme (Dozy & Molk.) Jaeg., E. perminutum Broth ex
Bartr., Glossadelphus zollingeri (C. Mull.) Fleisch., Isopterygium pendulum Dix. ex
Bartr., Trachythecium micropyxis (Broth.) Bartr., Vesicularia dubyana (C. Mull.) Broth.,
V. montagnei (Bel.) Broth., V. reticulata (Dozy & Molk.) Broth. and Taxiphyllum
taxirameum (Mitt.) Fleisch.), Calymperaceae (Calymperes erosum C. Mull., C.
graeffeanum C. Mull., C. subintegrum Broth., C. tahitense (Sull.) Mitt., C. tenerum C.
Mull. and Syrrhopodon aristifolius Mitt.), Leucobryaceae (Arthrocormus schimperi
(Dozy & Molk.) Dozy & Molk., Leucobryum scalare C. Mull. ex Fleisch. L.
neilgherrense Mull. Hal., Leucophanes candidum (Schwaegr.) Lindb., and L.
octoblepharioides Brid.) and Sematophyllaceae (Acanthorrynchium papillatum (Harv.)
Fleisch., Acroporium sigmatodontium (C. Mull.) Fleisch., Taxithelium gottscheanum
(Hampe ex C. Mull.), Taxithelium instratum (Brid.) Broth. and Taxithelium nepalense
(Schwaegr.) Broth.) mostly grow on trees (bark, branch, base, trunk), rock, and soil
substrate. Sipit trail is a forested, slightly rolling, rocky and undisturbed area with
favourable moisture condition or environment and good for the growth of mosses.

Based on Table 2, 58% of mosses thrive on tree, 33.3% on rock and 8.3% on soil.

Similar with data on Makiling trail, the highest number of moss species were located on

40

trees due to its moisture content, water and nutrients found on this substrate (Goffinet

and Shaw, 2009).

Figure 12. Species composition of families encountered in Sipit trail, MMFR.

The most dominant species found in Sipit trail is Taxithelium instratum (Brid.)
Broth. of Sematophyllaceae, followed by Stereophyllum anceps (Bosch & Lac.) Broth.
of Stereophyllaceae, Ectropotheciella distichophylla (Hampe) Fleisch. of Hypnaceae,
Dicranoloma brevisetum (Dozy & Molk.) Paris and Leucoloma molle (C. Mull.) Mitt. of
Dicranaceae and Pterobryopsis crassicaulis (C. Mull.) Fleisch. of Pterobryaceae.

Taxithelium instratum (Brid.) Broth. can be found in higher elevations where

41

characterized by a persistent cloud cover where the atmosphere is saturated with water.

Probably. this will explain why this species is more abundant than others.

Comparison of Trail Communities in MMFR

A total of 77 moss species belonging to 17 families were identified in plots
established in two altitudinal trail communities in MMFR, with 43 and 48 species from

Makiling and Sipit trail, respectively (Figure 13).

Figure 13. Map showing location of plots along Sipit and Makiling Trails.

Only 14 species (18%) were common to both trail communities, but there were
71% shared moss flora family for both trail communities (Tables 3 and 4). Results of the

study represent ~11% of the total moss species listed in the country (Tan and Iwatsuki,

42

1991) and approximately 50% of the total moss species in Mt. Makiling (Table 3).
Further survey of moss in Mt. Makiling is recommended to get more species and update
the species list. The most rich moss flora species and families were observed in Sipit trail
due to undisturbed area, Sipit and Makiling trail are both forested area. However,
Makiling is more disturbed than Sipit trail that’s why mosses are more abundant in Sipit
area. This is similar with the study of Lapitan ef al.(2010), and described summit area of
Greater Sipit Subwatershed as relatively “untouched” and mossy where water springs

naturally.

Table 3. List of moss species found in Makiling (MK) and Sipit (GSS) trai

MAKILING SIPIT
SPECIES FAMILY TRAIL TRAIL TOTAL

‘Acanthorrynchium papillatum (Harv.)
Fleisch. Sematophyllaceae \ 1

Acroporium sigmatodontium (C. Mull.)
Fleisch, Sematophyllaceae - 1 1

Acroporium sp. Sematophyllaceae 1 1

Arthrocormus schimperi (Dozy & Molk.)

Dozy & Molk. Leucobryaceae 7 1 8
Barbella compressiramea (Ren. & Card.)

M. Fleisch. Meteoriaceae 2 2
Barbella pendula (Sull.) M. Fleisch. Meteoriaceae 1 I
Brotherella sp. Sematophyllaceae 5 - 5
Calymperes erosum C. Mull. Calymperaceae 1 1
Calymperes graeffeanum C. Mull. Calymperaceae - 2 2
Calymperes subintegrum Broth. Calymperaceae 6 1 1

Calymperes subserratum M. Fleisch. Calymperaceae 1 : 1


43

Table 3. Continued,
MAKILING SIPIT

SPECIES FAMILY TRAIL TRAIL TOTAL

Calymperes tahitense (Sull.) Mitt. Calymperaceae : 1 1

Calymperes tenerum C. Mull. Calymperaceae 1 2 3

Chaetomitriopsis glaucarpa (Reinw.) ee ‘ ;

Fleisch.

Chaetomitrium beccarii Dix. Hookeriaceae 1 1 2

Dicranodontium fleischerianum W. Dicranaceae 2 2

Schultze-Motel

Dicranoloma assimile (Hampe) Par. Dicranaceae : 1 1

Dicranoloma blumii (Mull. Hal.)Paris __Dicranaceae 2 2

Dicranoloma brevisetum (Dozy & Molk.)

Paris Dicranaceae - 5 5

Ectropotheciella distichophylia (Hampe)

Fleisch. Hypnaceae 6 6

Ectropothecium dealbatum (Reinw. &

Homsch.) Jaeg. Hypnaceae 1 1

Ectropothecium elegantipinnatum (C.Mull.)

Jacg. Hypnaceae 1 1

Ectropothecium falciforme (Dozy & Molk.)

Jaeg. Hypnaceae 3 3

Ectropothecium perminutum Broth ex

Bartr. Hypnaceae | 1

Eurynchium asperisetum (C. Mull.) Bartr.  Brachytheciaceae - 4 4

Exostratum blumei (Nees ex Hampe) Ellis Leucobryaceae 5 - 5

Fissidens crenulatus var. elmeri (Broth.)

Iwats. & Suzuki Fissidentaceae 3 2 5

Fissidens hollianus Dozy & Molk. Fissidentaceae 1 1 2

Fissidens hyalinus Hook. & Wils. Fissidentaceae 1 - 1


Table 3. Continued...

MAKILING SIPIT

44

SPECIES FAMILY TRAIL TRAIL TOTAL
Fissidens laxus Sull. & Lesq. Fissidentaceae 2 : 2
Fissidens zippelianus Dozy & Molk. Fissidentaceae 1 1
Fissidens zippelianus var. robinsonii
(Broth.) Iwats. & Suzuki Fissidentaceae 1 1 2
Floribundaria floribunda (Dozy & Molk.)
Fleisch. Meteoriaceae 2 1 3
Floribundaria thuidioides Fleisch. Meteoriaceae 2 2
Funaria hygrometrica Hedw. Funariaceae 1 1
Garovaglia elegans (Dozy & Molk.)
Hampe ex Bosch & Lac. Pterobryaceae 5 5
Garovaglia plicata ssp. punctidens
(Williams) During Prerobryaceae 3 3
Glossadelphus zollingeri (C. Mull.) Fleisch. Hypnaceae - I 1
Himantocladium plumula (Nees) Fleisch. Neckeraceae 1 1
Homaliodendron exiguum (Bosch & Lach)
Fleisch. Neckeraceae 1 - 1
Homaliodendron flabellatum (Sm.) Fleisch. Neckeraceae 1 1
Homaliodendron microdendron (Mont.)
Fleisch. Neckeraceae 4 4
Hyophila rosea Williams Pottiaceae . 1 1
Hypnodendron dendroides (Brid.) Touw.  Hypnodendraceae 2 2
Hypnodendron reinwardhii ssp.
caducifolium (Herz.) Touw. Hypnodendraceae : I 1
Isopterygium bancanum (Lac.) Jaeg. Hypnaceae 1 - 1
Isopterygium pendulum Dix. ex Bartr. Hypnaceae - 2 2
Isopterygium sp. Hypnaceae 2 5 2


Table 3. Continued.

MAKILING SIPIT

45

SPECIES FAMILY TRAIL TRAIL TOTAL

Jaegerina luzonensis Broth. Prerobryaceae 4 1 5
Leucobryum neilgherrense Mull. Hal. Leucobryaceae 1 1
Leucobryum scalare C. Mull. ex Fleisch. Leucobryaceae : 1 1
Leucoloma molle (C. Mull.) Mitt. Dicranaceae 10 5 15
Leucophanes candidum (Schwaegr.) Lindb. Leucobryaceae 3 3 6
Leucophanes octoblepharioides Brid. Leucobryaceae 1 1 2
Lorentzia bifaria (Bosch & Lac.) Buck &

Crum Thuidiaceae 6 2 8
Lorentzia velata (Mitt.) Buck & Crum Thuidiaceae 2 - 2
Meiothecium attenuatum Broth. Sematophyllaceae 1 1
Meteorium miquelianum (C. Mull.) Fleisch.

ex Broth, Meteoriaceae 1 1
Mitthyridium cf flavum Calymperaceae 1 1
Neckeropsis lepineana (Mont.) Fleisch. Neckeraceae 1 1
Pinnatella mariei (Besch.) Broth. Neckeraceae I 1
Pogonatum camusii (Ther.) Touw Polytrichaceae 1 1
Pogonatum piliferum (Dozy & Mol.) Touw. Polytrichaceae 1 1
Pterobryopsis crassicaulis (C. Mull.)

Fleisch. Pterobryaceae - 5 5
Rhynchostegiella menadensis (Lac.) Bartr. Brachytheciaceae 1 1
Stereophyllum anceps (Bosch & Lac.)

Broth, Stereophyllaceae - 6 6
Syrrhopodon aristifolius Mitt. Calymperaceae 1 2 3
Syrrhopodon loreus (Lac.) Reese Calymperaceae 1 - 1
Taxiphyllum taxirameum (Mitt.) Fleisch. — Hypnaceae - 1 1


Table 3. Continued...

MAKILING SIPIT

46

SPECIES FAMILY TRAIL TRAIL TOTAL
Taxithelium gottscheanum (Hampe ex C.

Mull.) Sematophyllaceae 3 3
Taxithelium instratum (Brid.) Broth. Sematophyllaceae 0 10
Taxithelium nepalense (Schwaegr.) Broth. Thuidiaceae S 1 1
Thuidium cf glaucinum Thuidiaceae 1 ; 1
Trachythecium micropyxis (Broth.) Bartr. Hypnaceae 5 1 1
Vesicularia dubyana (C. Mull.) Broth. Hypnaceae 3 3
Vesicularia montagnei (Bel.) Broth. Hypnaceae 1 1
Vesicularia reticulata (Dozy & Molk.)

Broth. Hypnaceae : 3 3
Total 94 105 «199

‘Note: Values are the number of individuals found in the study plots.

Table 4. List of moss flora family found in Makiling and Sipit trails.

MAKILING SIPIT
FAMILY TRAIL TRAIL TOTAL
Brachytheciaceae 1 4 3
Calymperaceae Wl 9 20
Dicranaceae 12 13 25
Fissidentaceae 9 5 14
Funariaceae - 1 1
Hookeriaceae - 2 2
Hypnaceae 5 22 27
Hypnodendraceae 2 1 3
Leucobryaceae 16 7 23
Meteoriaceae 6 3 9
Neckeraceae 5 4 9
Polytrichaceae 2 a 2
Pottiaceae - 1 1
Pterobryaceae 9 9 18
Sematophyllaceae 7 16 23
Stereophyllaceae = 6 6
Thuidiaceae 9 2 a

Total 94 105 199


48

Table 5. Percentage of moss flora in the Philippines and Mt, Makiling.

TOTAL NO. OF PERCENTAGE
MOSS FLORA
SPECIES (%)
In Philippines 700 ul
In Mt. Makiling 155 50

Figure 14, shows that 71% of family of moss are common to both Sipit and
Makiling trails. These include family Brachytheciaceae, Calymperaceae, Dicranaceae,
Fissidentaceae, Hypnaceae, Hypnodendraceae, Leucobryaceae, _ Meteoriaceae,
Neckeraceae, Pterobryaceae, Sematophyllaceae and Thuidiaceae. The remaining 29% of
family of moss were characterized as unique to both Sipit and Makiling trails. These are
species belonging to families Funariaceae, Hookeriaceae, Pottiaceae, Polytrichaceae and
Stereophyllaceae. Collectively, almost three-fourth (3/4) of the moss family are normally
found in both trails while more than one-fourth (1/4) of the moss family are exclusively
found in both trails. These data emphasized that the family composition in Sipit trail is
almost the same with the families found in Makiling trail. It is proven that MMFR is an

untouched area and rich moss flora diversity.

49

Shared and Unique Families of Moss

shared Familie:

® Unique Familie:

11%

Figure 14. Shared and unique families of moss in Sipit and Makiling trails.

Table 6 shows that most abundant species were Leucoloma molle (C. Mull.) Mitt.
Taxithelium instratum (Brid.) Broth., Lorentzia bifaria (Bosch & Lac.) Buck & Crum
and Arthrocormus schimperi (Dozy & Molk.) Dozy & Molk. Also, 8 species were listed
as the five species combining the most abundant species in Sipit trail, Makiling trail, and
both trails. Five species were on the top five most abundant species in Makiling trail,
while 8 species were on the five most abundant species in Sipit trail, signifying a more
even dominance in Sipit trail. Irrespective of abundance, most abundant species were
presented in Sipit trail, while half are present in Makiling trail. The data gathered
indicates that condition of Sipit trail is more favourable for moss species than in
Makiling trail. This condition may also explained that Makiling trail is more disturbed
because of its popularity to the hikers than the Sipit trail.

50

Table 6. Top five moss species in Makiling and Sipit trails.

MAKILING SIPIT

K SPECIES FAMILY TRAIL TRAIL

1 Leucoloma molle (C. Mull.) Mitt. Dicranaceae + +

2. Taxithelium instratum (Brid.) Broth. Sematophyllaceae +
Arthrocormus schimperi (Dozy & Molk.)

3 Dozy & Molk. Leucobryaceae + +
Lorentzia bifaria (Bosch & Lac.) Buck &

3 Crum Thuidiaceae + +

4 Calymperes subintegrum Broth. Calymperaceae + +
Leucophanes candidum Leucobs

5 (Schwaegr.)Lindb. eucobryaceae + +
Ectropotheciella distichophylla (Hampe)

5 Fleisch. Hypnaceae +
Stereophyllum anceps (Bosch & Lac.)

5 Broth. Stereophyllaceae S +

Legend: + = present

absent

Shared Species of Moss
Along Altitudinal Gradients

The shared species of mosses were found in elevation 500, 800 and 1,000 masl
(Figure 15). The species that are shared to 500 and 800 masl are Fissidens crenulatus var.
elmeri (Broth.) Iwats. & Suzuki and Leucoloma molle (C. Mull.) Mitt., respectively. The
shared species in 1,000 masl are Leucoloma molle (C. Mull.) Mitt, Chaetomitrium
beccarii Dix. and Leucophanes candidum (Schwaegr.)Lindb. Among the three elevations,
the highest number of shared species was located in 1,000 masl. This results was

explained in the study of Geffert et al. (2013) that tropical lowland forests are relatively

51

species poor, and high species numbers were only achieved in the mountain ranges and

cloud forest ecosystems.

No.of shared Species

{evation (mas

Figure 15. Number of shared species of mosses in Sipit and Makiling trails, MMFR.

Unique Species of Moss
Along Altitudinal Gradients

All elevations of Sipit and Makiling trail have unique species of mosses. Figure
16, shows the number of unique species of mosses in Sipit and Makiling trail. Elevation
900 and 1000 mas! have more unique species with 18 species each, followed by 17
species at 700 masl. The least unique species was found in 300 masl. This result may
indicate that the elevation has significant factor for outcome of uniqueness of species of

moss. This was positively the same with the results obtained by some authors regarding

52

high elevation with more unique species compared to lower elevation (Geffert ef al.,
2013).

16 16
Fu
16 15
14
ut
a2
2 Lb
8
2
°
300 400 500 600 700 800 900

1000

No.of Unique Species

Elevation (mas)

Figure 16. Number of unique species of mosses in Sipit and Makiling trails, MMFR.

Key to the Families of Mosses
(Modified from Bartram, 1939)

Leaves equitant and distichou: Fissidentaceae

2

Leaves in 2 or more rows, often complanate but not distichous...

Leaf blade nearly all costa, with 3 or more layers of differentiated cells, small
chlorophyllose cells (chlorocysts), and large hyaline porose cells
leucocysts).... ..Leucobryaceae

Leaf blade composed of | or rarely 2 layers of similar cells, costa usually
narrow... seseneee

Inner basal cells large and empty, sharply differentiated from the small
chlorophyllose cells of the blade.... ...Calymperaceae

Inner basal cells not conspicuously differentiated... 4

Leaves with longitudinal lamellae on the inner face, peristome of 32 or 64 short
teeth connected above with a membrane covering the mouth of the
capsule... Polytrichaceae

5

Leaves without ventral lamellae...

Stems usually erect, dichotomously branched, setae terminal on stems of leafy

branches with few exceptions (acrocarpous). 6

Stems creeping, often pinnate or copiously branched, setae lateral on main stem
or secondary branches (pleurocarpous)... 8

Peristome teeth broad at base, entire or cleft above; upper leaf cells papillose,
rounded, often obscure. Hf

Peristome teeth divided into 32 filiform, papillose branches.

Peristome teeth cleft above, leaf cells firm, alar leaf cells often
differentiated..

Peristome teeth entire or none, leaf cells rhomboidal, very lax, alar cells not
differentiated... .-,Funariaceae

53

Costa single..

Costa double...

16

Leaves conspicuously bordered, small flaccid plants, leaves short-pointed, cells
lax... -Hookeriaceae

Leaves not bordered...

Costa toothed on back above...

Costa smooth on back...

Leaf margins faintly toothed, capsules smooth.

..Pterobryaceae

Leaf margins spinose-serrate, capsules ribbed... ..Hypnodendraceae

Leaf cells papillose.

Leaf cells
smooth...

Stems prostrate, pinnate or bi- and tripinnate, stem and branch leaves often
dimorphous.. ..Thuidiaceae

Stems flexuose and pendulous, irregularly branched. .--Meteoriaceae

Stems often regularly pinnate, leaves mostly very
complanat.

leckeraceae

Stems irregularly branched, leaves not complanate. AS

Alar cells few, poorly differentiated; leaves acuminate, lightly
concave. ...Brachytheciaceae

Alar cells numerous, well defined; coarser plants, costa strong, leaves short-

pointed... “Stereophyllaceae
Leaves transversely undulate, strongly complanate.. ....Neckeraceae
Leaves not transversely undulate... wl

54

20.

21.

Alar cells sharply defined, often large and inflated.

Alar cells few, inconspicuous...

Leaves deeply cochleariform, apex cucullate.... Pterobryaceae

Leaves more or less concave, apex not cucullate. ...Sematophyllaceae

Mostly soft plants, calyptra large, mitriform, often hairy. forks of costa usually
long. ...Hookeriaceae

Forks of costa short, calyptra usually cucullate.
Leaves plicate..

Leaves not plicate..

Leaves more or less concave, acuminate: endostome rudimentary, rigid woody
plants.. .Pterobryaceae

Leaves more or less concave, acuminate; peristome perfect, stems not
woody... ....Hypnaceae

Key to the Species Collected from
Makiling and Sipit Trails, MMFR

1,

1.

Key to Brachytheciaceae

Coarse plants, leaves broad; cells linear, more lax
..Eurynchium asperisetum (Figure 17)

Slender, delicate plants, leaves narrow; cells linear-rhomboidal,
smooth.. ve ..Rhynchostegiella menadensis (Figure 18 )

Key to Calymperaceae
(Modified from Ellis and Tan, 1999)

Plants with creeping main shoots and ascending branches; leaf margins largely

55

v

56

formed by a flattened, mostly unistratose band of stereids.........Mitthyridium cf.

flavum (Figure 25)

Shoot erect, branched or simple: leaf margins
various..

Distal extent of hyaline lamina poorly defined, shoots acaulescent, leaves
linear.

3

Hyaline lamina sharply defined with large, thin-walled hyaline cells abutting small,
thick-walled chlorophyllose cells; shoots acaulescent or not; leaves linear or not....4

Leaves erect, bristle-like (wet or dry); margins above leaf base polystratose and
largely entire... ..Syrrhopodon aristifolius (Figure 26)

Leaves variously incurled when dry, strap-like; margins above leaf base unistratose
and entire or, polystratose with well-developed uni- to multicellular, often double
teeth., .. Calymperes subserratum (Figure 22)

Leaves lingulate, less than 3 mm long; lamina on either side of hyaline region in
leaf base formed by a broad band of rounded-quadrate/shortly subrectangular cells
with thickened angles; lamina cells in one layer, irreglarly

“alymperes tenerum (Figure 24)

Leaves various; hyaline region in leaf base bordered on either side by narrow
marginal or intramarginal rib of thick-walled linear
cells...

Hyaline leaf base with marginal rib of thick-walled linear
cells... ..Syrrhopodon loreus (Figure 27)

Hyaline leaf base with intramarginal band of thick-walled linear
cells...
Costa in cross-section with 2 or more layers of guide cells; lamina cells minute,

dense. Calymperes tahitense (Figure 23)

Costa in cross-section with a single layer of guide
cell

Costa excurrent; leaves hardy dimorphic, gemmae (when present) produced from
all around the costal apex; lamina cells smal Calymperes erosum (Figure 19)

Costa ending just below leaf apex; leaves dimorphic; gemmae produced from the
ventral surface of a modified costal

57

apex..

Gemmiferous leaves lanceolate to lingulate (when moist); blades of chlorophyllose
lamina usually broader than costa, often abruptly narrowing into apical proboscis
and becoming recurved below apex... .Calymperes graeffeanum (Figure 20)

Gemmiferous leaves linear, bristle-like; blades of chlorophyllose lamina often
narrower than costa, tapering to just below apex..... .Calymperes subintegrum
(Figure 21)


58

Family Brachytheciaceae

Figure 17. Eurynchium asperisetum (C. Mull.) Bartr. — a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf
base; e. leaf apex.

Figure 18. Rhynchostegiella menadensis (Lac.) Bartr. — a. habit; b. leaf base; c. leaf
apex; leaf cells.

Family Calymperaceae

\\)

b c d e

Figure 19. Calymperes erosum C. Mull. — a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf base; . leaf
apex.

Figure 20. Calymperes graeffeanum C. Mull. — a, habit; b & c, leaf; d. leaf apex; e.
leaf base.

61


62

Figure 21. Calymperes subintegrum Broth. - a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf base; e.
median leaf cells.

63

Figure 22. Calymperes subserratum M. Fleisch. - a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf base;
¢. leaf apex; f. apical leaf cells.

Figure 23. Calymperes tahitense (Sull.) Mitt. - a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf base; ¢ & f.
leaf apex; g. median leaf cells.

65

Figure 24. Calymperes tenerum C. Mull. - a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf base; e.
median leaf cells; f. leaf apex.

Figure 25, Mitthyridium cf. flavum - a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. median leaf cells; e. leaf
apex; f. basal leaf cells.

67

Figure 26. Syrrhopodon aristifolius Mitt. - a. habit; b. leaf; c. median leaf cells; d.
leaf middle; leaf base; f. basal leaf cells.

Figure 27. Syrrhopodon loreus (Lac.) Reese - a. habit; b. leaf; c. basal leaf cells;
d. leaf base.

Key to Dicranaceae

Interior cells of costa not chlorophyllose, upper lamina cells
icranodontium fleischerianum (Figure 28)

Interior cells of costa not chlorophyllose, leave bordered with linear hyaline

cells. 2

Lamina cells papillose... .-Leucoloma molle (Figure 32)

Lamina cells smooth...

3

Capsules arcuate; uper cells rhomboidal......Dicranoloma assimile (Figure 29)

Capsules erect... 4

Seta 1 cm or over, stems with central strand; leaf cells linear,
porose.... Dicranoloma blumii (Figure 31)

Seta 5 mm or less, stems without central strand; leaf cells smooth; irregularly
thomboidal or linear above, more elongate
below... ..Dicranoloma brevisetum (Figure 30)

Key to Fissidentaceae

Leaves without costa; cells smooth, elongated... Fissidens hyalinus (Figure 35)

Leaves with costa... 2

Leaves bordered with a pale narrow band of elongated cells.

Leaves not bordered with band of elongated cells...

Cells unipapillate, seta smooth..........Fissidens crenulatus var. elmeri (Fig. 33)

..Fissidens hollianus

Cells pluripapillate, seta more or less scabrous.
(Figure 34)

Leaves up to 1 mm long, bluntly acuminate; cells relatively
small... .Fissidens laxus (Fig. 36)

69

Leaves 2 mm or more long, sharply acuminate.

Leaf widely acute; costa percurrent or ending a few cells below apex; cells
rounded.. . Fissidens zippelianus (Fig. 37)

Leaf narrowly acute; costa short, excurrent; small cells. .Fissidens

zippelianus var. robinsonii (Figure 38)

70

Family Dicranaceae

71

Figure 28. Dicranodontium fleischerianum W. Schultze-Motel - a.
leaf apex; d. median leaf cells.

habit; b. leaf; c.

Figure 29. Dicranoloma assimile (Hampe) Par. - a. habit; b. median leaf cells;
c. basal leaf cells; d. leaf apex; e & f. leaf.

3

Figure 30. Dicranoloma brevisetum (Dozy & Molk.) Paris - a. habit; b & e. leaf; c &
d. median leaf cells; f. leaf base.

4

Figure 31. Dicranoloma blumii (Mull. Hal.)Paris - a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf apex;
e. leaf base; f. basal leaf cells.

75

Figure 32. Leucoloma molle (C. Mull.) Mitt.- a. habit; b. leaf; c. median leaf cells;
d. basal leaf cells; e. leaf base; f. leaf apex.

76

Family Fissidentacene

Figure 33. Fissidens crenulatus var. elmeri wats. & Suzuki - a. habit; b & c. leaf;
d. leaf apex; e. leaf base; f. leaf middle.

i

L_

7

Figure 34. Fissidens hollianus Dozy & Molk. - a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf base.

7B

[_ e
Figure 35. Fissidens hyalinus Hook. & Wils. - a, habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf middle; e.
leaf apex; f. leaf base.


ee“

|

Figure 36. Fissidens laxus Sull. & Lesq. - a. habit; b & c. leaf; d, leaf middle; e. leaf
apex; f. leaf base.

80

Figure 37. Fissidens zippelianus Dozy & Molk. - a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf apex; e.
leaf; f. leaf middle.

|

Figure 38. Fissidens zippelianus var. robinsonii (Broth.) Iwats. & Suzuki - a. habit; b
&c. leaf; d. leaf middle; e. leaf base; f. leaf apex.

Key to Funariaceae

Peristome teeth entire or none, leaf cells rhomboidal, very lax, alar cells not
differentiated. Funaria hygrometrica (Figure 39)

Key to Hookeriaceae

‘haetomitrium beccarii
(Figure 41)

Lid rostrate, leaves erect-spreading; cells linear.

Lid conic, leaves deflexed; cells elongate, pappilose at apical
angle.. Chaetomitriopsis glaucarpa (Figure 40)

Key to Hypnaceae

Leaf cells relatively short, oval or rhomboidal.

Leaf cells narrowly linear...

.Ectropotheciella
distichophylla (Figure 42)

Leaf cells parenchymatous, sharply papillose...

Leaf cells prosenchymatous, smooth...

-Vesicularia
reticulata (Figure 55)

Leaves with long, subulate-acuminate points,

Leaves short-acuminate... 4

Vesicularia
montagnei (Figure 54)

Leaves ending in a short, sharp acumen, cells short...

Leaves ending in a wider acumen, cells elongate. Vesicularia

dubyana (Figure 53)

Leaves symmetrical, mostly falcate..

Leaves asymmetrical, usually complanate.

82

Capsule and lid strongly mamillose....

..Trachythecium micropyxis
(Figure 52)

7

Capsule and lid smooth...

Alar cells sharply defined often large and inflated.. Glossadelphus

zollingeri (Figure 50)

Alar cells not differentiated...

Autoicous or heteroicous, perichgetial leaves not plicate.

Dioicous, perichgetial leaves more or less plicat

Stems irregularly branched, more or less complanate-foliate....Ectropothecium
dealbatum (Figure 43)

Stems closely and regularly pinnate, leaves strongly falcate.....Ectropothecium
elegantipinnatum (Figure 44)

Robust plants, setae over 2 cm long.... ..Ectropothecium falciforme

(Figure 45)
Slender plants, setae less than 2 cm lon, Ectropothecium
perminutum (Figure 46)

Leaves toothed nearly to base, cells more or less papillose at apical
angles.. Taxiphyllum taxirameum (Figure 51)

Leaves subentire, cells smooth. 12

Leaves ovate-lanceolate, long-acuminate.. ..lsopterygium bancanum

(Figure 47)

Leaves ovate, very short-acuminate... Isopterygium pendulum

(Figure 49)

83

Family Funariaceae

L

Figure 39. Funaria hygrometrica Hedw. - a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf apex;
e. median leaf cells.


85

Family Hookeriaceae

Figure 40. Chaetomitriopsis glaucarpa (Reinw.) Fleisch. - a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf
apex; e. leaf middle; f. leaf base.

86

Figure 41. Chaetomitrium beccarii Dix. - a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf base; e. leaf
apex.

Family Hypnaceae
,

a

ae
'

87

> |

Figure 42. Ectropotheciella distichophylla (Hampe) Fleisch. - a. habit; b & c. leaf; d.
leaf apex; e. leaf base.

Figure 43, Ectropothecium dealbatum (Reinw. & Hornsch.) Jaeg. - a. habit; b & c.
leaf; d. leaf base; e. leaf apex.

89

Figure 44. Ectropothecium elegantipinnatum (C.Mull.) Jaeg. — a. habit; b-d. leaf.

Figure 45. Ectropothecium falciforme (Dozy & Molk.) Jaeg. — a. habit; b & c. leaf; d.
leaf base; e. leaf apex.

91

Figure 46. Ectropothecium perminutum Broth ex Bartr. — a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf
base; e. leaf middle; f. leaf apex

L

Figure 47. Isopterygium bancanum (Lac.) saeg. — a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf middle;
e. leaf apex; f. leaf base.

Figure 48, Isopterygium sp. — a. habit; b & c. leaf; d & e. leaf apex; f. leaf base.

Figure 49. Isopterygium pendulum Dix. ex Bartr. — a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. basal leaf

95,

Figure 50. Glossadelphus zollingeri (C. Mull.) Fleisch. — a. habit; b. median leaf cells;
c. basal leaf cells; d. leaf; e. & c. leaf; d. basal leaf cells; e. apical leaf cells.


MS i

Figure 51. Taxiphyllum taxirameum (Mitt.) Fleisch. — a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf
apex; e. leaf base.


97

Figure 52. Trachythecium micropyxis (Broth.) Bartr. — a. habit; b-d. leaf.

OB

Figure 53. Vesicularia dubyana (C. Mull.) Broth. — a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf apex;
e. leaf base.

99

Figure 54. Vesicularia montagnei (Bel.) Broth. — a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf apex; e.
basal leaf cells; f. leaf base.

100

Figure 55. Vesicularia reticulata (Dozy & Molk.) Broth. — a. habit; b. leaf; c. leaf
middle; d & e. leaf apex.

Key to Hypnodendraceae

Frond leaves large. ovate, spinose-serrate with teeth often in pairs complanate,
cells smooth, {ypnodendron reinwardtii ssp. caducifolium (Figure 57)

Frond leaves small, ovate-lanceolate, serrate, not complanate, striate when
dry: cells narrowly linear... .. Hypnodendron dendroides (Figure 56)

Key to Leucobryaceae

Costa with a median strand of stereid cells.

Costa without stereid cells...

Robust, glossy plants, leaves keeled above; lamina cells
rectangular... _Leucophanes candidum (Figure 62)

Slender, dull, delicate plants, leaves nearly flat above; lamina cells short-
eucophanes octoblepharioides (Figure 63)

rectangularor subquadrate.

Chlorocysts in one median row..

Chlorocysts in three rows

Leaves smooth on back; lamina cells wider than thin... .Leucobryum

neilgherrense (Figure 60)

Leaves strongly scabrous on back; hyaline lamina cells in 4 or 5 rows at widest
part of leaf. Leucobryum scalare (Figure 61)

Dorsal and ventral rows of chlorocysts covered with a layer of large, hyaline
cells. ..Arthrocormus schimperi
(Figure 58)

Dorsal and ventral rows of chlorocysts not covered with hyaline
cells ..Exostratum blumei (Figure 59)

101

Family Hypnodendraceae

Figure 56. Hypnodendron dendroides (Brid.) Touw. — a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf
base; e. leaf apex; f. median leaf cells.


103

a

Figure 57. Hypnodendron reinwardtii var. Caducifolium (Herz.) Touw. — a. habit; b.
& c. leaf; d. leaf middle; e. leaf base; f. leaf apex; g. median leaf cells.

Family Leucobryaceae

Figure 58. Arthrocormus schimperi (Dozy & Molk.) Dozy & Molk. — a. habit; b & c.
leaf; d. leaf apex; e. leaf base.

105

Figure 59. Exostratum blumei (Nees ex Hampe) Ellis — a. habit; b & c. leaf; d.
median leaf cells; e. leaf apex.

d. leaf

f;

Figure 60. Leucobryum neilgherrense Mull. Hal. - a. habit; b & c. lea!
middle; e. leaf base.

Figure 61. Leucobryum scalare C. Mull. ex Fleisch. — a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf
base; e. median leaf cells; f. leaf apex.

107

108

Figure 62. Leucophanes candidum (Schwaegr.) Lindb. — a. habit; b & c. leaf;

d. median leaf cells; e. leaf base; f. leaf apex.

109

Figure 63. Leucophanes octoblepharioides Brid. — a. habit; b-d. leaf; e, leaf apex; f.
leaf base; g. leaf base.

Key to Meteoriaceae

Leaves erect, appressed... ...Meteorium miquelianum (Figure 68)

Leaves widely spreading...

Dull plants. leaf cells seriate-papillose.

Glossy plants, leaf cells smooth or unipapillate.

Branches irregularly pinnate... ..Floribundaria floribunda (Figure 66)

Branches bipinnate.. .Floribundaria thuidioides (Figure 67)

Ultimate branches not filiform, branch leaves spreading Barbella
compressiramea (Figure 64)

Ultimate branches filiform, branch leaves mostly appressed, Barbella
pendula (Figure 65)

Key to Neckeraceae
Costa nearly percurrent, dull plants; cells rounded-hexgonal.......Pinnatella

mariei (Figure 74)

Costa ending well below apex, mostly glossy plants...

Leaves in 8 rows, stems more or less flattened, costa stout; cells irregularly
rounded-hexagonal... imantocladium plumula (Figure 69)

Leaves in 4 rows, stems very flat, costa slender...

Leaves undulate, stems long and pendulous, sparingly branched; cells with
firm, irregularly thickened walls... ..Neckeropsis lepineana (Figure 73)

Leaves not undulate, stems frondose, copiously branched. 4

Robust plants, leaves coarsely incised-toothed; cells smooth, oval-
thomboidal... ...Homaliodendron flabellatum (Figure 71)

Smaller plants, leaves minutely toothed...

110

MW

Branches few. distant, flagellate at tips; cells oval-rhomboidal,
smooth.. .Homaliodendron exiguum (Figure 70)

Branches numerous, dense, not flagelliform; cells smooth, linear-thomboidal
at base... 5. Homaliodendron microdendron (Figure 72)


2

Family Meteoriaceae

Figure 64. Barbella compressiramea (Ren. & Card.) M. Fleisch. — a. habit; b & c.
leaf; d. leaf middle; ¢. leaf base; f. leaf apex.

113

Figure 65. Barbella pendula (Sull.) M. Fleisch. — a. habit; b-d. leaf.

14

Figure 66,

Floribundaria floribunda (Dozy & Molk.) Fleisch. — a. habit; b & c. leaf;
d. leaf apex; e. median leaf cells.

Ws

Figure 67. Floribundaria thuidioides Fleisch. — a. habit; b & c. leaf; d & e. enlarged
leaf.

Figure 68. Meteorium miquelianum (C. Mull.) Fleisch. ex Broth. — a. habit; b & c.
leaf; d. leaf middle; e. leaf base; f. leaf apex.

116


17

Family Neckeracene

Figure 69. Himantocladium plumula (Nees) Fleisch.
leaf cells; e. leaf apex; f. leaf base.

a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. median

118

Figure 70. Homaliodendron exiguum (Bosch & Lach) Fleisch. — a. habit; b & c. leaf;
d &e. leaf apex.

19

Figure 71. Homaliodendron flabellatum (Sm.) Fleisch. - a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf
base; e. leaf apex.

120

Figure 72. Homaliodendron microdendron (Mont.) Fleisch. — a. habit; b & c. leaf;
d &e. leaf cells.

121

Figure 73. Neckeropsis lepineana (Mont.) Fleisch. — a. habit; b & c. leaf; c. leaf apex;

d. leaf cells.

122

Figure 74. Pinnatella mariei (Besch.) Broth. — a. habit; b & c. leaf; d & e. median
leaf cells; f. leaf apex.

Key to Polytrichaceae

Leaves strongly toothed, cells lax, parenchymatous. ogonatum camusii

(Figure 75)
Leaves subentire, cells elongate, prosenchymatous.. Pogonatum piliferum
(Figure 76)

Key to Pottiaceae

Stems usually erect, setae terminal on stems of leafy branches with few

exceptions (acrocarpous); Peristome teeth broad at base, entire or cleft above;

...Hlyophila rosea
(Figure 77)

upper leaf cells papillose, rounded, often obscure...

Key to Pterobryaceae

Primary stems short, rhizomatous, endostome well developed.

Primary stems elongate, filiform, endostome rudimentary or none.

Capsules exserted, calyptra cucullate; cells incrassate,
porose.. Garovaglia elegans (Figure 78)

Capsule immersed, calyptra mitriform; cells narrow, elliptical, with firm,
porose walls.... Garovaglia plicata ssp punctidens (Figure 79)

Leaves lightly concave, widely spreading; cells linear with rounded
ends. Jaegerina luzonensis (Figure 80)

Leaves deeply concave, erect; cells linear, porose, incrassate,
smooth... ..Plerobryopsis crassicaulis (Figure 81)

123

124

Family Polytrichaceae

Figure 75. Pogonatum camusii (Ther.) Touw. — a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf middle;
e. leaf base; f. leaf apex.

125

Figure 76. Pogonatum piliferum (Dozy & Mol.) Touw. - a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf
apex; e. leaf middle; f. leaf base.

126

Family Pottiaceae

Figure 77. Hyophila rosea Williams — a, habit; b & v. leaf; d. median leaf cells; e.
leaf apex.

Family Pterobryacene

Figure 78. Garovaglia elegans (Dozy & Molk.) Hampe ex Bosch & Lac.
b & c. leaf; d, basal leaf cells; e. leaf base; f & g. leaf apex.

a. habit;

127


128

Figure 79. Garovaglia plicata ssp punctidens (Williams) During — a. habit; b & c.
leaf; d. basal leaf cells; e. leaf apex.

129

UL

Figure 80. Jaegerina luzonensis Broth. habit; b & c. leaf; d. basal leaf cells; e &

{leaf apex.


130

Figure 81. Prerobryopsis crassicaulis (C. Mull.) Fleisch. — a. habit; b & c. leaf; d & e.
leaf middle; f. leaf apex.

Key to Sematophyllaceae

Peristome single. endostome none; cells linear-rhomboidal
attenuatum (Fig. 86)

Peristome double..

Peristome teeth with a median furrow; cells linear..
sigmatodontium (Fig. 83)

Peristome teeth with a fine, zigzag median line.

Leaves falcate-secund, exothecial cells not collenchymatous...
sp. (Fig. 85)

Leaves erect-spreading, exothecial cells collenchymatous.

Leaf cells unipapillate... «a Acanthorrynchium papillatum (Fig. 82)

5

Leaf cells pluripapillate.

..Taxithelium instratum

(Fig. 88)

Leaves long and slenderly acuminate....

6

Leaves short-pointed, not or scarcely acuminate...

Leaves minutely crenulate, alar cells not inflated, usually hyaline... Taxithelium
nepalense (Fig. 89)

Leaves sharply toothed, alar cells inflated and often
colored ...Taxithelium gottscheanum (Fig. 87)

Key to Stereophyllaceae

Leaf cells smooth; alar cells numerous, well defined; coarser plants, costa
strong, leaves short-pointed... .Stereophyllum anceps (Fig. 90)


132

Key to Thuidiaceae

Thuidium

Calyptra cucullate, mostly naked; cells oval-hexagonal...
cf glaucinum (Fig. 93)

Calyptra campanulate, hispic.

Autoicous, branch leaves rounded; cells small, papillose... .. Lorentzia
velata (Fig. 92)

Dioicous, branch leaves oblong; cells round

orentzia bifaria (Fig. 91)

133

Family Sematophyllaceae

Figure 82. Acanthorrynchium papillatum (Harv.) Fleisch. - a. habit; b & c. leaf; d.
median leaf cells; e. leaf apex; f. leaf base.

134

Figure 83. Acroporium sigmatodontium (C. Mull.) Fleisch. ~ a. habit; b & c. leaf; d.
leaf base; e. median leaf cells; f. leaf apex.

135

Figure 84. Acroporium sp. - a. habit; b & c. leaf; d leaf middle; e & f. leaf apex;
g; leaf base.

136

Figure 85. Brotherella sp. — a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf base; e & f. leaf apex.

137

Figure 86. Meiothecium attenuatum Broth. — a. habit; b & c. leaf; d & e. leaf base;
f. leaf apex.

138

Figure 87. Taxithelium gottscheanum (Hampe ex C. Mull.) - a. habit; b & c. leaf;
d. basal leaf cells; e & f. leaf apex; g. leaf base.

139

Figure 88. Taxithelium instratum (Brid.) Broth. — a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf base;
¢. leaf apex; f. basal leaf cells; g. median leaf cells.

140

Figure 89. Taxithelium nepalense (Schwaegr.) Broth. — a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf
apex; e. basal leaf cells.

141

Figure 90. Stereophyllum anceps (Bosch & Lac.) Broth. — a. habit; b & c. leaf; d. leaf
apex; e. basal leaf cells; f. median leaf cells.

142

Family Thuidiaceae

Figure 91. Lorentzia bifaria (Bosch & Lac.) Buck & Crum —a & b. habit; c-e. leaf.

143

Figure 92. Lorentzia velata (Mitt.) Buck & Crum — a. habit; b-e. leaf.


Figure 93. Thuidium cf glaucinum — a. habit; b-d. leaf.


145
Distribution of Moss Species Along Altitudinal Gradients

Species Richness of Moss
Along Trail Communities

The number of species found in each elevation of Sipit trail were compared to
Makiling trail. Figure 94 shows the graphical representation comparing the number of
species found in Sipit and Makiling trails. In Sipit trail, the greatest number of species
was found at 1,000 masl with 16 species. It is the most undisturbed among elevations.
Less number of species was found at 600 masl (2 species). This is due to slightly open
area and with direct heat of sunlight. In Makiling trail, greatest number of species was
observed in 900 masl (11 species). It was observed that 900 masl is more diverse than
1,000 masl due to its presence of forest cover while in 1,000 masl, the area is open and
with a little amount of cover found at the peak. Less diversity was found in 300 masl
with 3 species. The less number of species in lower elevation is explained by more

disturbance compared with higher elevation.

Moreover, based on the graph, sampling plots located at higher elevations tend to
have more number of species compared to the sampling plots in the lower elevations. For
both the Makiling and Sipit trails, the greatest number of species is found at 900 (11

species) and 1,000 mas! (16 species), respectively.

146

No. of Species

.
| || |
800 900 1000

300 400 500 600 700

Elevation (mas!)

Figure 94, Number of species found in Sipit and Makiling trails.

Although statistical comparison between paired-elevation sites cannot be
computed in the study (due to limited number of plots), the observed moss flora diversity
(species richness, shannon diversity H’ and abundance) were illustrated in Figure 95.
Red and green plots/lines indicates species diversity parameters from Makiling and Sipit
trails, respectively. Generally, overall and paired sites along elevations in Sipit trail has

higher species diversity parameters than Makiling trail (Figure 95).

In Makiling trail, only three altitudinal plots showed consistent higher richness
and diversity. These were observed at 600, 900 and 1,000 masl and species abundance
was observed at 900 and 1,000 masl. The highest number of species was observed at
1,000 masl with 16 species found in Sipit trail, followed by 11 species found at 900 masl
in Makiling trail. Less specious site was observed at 600 masl (Sipit trail) and 300 mast

(Makiling trail) with only 2 and 3 species, respectively (Figure 95a).

147

In Sipit trail. the most diverse plot (according to elevation) was found in 1,000
masl with 16 species while the lowest diversity index was observed in plots located at
600 masl having only 2 species. On the other hand, the highest recorded species diversity
for Makiling trail was observed at elevation 900 mas! with 11 species while the lowest

diversity index was recorded in plots found at elevation 300 masl with only 3 species.

Furthermore, plots located in high elevation showed higher moss abundance
(Figure 96a). These were also explained by the works of Gradstein and Pocs (1989)
which explain this abundance as a result of more favorable moisture conditions due to
clouds and fog and the prevailing lower temperatures. The same results were also found
by Gonzales-Mancebo and Hemandez- Garcia (1996) in their research on the life

strategies of mosses in the Canary Islands.

As noted, the species tumover showed variable fluctuations in the species
composition in Makiling and Sipit trail (Figure 96b). Species tumover gives the
proportion of species that either appear or disappear between altitudinal points. Turnover
is higher when value is closer to 1. In Sipit trail, plots at 500 and 600 mas! have no
species in common, while plots sampled at 300 and 400 mas! have more species in
common. In Makiling trail, high species tumover were observed every altitudinal plots,
with plot sampled at 900 to 1000 masl having the most species common (Figure 96b),

corroborating the result from NMDS ordination (Figure 97).

148

1 Makil trail .
© Makilin ral
o = 1) ® Sipit tral
®
|
go] ‘ a @
es @ 3
oO -4 * @
3 ° ®
& of & =
+4
& a
N 4 Ld
T T T T T T T T
300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
Elevation (mas!)
ire}
at =
- @
x o e ™ . @ ea
o e
ao] °
c
2 b
go
5 Makiling trail
| © Sipit trail
© ® l
ro T

T 1 T 1 T T 7
300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
Elevation (masl)

Figure 95. Altitudinal structure of moss species in MMFR using (a)
species richness and (b) Shannon Diversity H’.

Abundance

149

®
8 4| ® Makiling trail
© Sipit trail @
8 ‘ 6
© J
S &
e o
| e ®
Oo a
e eo
T T T T T T T T
300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
Elevation (masl)
O10
3
i=
09
o
6
308
D
fe)
a
E07
Oo
g b
Bog. trail
o- Makiling trail
fom = Sipit trail
400 500 600 700 800 900 1000

Elevation (mas!)

Figure 96. Altitudinal structure of moss species in MMFR using (a) species
abundance and (b) composition.

150

Generally, the lower diversity and abundance of mosses in lower elevation could
be explained by the presence of anthropogenic and natural disturbances as well as the
occurrence of open or unforested patches compared with the more conserved and

forested areas at higher elevations.

Moss Flora Species Richness and Composition Analysis

The result from non-metric multidimensional scale (NMDS) ordination plot
showed little divergence between trail communities (Figure 97). In this figure, gray lines
indicates paired-site altitudinal plots. Black text in each NMDS plots indicate plot names
(GSS = Greater Sipit Subwatershed; MKL = Makiling). Black circles indicate groupings
of high and low elevation plots. Reading in NMDS plots is quite straightforward such
that plots constructed in the ordination map that are closer to one another, are likely to be
more similar than those further apart. In this result for example, altitudinal plots with
relatively similar communities were plots at 1000 and 900 masl in Makiling trail, and
plots 300 and 400 mast in Sipit trail. NMDS plots in the ordination map showed more
affinity to altitudinal (elevation) position of the plots rather than trail community
differences, as shown by plot groupings between higher and lower elevation plots, with
exception to plot sampled at 700 masl in Sipit trail grouping along with lower elevation
plots (Figure 97). Also, species composition at altitudinal paired plots are not similar

given the long distance (gray line) between paired plots (Figure 97). The result indicates

151

that compositional pattern in MMFR might be related to the present forest types along

altitudinal gradient rather than aspect.

+
34 TRAIL @:
~ Makiling ser
a | @ Sipit =
n iS MKL601 = we
3 6
qgeo4 mikuao &
=o
z 87
al MKLS \
-0.5 0.0 0.5
NMDS1
Figure 97. Non-metric multidimensional scale (NMDS) ordination of

community composition relative to species abundance in
Makiling trail (red plots) and Sipit trail (green plots).

Influence of Environmental Variables
to Moss Flora Diversity and Composition

In the result of the study, elevation, relative humidity (RH) and light intensity

have consistent positive association to moss flora diversity (species richness, diversity H”

and abundance) while temperature has negative association to bryoflora diversity (Table

7).

152

The relationship implies that the species richness, diversity H’ and abundance of
moss species increases with increasing elevational gradients, with higher RH and light
intensity. In contrast. higher temperature decreases species richness, diversity (H") and
abundance of mosses in general. This result may be related to moss flora species
association with wet environment. Also, among the explanatory variables, elevation has

the highest correlation to response variables (a=0.05, p=0359 ~ 0.710).

Table 7. Pairwise comparison between response and explanatory (environment)
variables based from Pearson’s r correlation coefficient test.

RESPONSE EXPLANATORY (ENVIRONMENTAL) VARIABLE

VARIABLE LIGHT
ELEVATION TEMPERATURE RH wrengiry

Species richness 0.548 -0.316 0.265 0.308

St aeaead diversity 0.359 -0.166 0.137 0.182

Species abundance 0.710 -0.256 0.211 0.200

Since there is association (correlation) between response and explanatory variable,
the cause-effect relationship was only significant for elevation, and other explanatory
variable showed insignificant effect to our response variables based from multiple linear
regression model (Table 7). MLR results was presented, of which estimate and estimate
error is the effect size and the standard deviation of the sampling distribution which
explains the strength of the explanatory variable relative to its effect on the response
variable; adj-R? is the amount of variation explained by the whole model, where values

closer to 1 means stronger relationship; and P-values tells the probability of a test

153

statistics. significant test are usually measured when p-value is < 0.05. The result of

model (all the explanatory variables) explained the highest variation in species

abundance (adj- 0.46). followed by species richness (adj-R? = 0.34) then lowest in
explaining species diversity H’ (adj-R? = 0.09) (Table 8). This result means that the
factors influencing moss flora species richness, diversity H’, and abundance in MMFR
were explained by our measured variables by 34%, 9% and 46%, respectively. It was
also indicated that other environmental variables not measured in this study has
significant effect on response variable, especially the 91% unexplained variance for
species diversity H’. Again, species richness, diversity H’, and abundance were
significantly related to the effect of elevation alone (Table 8).

This findings is similar with the results observed for species composition fitting
the same explanatory variables where elevation was also the only important variable
explaining species composition as shown by the longer arrow related to elevation, while
shorter arrow are related to temperature, RH and light intensity (Figure 98). It indicates
that moss species did not differ between trail communities, and not affected to changes in
temperature, RH and light intensity. The absence of effect in trail communities,
temperature, RH and light intensity might be due to this variable being confounded by

the effect of elevation, which elevation mainly contributes to most variation explained.

154

Table 8. Multiple linear regression for species richness, Shannon diversity
H, and abundance in relation to trail communities, elevation, temperature,
relative humidity (RH) and light intensity.

RESPONSE EXPLANATORY ESTIMATE MODEL
VARIABLE VARIABLE (+SE) ADJ-R?
Species richness Intercept -17.53 + 42.352 0.34
Trail 14.895 + 7.247
Elevation 0.015 + 0.005*
Temperature 1.31 + 1.139
RH -0.403 + 0.296
Light intensity 0.006 + 0.006
Species diversity H’ Intercept -0.0891 + 7.13 0.09
Trail 2.3887 + 1.22
Elevation 0.002 + 0.001*
Temperature 0.17 + 0.192
RH -0.0726 + 0.05
Light intensity 0.0005 + 0.001
Species abundance Intercept -58.47 + 78.22 0.46
Trail 21.83 + 13.39
Elevation 0.03 + 0.01**
Temperature 2.73421
RH 51 +0.55

+0.
bles where p-values is 0.05* and 0.01**,

Light intensit
Codes denotes significant explanatory va


155

34 TRAIL e
® Makiling @ = elevation
Ss J © Sipit e
8 e .
ao
=o] ee
= {
teme
S4 S)
7
-0.5 0.0 0.5

NMDS1

Figure 98. Non-metric multidimensional scale (NMDS) ordination showing the
effect of trail communities, elevation, temperature, relative humidity
(RH) and light intensity to species composition in Makiling trail (red
plots) and Sipit trail (green plots). Blue text indicates explanatory
(environmental variables). Blue arrow indicates the strength of effect
for each explanatory variable.

Furthermore, Figure 99 and 100 shows the general trends and relationship of the
various environmental parameters to moss diversity in both trails. In general, moss
diversity is positively affected by increasing elevation in both trails. This is also
supported by correlation analysis on moss species composition for the two sampling sites
while sudden decreases in diversity in sampling plots located at 600 masl and 900 masi
(Sipit Trail) and 800 mas! and 1,000 mas! (Makiling Trail) could simply be due to the

presence of canopy gaps or disturbances in the site,

15) eh fe

300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
Elevation

(masl)

Elevation
(masl)
il Temperature

Relative Humidity
(36)

ht Intensity

Shannon_H

Figure 99. General trends between species diversity and environmental parameters

in Sipit trail.

1
os
C)
300 400 S00 600 700 800 900 1000
Elevation
(mas!)

Elevation
I)
=f Temperature

Relative Hum

(lux

Figure 100. General trends between species diversity and environmental

parameters in Makiling trail.

CHAPTER V

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

The study was conducted in Mt. Makiling Forest Reserve to compare the
diversity of mosses along an altitudinal gradients in the Sipit and Makiling trails.
Moreover. moss species richness and composition between trail communities,
distribution of species along an altitudinal gradient and environmental variables were
also taken into account.

Seventy seven (77) moss species belonging to 17 families were identified.
Eighteen percent (18%) equivalent to 14 species were common to both trail communities
and with 71% shared moss flora family. Furthermore, shared species of mosses were
found in elevation 500, 800 and 1,000 masl. Among the three elevations, the highest
number of shared species was located in 1,000 masl, This results was explained in the
study of Geffert ef al. (2013) that tropical lowland forests are relatively species poor, and
high species numbers were only achieved in the mountain ranges and cloud forest
ecosystems.

Most of the species of mosses in Makiling and Sipit trails, are anchored to tree
barks, trunks, branches and dead/fallen logs. The two trail communities characterized as
forested track side, thereby relatively humid environment. With this characteristics of the

area, the moss species flourished and contribute greatly to the growth of other species.

158

From the data collected, approximately 11% of the total moss species listed in the
country and roughly 50% of the total moss species in Mt. Makiling. The identified most
abundant species were Leucoloma molle (C. Mull.) Mitt, Taxithelium instratum (Brid.)
Broth.. Lorentzia bifaria (Bosch & Lac.) Buck & Crum and Arthrocormus schimperi
(Dozy & Molk.) Dozy & Molk.. These spcies were observed in higher elevations. In this
study, abundance increase with increasing altitudes. Relative moisture increases as
altitude increases (Myers ef al., 2000). Abundance are more likely because of their
relatively moisture conditions that is suitable habitat for bryophytes. Most abundant
species was observed in Sipit trail than Makiling trail. This condition may also explained
that Makiling trail is more disturbed because of its popularity to the hikers than the Sipit
trail.

In Makiling and Sipit trail, the greatest number of species was found at 900 (11
species) and 1,000 masl (16 species), respectively. sampling plots located at higher
elevations tend to have more number of species compared to the sampling plots in the
lower elevations. Low species richness in lower elevation is explained by more
disturbance compared with higher elevation.

In Sipit trail, the most diverse plot (according to elevation) was found in 1,000
masl with 16 species while the lowest diversity index was observed in plots located at
600 masl having only 2 species. On the other hand, the highest recorded species diversity
for Makiling trai] was observed at elevation 900 mas! with 11 species while the lowest

diversity index was recorded in plots found at elevation 300 masi with only 3 species.

159

Furthermore. plots located in high elevation showed higher moss abundance
(Figure 96a). These were also explained by the works of Gradstein and Pocs (1989)
which explain this abundance as a result of more favorable moisture conditions due to
clouds and fog and the prevailing lower temperatures. The same results were also found
by Gonzales-Mancebo and Hernandez- Garcia (1996) in their research on the life
strategies of mosses in the Canary Islands.

Species tumover showed variable fluctuations in the species composition in
Makiling and Sipit trail. Species tumover gives the proportion of species that either
appear or disappear between altitudinal points. In Sipit trail, plots at 500 and 600 mas!
have no species in common, while plots sampled at 300 and 400 mas! have more species
in common. In Makiling trail, high species turnover were observed every altitudinal plots,
with plot sampled at 900 to 1000 masl having the most species common, corroborating
the result from NMDS ordination.

The generally lower diversity and abundance of mosses in lower elevation could
be explained by the presence of anthropogenic and natural disturbances as well as the
occurrence of open or unforested patches compared with the more conserved and
forested areas at higher elevations.

The result from non-metric multidimensional scale (NMDS) ordination plot
indicated little divergence between trail communities. The altitudinal plots with
relatively similar communities were plots at 1000 and 900 mas! in Makiling trail, and
plots 300 and 400 masl in Sipit trail. NMDS plots in the ordination map showed more

affinity to altitudinal (elevation) position of the plots rather than trail community

160

differences, as shown by plot groupings between higher and lower elevation plots, with
exception to plot sampled at 700 mas! in Sipit trail grouping along with lower elevation
plots. The result shows that compositional pattern in MMFR might be related to the
present forest types along altitudinal gradient rather than aspect.

In the result of the study, elevation, relative humidity (RH) and light intensity
have consistent positive association to moss flora diversity (species richness, diversity H’
and abundance) while temperature has negative association to moss flora diversity (Table
9).

The relationship implies that the species richness, diversity H’ and abundance of
moss species increases with increasing elevational gradients, with higher RH and light
intensity. In contrast, higher temperature decreases species richness, diversity (H*) and
abundance of mosses in general. This result may be related to moss flora species
association with wet environment. Also, among the explanatory variables, elevation has
the highest correlation to response variables.

Species richness, diversity H’, and abundance were significantly related to the
effect of elevation alone. Moss species did not differ between trail communities, and not
affected to changes in temperature, RH and light intensity. The absence of effect in trail
communities, temperature, RH and light intensity might be due to this variable being
confounded by the effect of elevation, which elevation mainly contributes to most
variation explained.

In general, moss diversity is positively affected by increasing elevation in both

trails. This is also supported by correlation analysis on moss species composition for the

161

two sampling sites while sudden decreases in diversity in sampling plots located at 600
masl and 900 masl (Sipit Trail) and 800 mas! and 1,000 mas! (Makiling Trail) could

simply be due to the presence of canopy gaps or disturbances in the site.

RECOMMENDATION

Data collection for moss species richness, diversity and composition was
conducted over a single season (dry season); therefore, it is recommended that a study
covering an expanded sampling period (both wet and dry seasons) be conducted.

Mosses are particularly sensitive to anthropogenic disturbance. Low moss
diversity (richness. diversity H. and abundance) was observed in lower elevation plots
which can be related to proximity to human activities. Therefore, forest along low
elevation should be addressed for protection and conservation in MMER, since moss has
a significant role in the ecosystem.

Furthermore, it is recommended that the moss diversity and composition of the
Northeast and Southeast portions of MMFR be compared to this study. Moreover, these
could be compared to other similar forest reserves in the Philippines having the same

altitudinal gradients.

LITERATURE CITED

ABRAHAM. E.R.G.. J.C.T. GONZALEZ, M.L. CASTILLO, ILL. LIT Jr, and E.S.
FERNANDO. 2010. Forest cover and biodiversity profile of the crater area of Mt
Makiling. Luzon. Philippines. Asia Life Sciences Suppl. 4: 49-82.

AH-PENG. C.. CHUAH-PETIOT, M., DESCAMPS-JULIEN, B., BARDAT, and P.
STAMENOFF. 2007. Bryophyte diversity and distribution along an altitudinal
gradient on a lava flow in La Réunion. Divers Distrib 13: 654-662.

ANDREW. N.R. and M. DUNLOP. 2003. Variation in  invertebrate-bryophyte
community structure at different spatial scales along altitudinal gradients. J
Biogeogr 30: 731-746.

AZUELO, A.G., L.G. SARIANA, and M.P. PABUALAN. 2010 Diversity and
ecological status of bryophytes in Mt. Kitanglad, Bukidnon. Asian Joumal of
Biodiversity 1(1):72-90.

BANERJEE, R.D. 1974. Studies on antibiotic activity of bryophytes and pteridophytes.
Ph.D. Thesis. University of Kalyani, Kalyani, India.

BARTRAM, E.B. 1939. Mosses of the Philippines. Philippine Journal of Science 68: 1-
423.

BATEMAN, R.M., CRANE, P.R., DiMICHELE, W.A., KENRICK, P.R., ROWE, N.P.,
SPECK, T. and STEIN, W.E. 1998. Early evolution of land plants: Phylogeny,
physiology and ecology of the primary terrestrial radiation. Annual Review in
Ecology and Systematics 29: 263-292.

BATES, J.W. 2000. Mineral nutrition, substratum ecology and pollution. Bryophyte
Biology.Cambridge University Press. 248-299.

BATTY, K., BATES, J.W. and J.N.B, BELL. 2003. A transplant experiment on the
factors preventing lichen colonization of oak bark in South-east England under
declining sulphurdioxide pollution. Can J Bot 81: 439-451.

BELNAP, J. BUDEL, B. and O.L. Lange. 2003. Biological soil crusts: characteristics
and distribution. In: Belnap J, Lange OL, editors. Ecological Studies 150:
Biological soil crusts: Structure, function, and management. Berlin, Heidelberg,
New York: Springer. 3-30.

164

BERINGER, J.. LYNCH. A.H.. CHAPIN, F.S. MACK, M. and G.B. Bonan. 2001. The
representation of arctic soils in the land surface model: the importance of mosses.
J Climate 14: 3324-3335.

BRIDEL-BRIDERI, S.E. 1826-1827. Bryologica Universa seu Systematica ad Novam
Methodum Dispositio, Historia et Descripto Omnium Muscorum Frondorosum
Hucusque Cognitorum cum Synonymia ex Auctoribus Probatissimis. Barthii,
Lipsiae, 2 vols.

BROTHERUS, V.F. 1924, Band. Musci (Laubmoose). In: Engler, A. and Prantl, K.
(Eds.), Die Natirlichen Pflanzenfamilien. 1. Halfte. Englemann, Leipzig, 10:143~
478.

BROTHERUS, V.F. 1925. Band. Musci (Laubmoose). In: Engler, A. and Prantl, K.
(Eds.). Die Natiirlichen Pflanzenfamilien. 2. Halfte. Englemann, Leipzig, 11:1-
542.

BROWN, W.H. 1919. Vegetation of Philippine Mountains, DANR, Bureau of Science,
Manila. Pp. 102-104.

BUCK, W.R. and B. GOFFINET. 2000. Morphology and classification of the mosses. In:
‘Shaw, A.J. and Goffinet, B. (Eds.), Bryophyte Biology. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, pp. 71-123.

COLWELL, R.K. and D.C. LEES. 2000. The mid-domain effect: geometric constraints
on the geography of species richness. Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 15, 70-
76. Grytnes, J.A. (2003) Ecological interpretations of the mid-domain effect.
Ecology Letters, 6, 883-888.

COLWELL, R.K., C. RAHBEK and N.J. GOTELLI. 2004. The mid-domain effect and
species richness patterns: what have we learned so far? American Naturalist, 163,
E1-E23.

CROSBY, M.R., R.E. MAGILL, B. ALLEN and S. HE. 1999. Checklist of mosses.
Missouri Botanical Gardens, St. Louis.

DELACH, A. and R.W. KIMMERER. 2002. The effect of Polytrichum piliferum on
seed germination and establishment on iron mine tailings in New York.
Bryologist 105: 249-255.

ELDRIDGE, D.J. 1993. Cryptogam cover and soil surface condition: effects on
hydrology on a semiarid woodland soil. Arid Soil Research and Rehabilitation 7

(3): 203-217.

165

FLEISCHER. M. 1904-1923. Die Musci der Flora von Buitenzorg (zugleich
Laubmoosflora von Java). 4 volumes. Brill, Leiden

FRAHM, J.P. and R. OHLEMULLER. 2001. Ecology of bryophytes along altitudinal
and latitudinal gradients in New Zealand. Studies in austral temperate rain forest
bryophytes 15. Trop Bryol 20: 117-137.

FREGO, K.A. 2007. Bryophytes as potential indicators of forest integrity. Forest Ecol.
Management 242: 65-75.

GEFFERT. J. L.. J.P. FRAHM. W. BARTHLOTT and J. MUTKE. 2013. Global moss
diversity: spatial and taxonomic patterns of species richness. Journal of Bryology
35:1, 1-11.

GIGNAC. L.D. 2001. Bryophytes as Indicators of climate change. Bryologist 104: 410-
420.

GOFFINET, B. and A.J. SHAW. 2009. Bryohyte Biology:Second edition. Cambridge
University Press, New York. p.299-356.

GONZALES-MANCEBO J.M. and C.D. HERNANDEZ-GARCIA. 1996. Bryophyte
life strategies along an altitudinal gradient in El Canal y Los Tiles (La Palma,
Canary Islands). J Bryol 19:243-255.

GRADSTEIN S.R and T. POCS. 1989. Bryophytes. In: Tropical rain forest ecosystems.
Lieth H and Werger MJA eds. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers b.v.
p311-325,

GRAHAM, L.E., COOK, M.E. and J.S. BUSSE. 2000. The origin of land plants: Body
changes contributing to a major evolutionary radiation. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 97(9): 4535-4540.

GRAU, O., GRYTNES, J. and H.J.B. BIRKS. 2007. A comparison of altitudinal species
richness pattems of bryophytes with other plant groups in Nepal, Central
Himalaya. J Biogeogr 34: 1907-1915.

GRUEZO, W.S. 2000. Floral Diversity Profile of Mt Makiling Forest Reserve, Luzon,
Philippines. Paper presented during the ASEAN Regional Centre for Biodiversity
(ARCBC) and UPLB College of Forestry and Natural Resources (CFNR)
Seminar Workshop on Facing the Challenges of Sustaining Biodiversity
Conservation of Mt Makiling held on 20-21 September 2000 at CFNR
Auditorium, UPLB, College, Laguna, Philippines.

166

GRYTNES, J.A., HEEGAARD, E. and P.G. IHLEN. 2006. Species richness of vascular
plants, bryophytes and lichens along an altitudinal gradient in western Norway.
Acta Oecol 29: 241-246.

HARIS, E.S.J. 2008. Ethnobryology: Traditional Uses and Folk Classification
of Bryophytes. The Bryologist. Vol. III, Issue 2. 169-217.

HEDWIG. J. 1801. Species Muscorum Frondorosum Descriptae et Tabulis Aeneis Ixxvii
Coloratis Illustatae. Schwaegrichen, F. (Ed. Posthumum). Barthii, Lipsiae.

HEMSLEY, A.R. and I, POOLE. 2004. The evolution of plant physiology: from whole
plants to ecosystems. Linnean Society symposium series, Amsterdam, 492 pp.

HIPOL, R.M., D.B. TOLENTINO, E.S. FERNANDO, and N.M. CADIZ. 2007. Life
strategies of mosses in Mt. Pulag, Benguet Province, Philippines. Philippine
Journal of Science 132(1):11-18.

JESCHKE, M. and K. KIEHL. 2008. Effects of a dense moss layer on germination and
establishment of vascular plants in newly created calcareous grasslands, Flora
203: 557-566.

JOHANSSON, V.. N., LONNELL, U. RANNIK, S. SUNDBERG, and K. HYLANDER.
2015. Air humidity thresholds trigger active moss spore release to extend
dispersal in space and time. Dryad_—Digital_—_ Repository,
http://dx.doi.org/10.5061/dryad.mv346

KENRICK, P. 1994. Alteration of generations in land plants: New phylogenetic and
palaeobotanical evidence. Biological Review 69: 293-330.

KESSLER, M. 2001. Patterns of diversity and range size of selected plant groups along
an elevational transect in the Bolivian Andes. Biodiversity and Conservation 10:
1897-1921.

LAMBIO, I.A.F and LE. BUOT Jr. 2006. Zonation Studies on Mt. Makiling, Philippines:
Its Relevance in Handling Resource Loss. Paper presented at the 6th Annual
Scientific Convention The Philippine Society for the Study of Nature, Inc,
Kapalong, Davao del Norte, Philippines. May 15-21, 2006.

LAPITAN, P.G., E.S. FERNANDO, M.H. SUH, R.U. FUENTES, Y.K. SHIN, N.M.
PAMPOLINA, M.L. CASTILLO, R.P. CERENO, J.H. LEE, S. HAN, T.B. CHOI
and D.K. LEE. 2010. Biodiversity and Natural Resources Conservation in
Protected Areas of Korea and the Philippines. ASEAN-Korea Environmental
Cooperation Unit (AKECU). pp. 49-50.

167

LEON, V. and S. ENGWALD. 1997. A comparison of the diversity and_ life
strategies of epiphytic bryophytes and vascular plants in lowland and
montane forest in Venezuela. Abstracts: 9

LEWIS, L.A. and R.M. McCOURT. 2004. Green algae and the origin of land plants.
American Journal of Botany 91(10): 1535-1556.

LINIS, V.C. 2009. Biogeography of Mindoro mosses. Blumea 54: 290-296.

LINIS. V.C. 2010. The mossflora of Camiguin Island, Philippines and their floristic
relations to some adjacent islands in the archipelago. Telopea 12(4): 525-542.

LINIS, V.C. 2011. Biogeographical notes on the moss floras of Bicol Peninsula in Luzon
and the Catanduanes Islands, the Philippines. Philippine Journal of Science 142:
119-133,

LUBOS, L.C. 2010. Species richness, distribution, and status of mosses in selected
mountains in Mindanao, Philippines. Asian Journal of Biodiversity 1(1):72-90.

McCAIN C.M. 2004. The mid-domain effect applied to elevational gradients: species
richness of small mammals in Costa Rica. Journal of Biogeography 31: 19-31.

McCOY, E.D. 1990. The distribution of insects along elevational
gradients, Oikos 58: 313-322.

MYERS, N., R.A. MITTERMEIER, C.G. MITTERMEIER, G.A.B, DA FONSECA and
J. KENT. 2000. Biodiversity hotspots for conservation priorities. Nature
403:853-858.

PANCHO, J.V. 1983. Vascular Flora of Mount Makiling and Vicinity (Luzon:
Philippines), Part 1. Kalikasan, The Philippine Jounal of Biology, Suppl 1,
Kalikasan Press, Manila.

PANCHO, J.V. and W. SM. GRUEZO. 2006. Vascular Flora of Mount Makiling and
Vicinity (Luzon:Philippines), Part 2. National Academy of Science and
Technology (NAST) Philippines, Department of Science and Technology,
Bicutan, Taguig City and Institute of Biological Sciences, University of the
Philippines Los Bafios, College, Laguna, Philippines (Publishers), 626 p.

PENTECOST, A. 1998. Some observations on the biomass and distribution of
cryptogamic epiphytes in the upper montane forest of the Rwenzori mountains,
Uganda. Global Ecol Biogeogr Lett 7: 273-284.

168

PHARO, E.J. and A.J, BEATTIE, 2002. The association between substrate variability
and bryophyte and lichen diversity in eastern Australian forests. Bryologist 105:
11-26.

PHILIBERT. H. 1884-1902. De l'importance du péristome pour les affinités naturelles
des mousses. Revue Bryologique 11: 49-52, 65-72. Etudes sur le péristome.
Revue Bryologique 11: 81-87; 12: 67-77, 81-85; 13: 17-27, 81-86; 14: 9- 11,

5: 6-12, 24-28, 37-44, 50-56, 65-69, 90-93; 16: 1-9, 39-44, 67-77; 17:

PORLEY. R. and N. HODGETTS. 2005. Mosses and Liverworts. Harper Collins
Publishers, London, UK.

RAHBEK, C. 1995. The elevational gradient of species richness: a uniform pattern?.
Ecography. 18:200-205. Ecology Letters, 8, 224-293.

RENZAGLIA, K.S., DUFF, RJ, NICKRENT, D.L. and D.J. GARBARY. 2000.
Vegetative and reproductive innovations of early land plants: Implications for a
unified phylogeny. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, B
355: 769-793.

RICHARDSON, D.HLS. 1981. The Biology of Mosses. Blackwell, London.

ROSENZWEIG, M.L. 1995. Species Diversity in Space and Time. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.

SAXENA, D.K. and HARINDER. 2004. Uses of Bryophytes. Resonance.

SHAW, A.J. and S.C. BEER. 1999. Life history variation in gametophyte populations of
the moss Ceratodon purpureus (Deptrichaceae). American Journal of Botany 86
(4): 512-521.

SHEVOCK, J.R., I. A. F. LAMBIO and B.C. TAN. 2014. Collection and preparation
techniques of bryophyte specimens in biodiversity inventories. Pages 395-405
in:The Coral Triangle: The 2011 Hearst Philippine Biodiversity Expedition
Proceedings of the California Academy of Sciences, San Francisco.

STEEL, J.B., WILSON, J.B. ANDERSON, B.J., LODGE, R.H.L. and R.S. TANGNEY.
2004. Are bryophyte communities different from higher-plant communities?
Abundance relations. Oikos 104: 479-486.

STEVENS, G.C. 1992. The elevational gradient in altitudinal range: an extension of
Rapaport's latitudinal rule to altitude. American Naturalist 140: 893-911.

169

TAN. B. C. and Z. IWATSUKI. 1991. A new annotated Philippine moss checklist.
Harvard Papers Bot. 3: |

TAN, B.C, 1982. Checklist of mosses of Mt Makiling (Luzon Island, Philippines).
Quarterly Journal of the Taiwan Museum 35: 135-148.

TAN. B.C. 1996. Biogeography of Palawan Mosses. Australian Systematic Botany 9:
193-203.

TAN, B.C. 1998. Noteworthy disjunctive patterns of Malesian mosses, pp. 235-241. In:
R. Hall and J. D. Holloway (eds.), Biogeography and Species Richness,
Distribution, and Status of Mosses in Selected Mountains in Mindanao,
Philippines L. C. Lubos Geological Evolution of SE Asia. Backhuys Publisher,
Leiden.

TERBORGH, J. 1977. Bird species diversity on an Andean elevational gradient. Ecology
58: 1007-1019.

TIPPMAN, S. 2015. Programming tools: Adventure with R. Nature. 517: 109-110.

TURETSKY, M.R. 2003. The role of bryophytes in carbon and nitrogen cycling.
Bryologist 106:395—409.

UCHIDA, M., H. MURAOKA, T. NAKATSUBO, Y. BEKKU and T. UENO. 2002. Net
photosynthesis, respiration, and production of the moss Sanionia uncinata on a
glacier foreland in the high arctic, Ny-Alesund, Svalbard.Arct Antarc Alp Res 34:
287-292.

VELLAK, K., J. PAAL and J. LIIRA. 2003. Diversity and distribution pattem of
bryophytes and vascular plants in a boreal spruce forest. Silva Fenn 37: 3-13.

WIEDER, R.K. and D.H. VITT. 2006. Boreal peatland ecosystems. Springer-Verlag
Berlin Hiedelberg, 188: 425-429.

‘WU, P.C. 2007. The Medicinal Uses of Bryophytes. Acta Botanica Yunnanica. Kunning
Institute of Botany, Academia Sinica, China.

ZHAO, J., ZHENG, Y., ZHANG, B., CHEN, Y. and Y. ZHANG. 2009. Progress in the
study of algae and mosses in biological soil crusts. Frontiers of Biology in China
4: 143-150.

170

Appendix A. R statistical codes used in data analysis.

‘Wiisiall necessary packages, instal just once, no need to-do i again next time
install packages(“vegan”) #diversity package

install packages(“codyn*) Htumover package

install packages("geplot2") Aplotting package

\Wetimport packages

library(vegan)
ibrary{codyn)

librarytggplot2)

witimpont data

‘moss=read delimiclipboard” row=1) species matrix at plot level, excel data “moss”
‘moss,ac-read.delim( “clipboard",row=1) #species matrix a subplot level, excel date "moss"
Sipitac=read delim(*clipboard® row=1) #species matrix at subplot level for Sipit trail
‘makiling.ac=Tead.delim("clipboard" row=1) species matrix af subplot level for makiling tral
_mosses-read delim("clipboard* row=1) #data frame

‘moss. dal=read.detim( “clipboard” row=1) dmoss data list

derived variables
specnumber{moss) Aspecies richness

diversity(moss) # shannon diversity index

NOTE: abundance data can be tallied using pivot table in excel

WHOBJECTIVE 1

plot(moss sac, ylim=c( 0,80) xlim=c(0,32) xxp=c(0,32.4),cex lab 5 wd=2,00l="blue” ylab="Species
‘of Sampling Sites")
par(new=TRUE)
plot(makiting sec ylim=c(0.80) xim=c(0,32) xaxp-c(0,32.4).cex.lb=1.5.1wd=3,col="
Richness" xlab="No. of Sampling Sites")

par(new=TRUE)

plot spit ac yimi0,80) xlim=0,32) xaxp-c(0,32.4),cex lab=I 5.wd=4,col="green” ylab="Species
Richness".main="Species Accumulation Curve" xlab"No. of Sampling Sites")

legend(bottomright, c(°MMFR","Makiling tral""Sipit trail”), Iwd=c(2.3.4)col-c("blue","red”,"green”),bty=n,
inset=0.025,cex=1.5)

mess" xlab="No,

sd" ylab="Species

BCI data, good SAC
<data(BCl)

bei. c=specaccum(BC1)

plot(bci.ac,1wd=2,cex.lab=1.5 ylab="Species Richness" mi

pecies Accumulation Curve”,xlub="No. of Sampling Sites")

{#NMDS ordination
moss.com=metaMDS(moss)

colmc( "red", "gree
peh=c( 16,16)

plot(moss.com,type="n",cex.lab=1.5,cex.axis=1.5)

‘ordispider{moss.com,mossesSelevation,col="gray”,|wd=3)

‘with(mosses,points(moss.com,display = "sites" col = colftrall,pch = pehftraill,ex = 2.5))
legend("topleft”,inset=0.015,legend = with(mosses, levels(tral),col = col,pch = pch, cex=I.5itle = "TRAIL" bry
‘ordiellipse(moss.com,mossesSspOrdiwd=1)

text(moss.com,cex=0.8,col="black")

#HHOBJECTIVE 2
fplot response agaist elevation

plot(mossesSelevation mossesSrichness.cex=2 5,pch=c(16,16).cex.axis-1.5,col
("red "green")[as numeric{mossesStrail)), xlab~"Elevation*ylab="Species Richness" cex lab=1.5)
legendtopleft o(°Makiling trai”,"Sipit tail"), pch=c{ 16,16), col=e(red" green"), inset=0.025,cex=1.5)
plotimossesSee vation mossesSshannonH.cex=2.5 peh=e(16,16),cex.axis“15,col*


171

7 Jab="Elevation® jlab="Shannon Diversity H™cex fab 1.3)
legend botiomright, o("Makiling tril"Sipit trail"), pcho(16,16), colmc("red”, green”), inset=0,025,cex=1.5)
plotimossesSelevation,mossesSabundance,cex™2.5,pchc(16,16),cex.axis=I.5,col=

grcen*)as numeric(mossesStrail)].xlab="Elevation” ylab=" Abundance" cex.lab= 1.5)
legend{topleft. c(*Makiling trail,"Sipit til"), poh=c(16,16), colme(*red*, green”), inset=0.025,cex*1.5)

species tumover
‘moss.tumnover<: tumover(dfemoss dat,
time.var = "elevation",
species. var = "species
abundance. var = "count",
replicate.var = “tral")
‘moss tumover

eplot(moss tumover.ses(elevation iota). colortril)) +
‘geom_fine(size= 2) + theme_bw()+

‘hemel(ext = element textsize=20))+
seale_color_manual(values=c("red’, "green*))+
theme(legend justification-<(0.0), legend postione(0,0))+
labs(x="Elevation* y="Species Compositional Tumover")

MHHODEICTIVE 3
‘Pearson r correlation analysis
‘moss.cor=mosses{c{ "richness", "shannonlt”, "abundance
cor{moss.cor, use="pairwise.complete.obs", met

"clevation*,"temp”,"RE
pearson”)

‘¥Multiple linear regression analysis,
‘ichness.reg=Im(richness~trail+elevation emp+RH light date=-mosses)
‘summary(Fichness.reg)

shannon reg-Im(shannonH~trail+elevationemp+RH+light data-mosses)
‘summary(shannon.reg)

‘bund regin(abundance-irail+elevation temp+RHslightdata-mosses)
summary (abund reg)

#NMDS and envit
plow(moss.com,type="n’cex.lab=I.5 ex axis=.5)

‘with(mosses, points moss.com, display = "sites" col = coal pch = peh{trail.cex = 2.5)
Jegend(*topleftnset=0.015.Jegend = with(mosses, levels(trail)col = colpch = pch,cex= tile = "TRAIL" bry =

moss, envft(moss.com-elevation*trailstemp+RH light, date-mosses, permu = 999)
moss fit
plot(mossfi,cex-1.5)


