NUTRIENT AND PHYTOCHEMICAL CONTENTS, CARBOHYDRATE PROFILE AND ACCEPTABILITY OF RICE-LIKE GRAINS FROM CORN [Zea mays L.]

BETHLEHEM PANISALES MALOLES, RND

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Applied Nutrition

DECEMBER 2014

ABSTRACT

IPB variety 6 corn, a non-waxy white corn and Lagkitan, a waxy white corn, were
combined resulting in 11 different combinations and were processed into rice-like grains. Sensory
characteristics and acceptability of corn-based rice-like grains were determined. Generally, 40:60
(IPB variety 6:Lagkitan) combination showed the highest preference score in terms of
cohesiveness, flavor and hardness and was regarded as the most acceptable combination bascd on
the 7-point Hedonic rating scale. The 40:60 (IPB variety 6:Lagkitan) combination was further
analyzed for its nutritional and health value. There were significant reductions (a < 0.05) in the
moisture, crude protein, crude fat, zinc and iron content as well as phytochemical content when
the 40:60 (IPB variety 6:Lagkitan) rice-like grain combinations were cooked. In vitroglycemic index was also determined and 40:60 (IPB variety 6:Lagkitan) rice-like
grain combination was classified into intermediate glycemic index (GI) food of 67.03 % as
compared to rice with a relatively high GI of > 70 %. Starch hydrolysis tended to be more rapid
for waxy samples than for high amylose samples. The results showed that high amylose
concentration was negatively correlated to glycemic index value. The nutrient contribution to the
recommended energy and nutrient intake for Filipinos (% RENI) of 40:60 (IPB variety
6:Lagkitan) rice-like grain combination was considered as good source of energy, protein, and zinc based on CODEX classification.

INTRODUCTION

In many developing countries, rice is the basis of food security and is intimately
associated with local ways of life. Rice (Oryzu sativaL.) is one of the world’s most
important crops, providing a staple food for nearly half of the global population (FAO
2004). Rice is the staple food in the Philippines supplying about 35% of the average
Filipino's daily caloric intake.

However, white rice being a staple food and major source of calories may
contribute to a high dietary glycemic load. Several epidemiologic studies have linked
higher dietary glycemic load, primarily from white rice, to an increased risk of metabolic
diseases, such as obesity, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and metabolic syndrome(Zhang et al.
2010).

Maize (Zea mays L.) is the third most important food crop in the world and a
major source of energy, protein, and other nutrients for both human and livestock. It is
also an important human food in the Philippines. About one-fifth of the population
depends on white corn as a staple grain. Over 60% of the seed planted for grain corn in
the Philippines is supplied by traditional varieties (Floros et al. 2010). Corn is important
in Asia as a livestock feed and a staple food wherein about 70 percent of our total com
production is consumed as human food; the rest is used for livestock and poultry feeds. Com is also
used in our industry in manufacture of com by-products like com starch, textile, paints, com oil, paper,
etc,

It is recognized that foods not only provide basic nutrition, but can also prevent

diseases as well as ensure good health and longetivity (Rodriguez et al. 2006). IPB

variety 6 white corn is a high amylose type of corn which has intermediate glycemic
index value. Unlike rice, white corn has lower glycemic index (GI). Low GI makes white
corn slower to digest thereby releasing glucose gradually into the blood stream, thus
lessening the risk of diabetes. And because of the economic and health importance of maize,
product development and improvement should be carefully studied and investigated. Due
to the fact that people’s demands keep changing over time, product innovation is very

important.

Objectives of the Study

The general objective of this study was to develop an acceptable rice-like grain
from IPB variety 6 corn (non-waxy) and Lagkitan white corn (waxy) flour. The study
specifically aimed to:

1. evaluate the sensory characteristics and acceptability of the different rice-like

grain combinations;

2. measure proximate composition (moisture, fat, protein, crude fiber, total ash
and carbohydrate), limiting amino acids (lysine and tryptophan), and mineral content
(zinc, calcium, iron), of the IPB variety 6 flour, Lagkitan white corn flour and most
acceptable Lagkitan-based and IPB variety 6-based rice-like grain;

3. measure the carbohydrate profile (starch, amylose and amylopectin) of the IPB
variety 6 flour, Lagkitan white corn flour and most acceptable Lagkitan-based and IPB

variety 6-based rice-like grain;


4. measure the dietary fiber and glycemic index of the IPB variety 6 flour,
Lagkitan white corn flour and most acceptable Lagkitan-based and IPB variety 6-
based rice-like grain;

5. measure the anti-nutrient (oxalate and phytate), and phytochemical components
(antioxidant, phenols, tannins, flavonoids, saponins, and alkaloids) of the IPB variety 6
flour, Lagkitan white corn flour and most acceptable Lagkitan-based and IPB variety
6-based rice-like grain; and

6. correlate the carbohydrate profile of the most acceptable IPB variety 6-based

and Lagkitan-based rice-like grains with their glycemic index.

Significance of the study

Corn flour has dietary fiber which can help lower cholesterol levels and may
reduce the risks of constipation. Also, according to Linus Pauling Institute Micronutrient
Information Center, corn flour is cholesterol free and a source of phytonutrients. Corn
flour is also naturally low in sodium that can help to prevent high blood pressure.

Studies about corn nowadays are of great importance. According to the
Department of Agriculture, corn has its health benefits and can be used in attaining food
security. Unlike rice, white corn has a low glycemic index (GI) which slows its digestion,
thereby releasing glucose gradually into the blood stream and lessening the risk of
diabetes.

Celiac disease or gluten-sensitive enteropathy is a digestive and autoimmune

disorder that results in damage to the lining of the small intestine when foods with gluten

are eaten. The damage to the intestine makes it hard for the body to absorb nutrients,
especially fat, calcium, iron and folate. Thus, people with celiac disease are susceptible to
osteoporosis, birth defects, infertility, and anemia.

In this study, rice-like grains produced were made from a combination of IPB
variety 6 corn flour and Lagkitan white corn flour. According to Dr. Stefano Guandalini,
there is no scientific evidence showing that corn contains cross-reacting proteins with
gluten. Thus, corn is safe for people with celiac disease to consume (Guandalini et al.
2013).

Since average Filipino’s diet regularly feature rice, rice-like grains made from
corn as compliment for rice lessen the demand for rice. Philippines’ greater demand for
corn will definitely result in a cheap production and the country would no longer have to
import rice. Aside from the health benefits of corn, white corn is easier to grow and has
less capital demand as compare to rice. Thus, corn and corn products could help reduce

hunger and malnutrition in the country.

Date and Place of the Study

The study was conducted from December 2013 to March 2014 at the Institute of

Human Nutrition and Food (IHNF) and Institute of Plant Breeding (IPB) at the

University of the Philippines Los Bafios (UPLB), Laguna.

Scope and Limitation of the Study

This study only examined two varieties of corn (IPB variety 6 corn and Lagkitan
white corn). It only determined the nutrient, phytochemical content, carbohydrate profile
and acceptability of the rice-like grains. Only the most acceptable rice-like grains was
regarded and examined. Among the minerals, only zinc, iron and calcium were analyzed.

Rice-like grains were produced at laboratory scale only.

Conceptual Framework

INPUT PROCESS OUTPUT
Development of rice- - © Possibility of producing rice-
like grains naire like grains made of waxy and
Profile of the 0 ical Analyses non-waxy corn flour
respondents in terms of: *® Most acceptable rice-like grain
o Age combination

o Sex

Fig. 1. Conceptual Framework

Figure | describes the conceptual framework of the study wherein the input is
consisting of the following: development of rice-like grains and the profile of the
respondents. On the other side, the process being used is through questionnaire with 7-
point Hedonic Scale, and KruskalWalis Test. The researcher wants to find out the
possibility of making rice-like grains made of waxy and non-waxy corm flour and
possibility of producing most acceptable rice-like grain combination. The most

acceptable combination will be tested for the nutritional and health value.

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

Corn (Zea mays L.)

Physiology and Taxonomy

Botanically, corn (Zea mays) belongs to the grass family and is a tall annual plant
with a wide fibrous root system. It is a cross pollinating species, with the female (ear) and
male (tassel) flowers in separate places on the plant. Weight depends on genetic,
environmental and cultural practices. Grain makes up about 42 percent of the dry weight
of the plant. The kernels are often white or yellow in color, although black, red and
mixtures of colors are also found. There are a number of grain types, distinguished by
differences in the chemical compounds deposited or stored in the kernel (FAO 1992).

Corn kernel is made up of four primary parts: (1) tip cap, (2) pericarp, (3) germ,
and (4) endosperm (Figure 2). The endosperm constitutes for the main for the main part
of the corn kernel. It consists of 85 to 90% starch, 8 to 10% protein and small amount of
oil and other compounds. Starch is desired for ethanol production and some other starch
and sugar based chemistry. Germ is the living seed where the proteins and most of the
vegetable oil are. It constitutes for about 11 to 12% of the corn kernel. The pericarp is the
dense outer layer of corn kernels consisting of layers of dead cells. The cutinized outer
layer of the pericarp prevents the absorption of water into the corn kernel. The tip cap is

the remaining fibrous material that connects the com kernel to the cob. Of these the oil

and the germ are the most desirable parts for human consumption with high digestible

protein and energy rich oil (Singh and Johnston 2004).

Endosperm

Fig. 2. Structure of the rice grain (adapted from Singh and Johnston 2004).

Processing Possibilities of Corn

Corn (Zea mays L.) was considered as staple food in the Philippines. It can be
directly consumed as food at various developmental stages from baby corn to mature
grain. It is the second most important crop in the Philippines. White maize, in particular,
is preferred in most of the developing country as human food as compare to yellow maize
(Mejia 2003). Maize can be processed for a range of uses both as an ingredient in food or
drinks such as corn syrup in softdrinks or maize meal, or for industrial purposes. It can
also be milled to make food products such as corn bread, corn chips, and cereals. Maize
grains are also considered to be a key industrial raw material used for making starch,
glucose, and oil (Kyung-joo Park 2001). Maize is the major source of starch worldwide,

and is used as food ingredient either in its native form or chemically modified (White

1994). The oil and protein are also considered for commercial value as by-products of

starch production. They are also used in food manufacturing (OGTR 2008).

Nutritional and Health Value

Nutritionally, maize is superior to other cereals except for protein. As what Mejia
(2003) stated, maize compare to wheat and rice has higher fat, iron, and fibre content.
Storage protein is found in the embryo and in the endosperm of maize. The relative
amount of protein is highest in the embryo but because the endosperm occupies a greater
part of the kernel, it contributes the greatest total amount of protein (FAO 1992). The
endosperm proteins can be divided into prolamins, collectively referred to as zeins, and
comprising about 52% of kernel nitrogen; glutelins (ca 25% of kernel nitrogen); albumins
(ca 7%); and globulins (ca 5%).

Zeins, which accumulate in the rough endoplasmic reticulum of endosperm cells,
contain large amounts of the amino acids glutamine, proline, leucine, and alanine but
very low in the essential amino acids lysine and tryptophan. Embryo proteins provide
higher levels of tryptophan and lysine (FAO 1992).

Lysine aids in building muscle tissue, recovering from injury or surgery, and
absorbing calcium effectively. It also helps the body produce antibodies, enzymes, and
hormones. Tryptophan, on the other hand, is needed for normal growth in infants and for
nitrogen balance in adults (Balangen 2012).

This study used IPB variety 6 white corn. It contains high level of limiting amino

acids such as lysine and tryptophan, which other corn varieties lack. The IPB variety 6

corn also has high amylose content and intermediate Glycemic Index (GI) which slows
down digestion and energy release.

Waxy Maize is another type of maize that was used in this study. Waxy maize
kernels contain almost entirely amylopectin as their starch (rather than the normal 70%
amylopectin and 30% amylose). Waxy maize is preferred for food in some parts of East
Asia and for some industrial uses; it produces a starch similar to tapioca (OGTR 2008).

Escobar (1992) studied synthetic rice grains from local starches and flour.
Advantages of producing synthetic rice were mentioned in the study such as increasing
the nutritional value of the grains, increasing the utilization of starchy root crops for

human foods, and the availability of synthetic rice grains any time of the year.

Effect of Processing on Nutritional and Health Value

Starch has powerful thickening properties. When starch is combined with water
and heated, individual starch granules absorb the liquid and swell. This process, known
as gelatinization, is what causes the liquid to thicken. Gelatinization occurs at different
temperatures for different types of starch. As a general rule of thumb, root-based starches
like potato and arrowroot, for instance, thicken at lower temperatures but break down
more quickly, whereas cereal-based starches like corn and wheat, for example, thicken at
higher temperatures but break down more slowly.

Application of heat irreversibly denatures the protein. Enzyme inhibitors present
in plant food, are denatured or inactivated at 100°C and hence are no longer able to

inhibit the action of enzymes such as trypsin, which is involved in the digestion of protein

in the small intestine (FAO 1990). Another would be the reduced availability of essential
amino acids such as lysine, which is due to the Maillard reaction between reducing sugars
and the amino groups of proteins and amino acids.

Cooking is responsible for losses of vitamins and minerals in foods. However, the
bioavailability of some minerals, such as iron, may be increased by cooking (Severi
1997).

Cooking process may also result to a consequence like nutrient loss. Exposure to
heat, light or oxygen will alter the nutrients found in food, and methods that involve
water often reduce the amounts of nutrients as these get ‘washed out’ and left behind.
Certain nutrients, such as sodium, potassium and calcium, may be lost when cooking in
water. This induces leaching to occur. Nutrients lost during leaching are usually
discarded with the cooking water. However, there are also advantages in cooking of
foods; this includes a reduction of the number of possible microorganisms, an increase in
digestibility and the increased availability of certain phytonutrients (Diaz 2011).

Aside from source of carbohydrate, resistant starches, amylose, amylopectin
levels, and fiber content, cooking may also influence the glycemic index of a food. The
starch in raw food is stored in compact granules that are difficult to digest. The cooking
process causes hydrogen-bonding sites involved in intermolecular bonds of starch
molecules to engage more water, releasing individual molecules (Allen et al. 2012).
Gelatinization happens when starch molecules enter the aqueous solution and sequential
process followed due to the disruption of starch granules (Bennion and Scheule 2000).
Starch is gelatinized at approximately 60-90°C and becomes susceptible to hydrolysis by

the action of alpha and beta amylase. Incomplete cooking processes followed by cooling

results in starch becoming resistant to digestion leading to slow digestion and lower

glycemic response (Allen et al. 2012).

Sensory Characteristics

Sensory quality of foods comprised of texture, visual appearance, taste and aroma.
The only way to evaluate the sensory characteristics of food is to ask the opinion of the
consumers. This is due to the fact that sensory quality is not an intrinsic food
characteristic, but the result of interactions between human and the kind of food (Costell

and Duran n.d.).

Appearance

Appearance of the food is very important to the consumers. There are two
separate categories of appearance: color attributes and geometric attributes. Of these two
categories, color is more important. Color of the food may indicate ripeness or spoilage.
Changes of colors may also be due to enzymatic or non-enzymatic reactions. Naturally
occurring pigments may also play a role in food color. Geometric attributes may depend
on the product and how the consumers expect to have certain size and shape (Potter and

Hotchkiss 1998).


Aroma

Aroma was considered to be one of the most important factors related to food
palatability. Food aroma consists of volatile compounds depending on the sources that
could alter the taste and even the preferred perception of food (Kubota 2007). Food

aroma can be evaluated by smelling the food.

Flavor

Flavor, like color and texture, is a quality factor. It includes taste sensations
perceived by the tongue such as sweet, salty, sour and bitter. There are some compounds
that affect taste and aroma of food. Such compounds are sulfur, astringency, hot, and
fruity. Flavor can also be influenced by bacteria, yeasts, molds, enzymes, temperature,
moisture/dryness, light, time, and additives. Food flavor is very subjective and is difficult
to measure. People differ in their ability to taste foods and they also differ in their own

preferences (Potter and Hotchkiss 1998).

Texture

The textural qualities of a food have a relationship to the appearance of a product
and to its evaluation in the mouth. Texture is defined as “all the mechanical, geometrical
and surface attributes of a product perceptible by means of mechanical, tactile, and where

appropriate, visual, auditory receptors”. Evaluation of texture is a complex and dynamic

process that comprises visual perception of the product surface, product behavior in
response to previous handling, and integration of in-mouth sensations experienced during

mastication and further swallowing (Costell and Duran n.d.).

Nutritional Properties

Proximate Composition

Moisture content.Moisture content (MC) is the amount of water in the grain.
Water is the simplest of all the nutrients, yet it is considered to be the most important
(Kleiner 1999). And there are different states of water present in foods. The three states
of water are free water, absorbed water, and water of hydration (Nielsen 2010). Free
water refers to water retaining its physical properties and acting as dispersing agent for
colloids and solvent for salts. Absorbed water, another state of water, is held tightly or is
occluded in cell walls or protoplasm and is held tightly to proteins; while, water of
hydration is water bounded chemically such as in lactose monohydrate and some salts.
The method in determining moisture may measure more or less of the moisture present in

a particular food may depend on the form of the water present.

Crude protein.Protein content in food varies widely. Protein quantitative analysis
is necessary for quality control and is a prerequisite for accurate food labeling. Crude

protein is a conventional expression of the total content of nitrogen compounds of the

analyzed product. It can be calculated by multiplying the corresponding nitrogen content
by a conversion factor (ICC 2013).

Wheat protein is very unique because of its exceptional ability to form a
viscoelastic dough. These unusual dough characteristics are mainly attributable to the
proteins in wheat flour. The major storage protein of wheat is gluten. Gluten is a
heterogeneous mixture of proteins, mainly gliadins and glutenins, with limited solubility
in water. The formation of a viscoelastic dough capable of entrapping gas during
fermentation is attributed entirely to the gluten proteins (MacRitchie 1992). Since corn
flour lacks gluten, egg white will serve as a binding agent to form dough in the

preparation of making rice-like grains.

Crude fat.Crude fat is the term used to refer to the crude mixture of fat-soluble
material present in a sample. Crude fat, also known as the ether extract or the free lipid
content, is the traditional measure of fat and the most common method of extraction
usually employs a Soxhlet apparatus (Hui et al. 2005).

The common approach for total crude fat determination is based on the solubility
of lipids in non-polar organic solvents such as hexanes, petroleum ether, or supercritical
liquid carbon dioxide with or without a solvent modifier.

The two methods most commonly used to determine crude fat are wet extraction
and dry extraction. A common dry extraction method is Soxhlet extraction method is
performed with anhydrous ether. It is common crude fat determination method in many
foods. This technique extracts the crude fat into ether which is finally evaporated. Wet

extraction, on the other hand, is performed with the water remaining in the sample.

Crude fiber.Crude fiber remains after food is digested with alkali and acid, which
destroys all soluble and some insoluble fiber. Crude fiber values include only variable
portions of the cellulose, hemicelluloses, and lignin present in dietary fiber (Spiller
2001). Crude fiber has been reported to recover on the average 20% of the hemicellulose,
10 to 50% of the lignin, and 50 to 80% of the cellulose (Heller and Hackler 1978).
Crude fiber is a useful parameter in food and feed analyses. Generally,
considerable changes in texture and consumer acceptance are accompanied by relatively

small changes in crude fiber content (Pomeranz and Meloan 1994).

Ash content.Ash content is a part of proximate analysis for nutritional evaluation.
It refers to the inorganic residue remaining after either ignition or complete oxidation of
organic matter in food stuff. It also represents the total mineral content in food (Nielsen
2010).

There are two major types of ashing used according to Nielsen (2010). First is dry
ashing which is primarily for proximate composition and for some types of specific
mineral analyses and the other one is wet ashing (oxidation) used as a preparation for the
analysis of certain minerals.

Based on USDA, ARS (2009), flours and meals vary from 0.3 to 1.4% ash. Pure
starch contains 0.3% and wheat germ 4.3% ash. It would be expected that grain and grain
products with bran would tend to be higher in ash content than such products without
bran.

Determining the ash content may be important for several reasons. It is a part of

proximate analysis for nutritional evaluation. One can usually expect a constant elemental

content from the ash of animal products, but that from plant sources is variable (Nielsen

2010).

Carbohydrate content.Carbohydrates constitute the major class of organic
nutrients within plant tissues. The carbohydrate group includes such important
compounds as glucose, fructose, sucrose, lactose, starch, glycogen, chitin, and cellulose.
Carbohydrates perform many important biological functions within the animal body. For
example; glucose, the end product of carbohydrate digestion in animals, serves as the

major energy source of brain and nervous tissue.

Limiting Amino Acid

Proteins are the major structural and functional components of all cells in the
body. They consist of chains of amino acid subunits joined together by peptide bonds.
From a nutritional perspective, an important aspect of a protein is its amino acid
composition. Amino acid is an organic compound containing an amino group and an
acidic group. The acidic group is usually a carboxylic acid. They are important because
they are use as substrates for protein synthesis. Essential amino acids are those amino
acids for which bodily synthesis is inadequate to meet metabolic needs and that must be

supplied in the diet (Mahan and Escottt-Stump 2004).

Lysine.Maize is considered to be one of the major cereal crop for both livestock

feed and human nutrition. It has high content of carbohydrates, fats, proteins, some

vitamins and minerals. Cereal proteins, however, have poor nutritional values because of
lower content of essential amino acids such as lysine, tryptophan and threonine (Prasanna
et al. 2001).

Quality protein maize contains high level of essential amino acids such as lysine
and tryptophan. Amino acids are the building blocks of protein. Lysine is said to be
important for proper growth, and plays an essential role in the production of carnitine- a
nutrient responsible for converting fatty acids into energy and helping to lower

cholesterol (Murthy and Janardanasarma1999).

Tryptophan.Tryptophan, like lysine, is also an essential amino acid. Thus, it
cannot be synthesized by the body and must come from food. Tryptophan is the precursor
for the synthesis of serotonin, an important neuromediator associated to mood, stress
response, sleep and appetite regulation.

Experimental research has shown that tryptophan can be an important determinant
of mood, cognition, and behavior. Interestingly, tryptophan can act as a substrate for
niacin synthesis through the kynurenine/quinolinic acid pathway. Therefore, tryptophan
is important to prevent the symptoms associated with niacin deficiency when dietary

intake of this vitamin is low (Richard et al. 2009).


Mineral Content

Minerals play an important role in the maintenance of human health. Iron for
example, is an essential component of blood and enzymes involved in electron transfer.
Its deficiency results in fatigue, headache and sore tongue in addition to anemia. Calcium,
on the other hand, is needed for bone formation while zinc is essential for protein and
nucleic acid synthesis, carbohydrate metabolism, successful pregnancy, delivery and
normal development. Cereals are rich in minerals but the bioavailability of these minerals
is usually low due to the presence of anti-nutritional factors such as phytate and

polyphenoles (Nadeem 2010).

Zinc.Zinc is an essential for humans, animals, and plants. It is a trace mineral
essential to all forms of life because of its fundamental role in gene expression, cell
development and replication. Zinc may be found in all parts of the body such as in
organs, tissues, bones, fluids, and cells. It is vital for many biological functions in the
body and is needed for growth and cell division especially during pregnancy. It is also
vital for fertility. Zinc is also necessary for the immune system and allows strong effect
which helps the T-cells to recognize and fight off certain infections. It is also needed for
taste, smell, and appetite wherein it activates areas of the brain that receive and process
information from taste and smell sensors. High concentrations of zinc are found in the
retina which made zinc vital for vision. Zinc is also vital for skin, hair and nail.

Lean red meat, whole-grain cereals, pulses, and legumes provide the highest

concentrations of zinc 25-50 mg/kg (380-760 mmol/kg) raw weight. Processed cereals

with low extraction rates, polished rice, and lean meat or meat with high fat content have
a moderate zinc content 10-25 mg/kg (150-380 mmol/kg) (FAO 2001). Phytates are
present in whole-grain breads, cereals, legumes, and other foods. This binds with zinc
and inhibits its absorption. Thus, even if many grain- and plant-based foods are known to
be good sources of zinc, its bioavailability is still lower than that from animal foods
(Wise 1995). Also, some non-digestible plant constituents such as dietary fibers and
lignin can bind zinc in ways that inhibit its absorption thereby engendering dietary zinc
deficiency. Calcium is also known to inhibit zinc adsorption and often acts synergistically
with phytate in inhibiting zinc adsorption (Nriagu 2007).

In the Philippines, the zinc requirement for adults is based on the intake that will
meet the daily absorbed zinc requirements of 0.072 and 0.059 mg/kg for adult males and
females, respectively and adjusted for bioavailability of 30% following the
recommendation of FAO/WHO (RENI 2002) (Table 1).

The causes of zinc deficiency may be due to nutritional causes such as
consumption of food items with either low zinc contents or unavailable forms of zinc,
and conditioned or secondary deficiency related to diseases and genetic malfunctions that
impair intestinal absorption and/or increase intestinal loss of zinc (Nriagu 2007). Zinc
deficiency is characterized by growth retardation, loss of appetite, and impaired immune
function. In more severe cases, zinc deficiency causes hair loss, diarrhea, delayed sexual
maturation, impotence, hypogonadism in males, and eye and skin lesions. Weight loss,
delayed healing of wounds, taste abnormalities, and mental lethargy can also occur.

Many of these symptoms are non-specific and often associated with other health


conditions; therefore, a medical examination is necessary to ascertain whether a zinc

deficiency is present (IOM 2001).

Table |.Recommended daily intakes of zinc for Filipinos (RENI 2002).

POPULATION GROUP

Infants, mos
birth - < 6
6-<12

Children, yr
1-3
4-6
7-9

Males, yr
10-12
13-15
16-18
19-29
30-49
50-64
65+

Females, yr
10-12
13-15
16-18
19-29
30-49
50-64
65+

Pregnant women
1* trimester

2™ trimester
3“trimester

Lactating women

1* 6 months
2" 6 months

Source: RENI 2002

ZINC (mg)

1.4
4.2

4.5
5.4
5.4



Iron.|ron has several vital functions in the body. It serves as a carrier of oxygen to
the tissues from the lungs by red blood cell haemoglobin, as a transport medium for
electrons within cells, and as an integrated part of important enzyme systems in various
tissues (FAO 2001).

In the human diet the primary sources of heme iron are the hemoglobin and
myoglobin from consumption of meat, poultry, and fish whereas non-heme iron is
obtained from cereals, pulses, legumes, fruits, and vegetables. The average absorption of
heme iron from meat-containing meals is about 25 percent. The absorption of heme iron
can vary from about 40 percent during iron deficiency to about 10 percent during iron
repletion. Heme iron can be degraded and converted to non-heme iron if foods are
cooked at a high temperature for too long. Calcium is the only dietary factor that
negatively influences the absorption of heme iron and does so to the same extent that it
influences non-heme iron (FAO 2001).

Calcium, consumed as a salt or in dairy products interferes significantly with the
absorption of both heme and non-heme iron. Because calcium and iron are both essential
nutrients, calcium cannot be considered to be an inhibitor in the same way as phytates or
phenolic compounds (Aggett and Favier 1993).

The recommended intake for iron is based on the amount of dietary iron needed to
meet absorbed iron requirements. This would correspond to the amount needed to cover
basal losses plus growth for children and menstrual losses for women of reproductive
age, adjusted for bioavailability of iron in typical complete meals consumed by Filipinos.

The Philippine recommended intake for iron is based on FAO/WHO (2002)

shown in Table 2. These recommendations are estimates for basal losses, local data on

menstrual losses and on bioavailability, iron absorption rates in the average Filipino diets,
food consumption surveys, and in-vitro studies on non-heme iron availability from rice-

based diets.

Table 2.Recommended daily intakes of iron for Filipinos (RENI, 2002).

POPULATION GROUP IRON (mg)
Infants, mos
birth - <6 0.38
6-<12 10
Children, yr
1-3 8
4-6 9
7-9 ll
Males, yr
10-12 13
13-15 20
16-18 14
19-29 12
30-49 12
50-64 12
65+ 12
Females, yr
10-12 19
13-15 21
16-18 27
19-29 27
30-49 27
50-64 27
65+ 10
Pregnant women
1* trimester 27
2™ trimester 34
3 trimester 38
Lactating women
1* 6 months 27
2" 6 months 30

Source: RENI 2002


For infants, it is assumed that the iron provided by breast milk is adequate to meet
the iron needs of infants exclusively fed human milk from birth to 6 months. The
consumption of iron-rich foods and iron-fortified foods is recommended for women from
adolescence onwards.

Iron supplementation is recommended to meet the needs of pregnant and lactating
women. The estimated iron requirement during the first trimester of pregnancy and the
first six months of lactation are actually lower than the requirement for menstruating non-
pregnant, non-lactating women. However, the recommended intakes for non-pregnant
and non-lactating women are adopted to allow for build-up of iron stores during these

periods.

Calcium.Calcium salts provide rigidity to the skeleton and calcium ions play a
role in many if not most metabolic processes. Calcium is an essential nutrient required for
critical biological functions such as nerve conduction, muscle contraction, cell
adhesiveness, mitosis, blood coagulation and structural support of the skeleton (Miller
and Anderson 1999).

The recommended nutrient intakes of calcium for Filipinos are shown in Table 3.
These are based on calcium requirement estimates which are considered low animal
protein intake levels. The FAO/WHO (2002) provided these estimates for countries
where the animal protein intake per capita is around 20-40 g only compared with 60-80 g

in developed countries.


Table 3.Recommended daily intakes of calcium for Filipinos (RENI, 2002).

POPULATION GROUP CALCIUM (mg)
Infants, mos
birth - <6 200
6-<12 400
Children, yr
1-3 500
4-6 550
7-9 700
Males, yr
10-12 1000
13-15 1000
16-18 1000
19-29 750
30-49 750
50-64 750
65 + 800
Females, yr
10-12 1000
13-15 1000
16-18 1000
19-29 750
30-49 750
50-64 800
65+ 800
Pregnant women
1* trimester 800
2™ trimester 800
3" trimester 800
Lactating women
1* 6 months 750
2°16 months 750

Source: RENI 2002

Calcium can be obtained from foods naturally rich in calcium such as dairy foods,
from calcium-fortified foods and beverages, trom supplements or from a combination of
these. Other foods such as some green leafy vegetables, legumes and cereals provide

calcium, but generally in lower amounts per serving than do dairy foods. Also, some

components such as phytates in cereals and oxalates in spinach reduce the bioavailability
of calcium.

Calcium has earned the title of “super nutrient” because of its role in reducing the
risk for osteoporosis, hypertension and possibly colon cancer, as well as other disorders
(Miller et al. 2001). Phytates, present in the husks of many cereals as well as in nuts,
seeds, and legumes, can form insoluble calcium phytate salts in the gastrointestinal tract.
Excess oxalates can precipitate calcium in the bowel but are not an important factor in

most diets (FAO 2002).

Carbohydrate Profile

Starch

Starch is a carbohydrate occurring in granular form in the organs of certain plants.
Plants store glucose as the polysaccharide starch. It is unique among carbohydrates due to
the fact that it occurs naturally in granules which are dense, insoluble and hydrate very
slightly in cold water (De Leon et al. 1999). The cereal grains such as wheat, rice, corn,
oats, barley as well as tubers such as potatoes are rich in starch. Starch can be separated
into two fractions--amylose and amylopectin. Natural starches are mixtures of amylose

(10-20%) and amylopectin (80-90%),


Amylose and amylopectin

The major chemical component of the corn kernel is starch, which provides up to
72 to 73 percent of the kernel weight. Other carbohydrates are simple sugars present as
glucose, sucrose and fructose in amounts that vary from | to 3 percent of the kernel. The
starch in maize is made up of two glucose polymers: amylose, an essentially linear
molecule, and amylopectin, a branched form. The composition of maize starch is
genetically controlled. In common maize, with either the dent or flint type of endosperm,
amylose makes up 25 to 30 percent of the starch and amylopectin makes up 70 to 75
percent. Waxy maize may contain even a starch that is 100 percent amylopectin (FAO
1992).

Amylose is considered to be linear polymer containing the a-1,4-glycosydic
linkages. Amylopectin, on the other hand, is a branch polymer, in which roughly twenty,
twenty-fifths glucose molecules have branched points (Vegh 2004). Based on amylose
content rice can be classified as waxy (1-2% amylose), very low amylose content (2-9%
amylose), low amylose content (10-20% amylose), intermediate amylose content (20-
25% amylose), and high amylose content (25-33% amylose) (Mutters and Thompson
2009).

Viscosity, shear resistance, gelatinization, textures, solubility, tackiness, gel
stability, cold swelling and retrogradation are all functions of amylose/amylopectin ratio
(Satin n.d.). Amylose forms useful gels and films. Its association and crystallization
(retrogradation) on cooling and storage decreases storage stability causing shrinkage and

the release of water (syneresis). Increasing amylose concentration decreases gel

stickiness but increases gel firmness. On the other hand, retrogradation is affected by
lipid content, amylose/amylopectin ratio, chain length of amylose and amylopectin, and
solid concentration. Amylopectin interferes with the interaction between amylose chains
(and retrogradation) and its solution can lead to an initial loss in viscosity and followed
by a more slimy consistency (Chaplin 2012).

Studies conducted by Frei et al. (2003) and Hu et al. (2004) reveal that high
amylose rice produce lower GI value. This is due to high amylose slowed the digestion
rate. There is greater hydrogen bonding between glucose units in amylose molecule than
amylopectin thus less exposure to enzymatic digestion (Barakatun 2005). In addition, the
larger size of amylopectin provides more open and wide surface for enzymatic attack as

compared to smaller amylose (Bennion and Schuele 2000; McWilliams 2001).

Dietary Fiber

Dietary fiber was defined by Spiller (2001) as a plant substances not digested by
human digestive enzymes, including plant cell wall substances (cellulose, hernicelluloses,
pectin, and lignin) as well as intracellular polysaccharides such as gums and mucilages.

Vegetables, cereals, and fruits are the main sources of dietary fiber. Although
bran is advertised as an excellent source of fiber, it is not unique nor is it as nutritious as
fruits and vegetables and some other whole unprocessed cereals.

Dietary fiber often has a negative impact on food preference. Most people, for

example, prefer white bread to wholemeal bread and white rice to brown rice. One reason

for this may be that fiber-rich foods often require considerable effort to chew (Spiller
2001).

Physical factors are also significant factors on how dietary fiber influence satiety
and hence, energy intake. This is due to the distention of the stomach that is believed to
serve as one of the signals to stop eating. Also, several investigators have speculated that
the bulk associated with high-fiber foods induces a feeling of satiety and thus reduces
meal size and food intake (Cho and Dreher 2001).

Based on the study conducted by Pastors et al. (1991), both normal subjects and
diabetics that take fiber at a meal could improve the glycemic response to subsequent
meal. High-fiber foods also are rich in phytochemicals and phytoestrogens that may

favorably affect glucose metabolism and insulin sensitivity (Anderson and Hanna 1999).

Glycemic Index

Carbohydrates react in different ways on the glucose level in the blood. Therefore,
not all carbohydrates affect the blood sugar level in the same way and it is important to
know which carbohydrates produce the lowest amount of sugar in the bloodstream. The
glycemic index is a ranking of foods based on their potential to raise blood glucose. It is a
ranking of carbohydrates on a scale from 0 to 100 according to the extent to which they
raise blood sugar levels after eating.

Although glycemic index seems simple, it is quite difficult to measure due to the
numerous factors influencing its response to carbohydrate. These factors includes

intrinsic properties of foods such as glucose-chain length and ratio of amylose to

amylopectin, and the extrinsic factors, such as total meal composition, overall diet and
variations within the host (Cummings and Stephan 2007). Also, the nature of the
carbohydrates, type of sugar, status of starch, complete food matrix and presence of anti-
nutrients may play a role in overall glycemic response (Jenkins et al. 2002). Furthermore,
previous meals consumed could have an effect on the glycemic index of the current meal.
Also, the presence of retrograded starch, formed after cooking and cooling of starch was
known to decrease the glycemic index value.

From the nutrition perspective, it is not particularly important to know the exact
glycemic index value of every food due to the fact that it will change depending on the
various factors listed. What is important is to be able to identify which food are absorbed
over a longer period of time (low GI; GI < 55), which foods elicit a rapid surge of
glucose (energy) into the bloodstream (high GI; GI > 70), and which are in between
(intermediate GI; GI 55-70) (Gibson 2010).

Foods with a high GI are those which are rapidly digested and absorbed and result
in marked fluctuations in blood sugar levels. Low-GI foods, on the other hand, produce
gradual rises in blood sugar and insulin levels, and have proven benefits for health due to
its slower rate of digestion and absorption. Low GI diets have been shown to improve
both glucose and lipid levels in people with diabetes (type 1 and type 2). They have
benefits for weight control because they help control appetite and delay hunger. Low GI
diets also reduce insulin levels and insulin resistance (Burani 2006).

Knowing the nutritional value of foods is essential especially in promoting
healthy eating. Glycemic index will give an indication of how sugar is being used in the

body and which carbohydrates have higher sugar content and should be restricted. It is

very important since certain carbohydrates turn to sugar more so than others, and thus
create the potential for high blood sugar. Some of those carbohydrate-rich foods are
cakes, candies, and other sweets, and also includes other products such as potatoes,
refined white flour, white rice, and white bread. Lower glycemic index are more likely to
keep the energy level to be at its height of performance. Also, carbohydrates that have a
lower glycemic index create slow burning energy that keeps a person going longer in
addition to maintaining that full feeling that prevents overeating (Gibson 2010).

According to Bahado-Singh et al. (2011)boiling elicits lower glycemic index
values when compared to frying, baking, and roasting based on their study about sweet
potatoes. This may be due to the amylose-amylopectin ratio. Studies revealed that rice
with higher amylose content was accompanied by lowered metabolic response and lower
glycemic index values. Boiling induces gelatinization, and permanently disrupts the
amylose-amylopectin structure of the starch complex, thus making it more readily
accessible by digestive enzymes. At the same time retrograded amylose is indigestible
due to the presence of stronger hydrogen bonding in comparison with retrograded

amylopectin (Bahado-Singh et al. 2011).

Anti-nutrient Content

Plant foods are considered to be an important part of human diets. They provide

protein, carbohydrates, fibre, vitamins, minerals, various antioxidants and

phytochemicals. But these plant foods also contain components such as phytate, and

oxalate which have been called anti-nutritional components (Patrice 2011).

Oxalate

Oxalic acid and its salts occur as end products of metabolism in a number of plant
tissues. It may cause adverse effect when consumed by humans because oxalates can bind
to calcium and other minerals rendering these minerals unavailable for normal
physiological and biochemical roles such as the maintenance of strong bones, teeth, nerve
impulse transmission and as clothing factor in the blood. Calcium binds to free oxalate to
form insoluble calcium oxalate. This may give rise to a functional hypocalcaemia with
tetany in acute cases. Calcium and free oxalate can precipitate in the urine and may form
kidney stones. Oxalate crystallizes with calcium in the renal vasculature and infiltrates
vessels walls causing renal tubular obstruction, vascular necrosis and haemorrhage which

leads to anuria, uraemia, electrolyte disturbance or even rupture (Kolawole et al. 2013).

Phytate

Phytate or phytic acid is the storage form of phosphorus which is found in plant-
based foods such as grains, legumes, and nuts. Phytate is one source of dietary phosphate
for both humans and animals. As a percentage of dry weight, phytates comprise 1.1% of
corn. The anti-nutritional aspect of phytate occurs due to the complexing action of pytate

on other di- and trivalent cations such as copper, zinc, nickel, cobalt, manganese, iron,

selenium, magnesium, and calcium. Deficiencies of iron and zinc can cause anemia, poor
psychomotor development, impaired growth, and increased risk of diarrhea and
respiratory infections. Although, studies reveal that not all plant foods containing phytate
may promote iron deficiency. Soybeans, in particular, have high iron content and much in
the form of ferritin, the storage form of iron. Ferritin iron is contained in a protein coat
and researchers suggest it is likely that ferritin-bound iron is less sensitive to phytate
chelation, and is therefore more bioavailable (Connelly 2011).

Application of heat during processing may improve the bioavailability of
micronutrients such as thiamin and iodine by destroying certain antinutritional factors.
Degradation of phytate, a potent inhibitor of iron, zinc, and calcium absorption, depends
on the plant species, temperature, and pH (Hotz and Gibson 2007). Aside from enhancing
the nutritional qualities of food by reducing or destroying the anti-nutrients presents in it,
processing increase the digestibility of proteins and starches. Elimination or inactivation
of anti-nutritional compounds is absolutely necessary to improve the nutritional quality
and effectively utilize human food to their full potential. The use of some processing
methods such as boiling, baking, microwave- and pressure cooking are known to achieve
reduction or elimination of anti-nutritional factors (Alonso et al. 2000).

There are several ways to reduce the amounts and bioavailability of oxalic acid in
food. Soaking, steaming and boiling are effective ways of decreasing oxalate content due
to leaching of the biologically significant soluble oxalates into the cooking water. Most
reductions of oxalate content occur when water is discarded. Also, soaking of cereals and
legumes has been used to reduce the phytate content of plant foods (Robertson and

Lupien 2008).


Phytochemical Components

Antioxidant

Antioxidants are found in many foods, including fruits and vegetables. They may
prevent some of the damage caused by free radicals by neutralising them. It is a molecule
stable enough to donate an electron to a rampaging free radical and neutralize it, thus
reducing its capacity to damage. These antioxidants delay or inhibit cellular damage
mainly through their free radical scavenging property. These low-molecular-weight
antioxidants can safely interact with free radicals and terminate the chain reaction before
vital molecules are damaged. Antioxidants act as radical scavenger, hydrogen donor,
electron donor, peroxide decomposer, singlet oxygen quencher, enzyme inhibitor,

synergist, and metal-chelating agents (Lobo et al. 2010).

Phenols

Phenolic compounds have anti-oxidant properties and can protect against
degenerative diseases such as heart disease and cancer in which reactive oxygen species
are involved. All plant-based foods have phenols, which affect their appearance, taste,
odor, and oxidative stability (Dykes and Rooney 2007).

Phenolic acids are derivatives of benzoic and cinnamic acids and are present in

cereals. The major phenolic acids in cereals are ferulic and p-coumaric acids. Phenolic

acid levels vary among cereals; their brans concentrate these compounds threefold (Hahn

et al. 1983).

Tannins

Condensed tannins are also called proanthocyanidins or procyanidins and consist
of polymerized flavanol units. They also contribute to astringency in foods (Dykes and
Rooney 2007). Tannins bind to proteins, carbohydrates, and mineras, which decrease
digestibility of these nutrients and reduce feed efficiency of ruminants and monogastric
during feeding. Studies conducted shown that condensed tannins have high antioxidant
activity in vitro compared to monomeric phenolic compounds. In addition to that, these
compounds may have anti-carcinogenic, cardiovascular, gastroprotective, anti-
ulcerogenic, and cholesterol-lowering properties and may also promote urinary tract

health (Dykes and Rooney 2006).

Flavonoids

Flavonoids are subdivided into different sub-families such as flavones,
isoflavones, flavanones, flavanols, anthocyanins, chalcones and condensed tannins. All of
these types of compounds comprise three aromatic rings harbouring different
substitutions such as methylation and hydroxylation (Rispail et al. 2005).

Flavonoids are reported to have antioxidant, anti-cancer, anti-allergic, anti-

inflammatory, and gastroprotecive properties (Harborne and Williams 2000).


Saponins

Saponins are glucosides with foaming characteristics. Saponins consist of a
polycyclic aglycones attached to one or more sugar side chains. The aglycone part, which
is also called sapogenin.Sapogenin can either be a steroid (C27) or a triterpene (C30).
The foaming ability of saponins is caused by the combination of a hydrophobic (fat-
soluble) sapogenin and a hydrophilic (water-soluble) sugar part. Saponins have a bitter
taste. Some saponins are toxic and are known as sapotoxin.

Saponins are phytochemicals which can be found in most vegetables, beans and
herbs. Flavonoids have been reported to have cholesterol reduction, cancer risk reduction,

immunity booster, bone loss reduction, and anti-oxidant activity (Price et al. 1987).

Alkaloids

Alkaloids are traditionally defined as (alkali-like), nitrogen-containing organic
constituents that occur mainly in plants. Most alkaloids are well-defined crystalline
substances which unite with acids to form salts. In the plant they may exist in the free
state, as salts or as N -oxides. In addition to the elements carbon, hydrogen and nitrogen,

most alkaloids contain oxygen (Fester 2010).

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The corn rice-like grain product was developed and evaluated in this study. The
preliminary study was on the product development of corn rice-like grain from IPB6
variety and lagkitan white corn flour combinations resulting to eleven composite
mixtures. The sensory attributes of the mixtures were evaluated to determine the most

acceptable combination, which was further tested for the nutritional and health value.

Development of corn rice-like grain

Eleven combinations of corn rice-like grain were produced and prepared for

sensory evaluation (Table 4).


Table 4. Composite mixtures made from IPB variety 6 corn flour and Lagkitan white

corn flour.
TREATMENT COMPOSITE MIXTURE COMBINATION
Tl IPBF:LF 0:100
T2 IPBF:LF 10:90
T3 IPBF:LF 20:80
T4 IPBF:LF 30:70
TS IPBF:LF 40:60
T6 IPBF:LF 50:50
T7 IPBF:LF 60:40
T8 IPBF:LF 70:30
T9 IPBF:LF 80:20
T10 IPBF:LF 90:10
Tu IPBF:LF 100:0

Note: IPBF — IPB variety 6 corn flour; LF — Lagkitan white corn flour

The composite mixtures of flour were sifted to obtain flour in uniform size. Egg
white was added to the mixture to form stiff dough (100g of composite mixture: egg
white from | piece egg), then, about a half cup of cold water was added to the mixture to
form the dough, such that when touched, water or dough would not adhere to hand.
Prepared dough was thoroughly kneaded. After kneading, the dough was shaped into
small balls and extruded into noodles. Noodles were then steamed for four to five
minutes. Steamed noodles were dried in an oven drier at about 50-55°C and cut into 10.0
to 12.0 mm per piece. Satake horizontal abrasive whitener was used to polish the

synthetic grains (Appendix B).

RAW MATERIALS
(IPB variety 6 and Lagkitan white corn Flour)

| Preparation of composite mixtures.

COMPOSITE MIXTURES

Add Ipc egg white in every 100g
composite mixtures; add about half
cup of cold water such that when
touch, the dough will not stick;
knead and form a dough

Vv
DOUGH

Extrude into noodles; steam for
about 4-Sminutes; dry the noodles;
cut into 10 to 12mm; polish using
satake horizontal abrasive
whitener

Vv.

RICE-LIKE GRAINS

Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of the preparation of rice-like grains from IPB variety 6 and
Lagkitan white corn flours.

3 “siskjeue ajduies jo [090}01g"p “314
uo]
winisjeD
oUlZ
3uaj;UO0D [es9UIA
ueydoidAry,
oUuIsh]
xXapuy SIWAedK|H phy oulwy sayy
Joqiy Areya1q ayeapAyoqies
Splojeyxiv ysv
suruodes unoadojAury Jaqig apna
SPlOUOAR] yey apm
suruuey, asojAwy ula}01d spniD
sjousyd arevkyd yua}U0D aINysIo,
quepixo-nuy aqejexO yours siskjeuy ayemixolg
K __*
LNALNOD aTMdOud SaILNadOuUd
TWOINAHDOLAHd INGRLLOAN-LINV aALVUAGAHOMVD TVNOILRILON

Li

Li

t

f

—-

(21qeidasoe sou) suress ayl-a9nNy payoos
(2[qeidas0e sow!) sures ayI]-29RY paxooou,

(anog WIOD aYMUDILYZVT % OO] “INO]{ WOd 9 AjaeA Gd] % OOI) SINOLy

ainjxiw 21qQejdaooe sour

|

NOILVN'TVAG AYOSNAS



Sensory Evaluation

Barangay San Antonio, Bay, Laguna, Philippines has 1,130 households and was
used as the basis for determining the total number of respondents. Simple random
sampling was used. Respondents were composed of mothers or household heads (in case
the mother was not present). Sensory evaluation test scorecard (Appendix B) was given
for the selected mothers to assess the product. Briefing was done before the actual test to
review the respondents’ qualifications, to explain the details of the questionnaire and to
answer any clarifications. Sensory characteristics and acceptability were described based
on the degree of liking the products using 7-point Hedonic Scale. Color, aroma,
cohesiveness, flavor, and hardness were included to evaluate the sensory properties of the

rice-like grains.

Nutritional Properties

Proximate Analysis

Moisture content, crude protein, crude fat, crude fiber, and ash of rice-like grains

were determined following the procedure as described in AOAC (1990).


Moisture content.Ten grams (10g) of sample were placed as evenly as possible

over the bottom of a metal dish, weighed and then dried overnight at 45°C (AOAC 1990).

After drying, dish was cooled in a dessicator for 30 minutes before taking the

final weight.

Moisture content (MC) was computed using the formula:

% MC= fresh weight —dry weight x 100%

fresh weight

Crude protein.Fifty milligrams (SOmg) of dried defatted ground sample were
weighed and placed in a micro Kjeldahl digestion flask. Samples were defatted using
soxhlet fat extractor. About 0.50 grams or a pinch of catalyst mixture made up of
selenium mixture was added and mixed with the sample. Subsequently, two millilitres
(2mL) of concentrated sulfuric acid were added and digested using a microdigestor until
the solution turns clear and odourless.

After cooling, samples were transferred into 100mL volumetric flask and diluted
with distilled water. Then, 100uL aliquot was placed in a test tube and 1.5 mL working
buffer, 0.40 mL salicylate reagent and 0.20mL hypochlorite solution were added to the
sample. Samples were allowed to stand at room temperature for color development.
Samples were diluted to final volume of 10mL with distilled water and mixed well.
Sample was injected to the atomic absorption spectrophotometer and the absorbance was

read at 660nm. The following equations were used to calculate for nitrogen content:


% Nitrogen = (Slope) sax (absorbance) samptex 100%
weight of sample

where: slope = u Nitrogen

unit absorbance

% Protein Content = % Nitrogen x 6.25

Crude fat.Soxhlet fat extractor was used to determine the crude fat content of the
sample. Samples were dried in an oven at 105°C for about 2 hours. One gram of dried
sample were weighed, wrapped in a filter paper and placed into the thimble. Samples
were then placed on a soxhlet fat extractor. Then petroleum ether was placed into the
boiling flask and samples were refluxed for 12 to 16 hours. After the extraction, the
samples were removed from the extractor and placed in an oven for at least an hour at
45°C. After drying, samples were placed in a desiccator. Staple was removed from one
side of the thimble and the exact weight of the thimble and defatted samples were

recorded. The crude fat content was calculated using the formula:

% Fat Content = weight of fat x 100%
weight of sample

where:
weight of fat = (weight of thimble + sample before refluxing) —
(weight of thimble + sample after drying)

weight of sample = (weight of sample + thimble) — (weight of thimble)

Crude fiber.One hundred milligrams (100mg) of dried, defatted sample were

weighed and placed in a Bercillus beaker; 50mL of 2.5% sulfuric acid was added and

refluxed for 30 minutes. Mixture was washed with distilled water until it is no longer
acidic. Fifty millilitres (50mL) of 2.5% sodium hydroxide solution were added and
refluxed again for 30 minutes. It was washed with distilled water until the washing
became neutral using the litmus paper. Samples were dried for two hours at 105°C,
cooled, and weight was determined. The samples were ignited in a muffle furnace at
550°C to decompose organic matter for 2 hours. The loss in weight indicated the weight
of the fiber. The amount of crude fiber was computed using the formula:

% Crude Fiber Content = _weightoffiber_ x 100%
weight of sample
where:
weight of fiber or loss in weight = (weight of crucible + sample after drying) —
(weight of crucible + sample after ignition)
Ash.Samples in evaporating dish were placed in muffle furnace and ignited over
night at 650°C. Sample was cooled to 50°C then placed in a dessicator and further cooled
before taking the weight. Samples were reignited and reweighed. Total ash was

calculated based on the formula:

% Total Ash Content = _weightofAsh_ x 100%
weight of sample

where:

weight of Ash = (weight of crucible + sample after ignition) —
(weight of crucible)


Carbohydrate and energy contents.The carbohydrate extract was calculated by
subtracting the sum of moisture, ash, crude fat, fiber and protein from 100. The energy
content was calculated by multiplying carbohydrate, protein and fat contents by 4, 4 and

9 kcal/g, respectively and values obtained were summed.

Amino Acid

Lysine.One hundred milligrams (100mg) dried, defatted powdered sample were
placed into a test tube, 3.0 mL papain solution was added and mixed well using a vortex
mixer. The solution was placed in an incubator for 16 hours at 65°C. After incubation, it
was cooled to room temperature and centrifuged at 3000rpm for 5 minutes. The
hydrolysate was collected and 1 mL aliquot sample was placed in a test tube into which
0.50 mL carbonate buffer and 0.50 mL cupric phosphate suspension were added. Mixture
was allowed to stand for 5 minutes and centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 5 minutes. The
supernate was collected. In 1 mL of the aliquot, 0.10 mL DNP was added and allowed to
stand for 2 hours with intermittent shaking. Five (5) mL of 1.2 N HCI and 5 mL ethyl
acetate were added and mixed well then, it was allowed to settle. The acetate layer was
siphoned off and washed twice. The absorbance of aqueous solution was read at 390nm.
Papain treated sample was used as the blank. Standard curve was plotted against

absorbance. Lysine content were computed using the following formula:

(slopesia) x (absorbance sampie)
% Lysine Content = ----------------0e-nennnnenennennnnnn nnn x 100%
weight of sample


where:
weight of sample = (100mg/3) x 1 mL = 33..3 mg

% lysine in sample
% lysine in protein = --------------
% protein in sample

Tryptophan.One hundred milligram (100mg) dried, defatted, powdered sample
was placed in 13 x 100mm test tube. Then 3.0 mL papain solution was added. Mixture
was shaken using vortex mixer. Samples were incubated for 16 hours at 65°C in an
incubator. Samples were cooled to room temperature and centrifuged at 3000rpm for 5
minutes. Hydrolysate was collected and 1.0 mL aliquot was used and placed in 13 x
100mm test tube. 4.0 mL reagent C was added to the mixture then incubated at 65°C for
15 minutes. Samples were cooled to room temperature and absorbance was read at 545

nm. Tryptophan was calculated using the following equation:

(slopes) x (absorbance sampie)
% Tryptophan Content = --

weight of sample

where:
weight of sample = (100mg/3) x ImL = 33.3mg

% try in sample
% tryptophan in protein = -----------
% protein in sample



Mineral Content Determination

The amount of zinc in the aqueous solution was determined using
spectrophotometer following the modified protocol of Platte and Marcy (1959). The
calorimetric method published in the official methods analysis of the Association of
Official Analytical Chemist (AOAC 1980) was employed for the analysis of iron while

calcium was analyzed according to the procedure described by Guinagossia et al. (1977).

Zinc.Twenty-five grams (25 g) of powder were placed in a crucible and dried at
135°C for two hours to determine its dry weight. It was transferred to a cool muffle
furnace, slowly raising the temperature to 450-500°C and left there to ash overnight. The
samples were removed and cooled to room temperature then 2 mL of HNO3and 20 mL
distilled water were added to the samples. Then 20mL 0.1N HCI were added and heating
was continued for 5 more minutes. The samples were transferred to a 100-mL volumetric
flask where HCI was added to dilute the sample and increase the volume then, 1.0mL
aliquot of the sample was pipetted to 5 mL volumetric flask. And 0.5mL buffer was
added to the sample. Zincon solution was added until red color was developed. Sample
was diluted to SmL with distilled water and mixed. Sample was injected to the atomic

absorption spectrophotometer and the absorbance was read at 620nm.

Tron.Aliquot of the ash solution estimated to contain no more than 0.10 mg iron
were used in the sample. A 0.01g of ascorbic acid crystals were added to the sample. Five

milliliters of sodium acetate trihydrate were also added to the mixture followed by the

addition of 1.0 mL of 272’ bipyridin solution then mixture was diluted to 25 mL with
distilled water. After mixing, sample was allowed to stand for one hour. Sample was
injected to the atomic absorption spectrophotometer and the absorbance was read at

520nm.

Calcium.EDTA method was used for the analysis of calcium content. One
milliliter aliquot of ash solution was placed in a test tube containing 3mL standard
(NH4)2C204. The pH was adjusted to 5-5.5 using diluted HCI then, was mixed well. After
1 hour, it was centrifuged for 5 minutes at 3000rpm and 3 mL of 1% NH4OH was added
to the residue and was centrifuge again. Afterwards, 0.5mL HCI was added to the residue
and was mixed well and transferred into a 125mL Erlenmeyer flask. Five milliliters
NH,CI-NH,OH solution, 0.25 NaCO; and several drops of Eriochrome Black T indicator
were added to the solution and were titrated with EDTA until a true blue color was

obtained (Guinagossian et al. 1977).

Carbohydrate Profile

Starch content was analyzed according to the method described by Shallenberger
et al. (1975). While procedure described by Williams et al. (1958) was followed for the
analysis of amylose. Amylopectin was estimated by subtracting the value of amylose

from that of total starch.


Starch

About 0.10mL of starch extract was placed in a test tube. The extract was then
mixed well with 2.0mL of 2.5% sulfuric acid. The solution was placed in an ice bath and
2.0mL anthrone reagent was added. The tube was covered with marbles and placed in a
boiling water bath for 10 minutes. Afterwards, the tube was placed in an ice bath to stop
further reactions to take place then, cooled to room temperature. The absorbance reading
was set at 630nm.

Standard solution was also prepared (see Appendix E). Absorbance values were
plotted against the concentration of glucose in the working solution and the slope of the

regression line was calculated for starch. Starch content was computed using the formula:

(slopestd) x (Absorbancesample)
% Starch Content= ----------------------0----ennennnnnennnn= x 100
weight of sample
where:

slopestd = mg gucose/ unit absorbance
weight of sample = 50mg/50 mL x 0.01mL = 0.10mg

Amylose and amylopectin

Fifty milligrams (50mg) defatted sample were placed in a test tube. Defatting
should be done by refluxing with 95% ethanol for 18 to 24 hours then, 0.5mL of 95%

ethanol and 9.5 mL IN sodium hydroxide were added and mixed in a vortex mixer. The

solution was placed in boiling water bath for 10 minutes and cooled to room temperature.
A 0.5mL aliquot was pipetted in a separate test tube and mixed well with 0.20mL iodine-
potassium iodide solution. Then, 0.10mL of 30% hydrochloric acid was added and mixed
with distilled water to make SmL volume of solution. The solution stood for 30 minutes.
And then, absorbance was read at 570nm. Standard was prepared (see Appendix D).
Absorbance values were plotted against amount of amylose in the working solutions and

the slope of the line was calculated. Amylose content was calculated using the formula:

(slopesia) x (Absorbance sampie)
% Amylose Content=-------------------------------00-nnnnnnnnnnnnne x 100%
weight of sample

where: slopesa = mg amylose/absorbance

weight of sample = 50mg/10mL x 0.50mL = 2.5mg

The amylopectin content was obtained by subtracting the amount of amylose

determined in each sample from their starch content.

Dietary Fiber

Total dietary fiber was analyzed using the published method of AOAC (1990).
Five hundred milligrams (500 mg) sample were placed into 100mL beaker. And 25.0 mL
phosphate buffer were added to the sample. The pH was checked and adjusted to pH 6.0

+ 0.2 then, 0.05mL termamyl solution was also added. Beaker was covered with

aluminum foil and placed in boiling water for 15 minutes. Sample was shaken every 5
minutes. And incubated 30 minutes in boiling water bath with internal temperature of 95-
100°C. Samples were then cooled to room temperature. Five milliliters of 0.275N
NaOHsolution were added to adjust the pH to 7.5 + 0.2. A 2.50 mg protease was added
by pipetting 0.05mL of solution to each sample. Samples were covered with aluminum
foil and incubated for 30 minutes at 60°C with continuous agitation and cooled. Then,
5.0mL 0.325 HCl were added to the mixture. A 0.15 mL amyloglucosidase was added
and samples were covered with aluminum foil and incubated for 30 minutes at 60°C with
continuous agitation. And 20mL of 95% ethanol were added. Precipitates were allowed to
form at room temperature for 60 minutes. Crucible containing celite was weighed to
nearest 0.1 mg. Celite were wet with 78% ethanol and evenly distributed. The precipitates
were then transferred to crucibles. Crucibles containing residue were dried overnight in
an oven (60°C). Samples were cooled and weighed to nearest 0.1 mg. Dietary fiber
content was computed using the following formula:
weight of residue
Total Dietary Fiber Content = ~---------------------------000--
weight of sample
where:

weight of residue = average of weighs (mg) for duplicate sample determination
weight of sample = average of two sample weights (mg) taken


In vitro Glycemic Index

Processing methods.Approximately fifty milligrams (50mg) sample materials
was weighed in 30mL Erlenmeyer flask. Subsequently the samples were cooked at a
controlled temperature at 100°C for 30 minutes in 4mL distilled water. The in vitro starch
digestion procedure was started immediately after cooking in order to avoid any effect of
retrogradation. It was performed in the same flask as cooking to avoid any losses of

materials.

In vitro rate of starch digestion. The procedure and model established by Goni et
al. (1997) was used to measure the in vitro starch digestion. Fifty milligrams (50 mg) of
sample was prepared in 30 mL Erlenmeyer flasks as described in the processing method.
Subsequently, 10mL of HCI-KCI buffer (pH 1.5) was added and samples were
homogenized for 2 minutes using homogenizer. Then, 0.2mL of solution containing Img
of pepsin (from porcine gastric mucosa) in 10mL HCI-KCI buffer (pH 1.5) was added to
each sample, followed by 60 minutes of incubation in a shaking water bath at 40°C. The
volume was raised to 25mL by adding 15mL of Tris-Maleate buffer, the pH being
adjusted accurately to 6.9 by addition of 0.4M NaOH. To start the starch hydrolysis,
another 5mL of Tris-maleate buffer containing 2.61U of alpha-amylase (from porcine
pancreas) was added to each sample. The flasks were placed in a shaking water bath at
37°C with moderate agitation. Aliquots of 0.1mL were taken every 30 minutes from 0 to
180 minutes (3 hours). Alpha-amylase was inactivated immediately by placing the tubes

in a boiling water bath for 5 minutes with vigorous shaking every 5 seconds and

refrigerated until the end of incubation time. Then, ImL of 0.4 M sodium-acetate
(NaCH3COO) buffer (pH 4.75) and 30pnL of amyloglucosidase from Aspergillussp were
added. The samples were incubated at 60°C for 45 minutes to hydrolyze the digested
starch into glucose. Finally, 3mL glucose oxidase-peroxidase (GOPOD) was added to the
sample mixture, then incubated at 50°C for 20 minutes. Absorbance was measured at 510
nm against the reagent blank. Glucose concentration was converted into starch by

multiplying 0.9. Each rice-like grain sample was analyzed in triplicate.

Calculation.The rate of starch digestion was expressed as a percentage of total
starch hydrolyzed at different times (0, 30, 60, 90, 120, 150, 180 minutes). The digestion
curves were adjusted to the following non-linear equation established by Goni et al.

(1997) to describe the kinetics of starch hydrolysis:

C= Cw (1-e*)
where C is the percentage of starch hydrolyzed at time ¢ (minutes), Coo is the
equilibrium percentage of starch hydrolyzed after 180 minutes and & is the kinetic

constant. The parameters Coo andk were estimated for each sample and each treatment.

Hydrolysis Index and Estimated Glycemic Index.From the digestion curves
obtained during the starch hydrolysis, the area under the hydrolysis curve (AUC) was
calculated for each sample and each treatment using the equation:

AUC = Co (ty— to) — (Co/ K)[1 — exp[-k (tr to)]]

wheret/s the final time (180 minutes) and ‘ois the initial time (0 minute)


The hydrolysis index (HI) was obtained by dividing the area under the hydrolysis

curve of each sample by the corresponding area of the reference sample (fresh white

bread, GI = 100) obtained from Goni et al. (1997). Finally, the estimated glycemic index
(EGI) was predicted with the formula:

EGI = 39.71 + (0.549 x Ill)

Anti-Nutrient

Oxalate

For the analysis of the oxalate content, one gram (1 g) of the sample flour was
extracted thrice by warming (40-50°C) and stirring with a magnetic stirrer for | hour with
20mL of 0.3N HCI then the combined extracts were diluted to 100mL with water. From
the combined extracts, SmL was adjusted to make the solution alkaline by the addition of
1 mL 5N NH,OH. Then, 2-3 drops of phenolphthalein were added to acidify the solution
and 1 mL of 5% calcium chloride was added and the mixture was left to stand for 3
hours. It was centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 15 minutes and the supernate was discarded.
The precipitate was washed thrice with hot water with thorough mixing and centrifuging
each time. Two mL of 3N H2SOg was added to the precipitate and it was warmed in a
water bath (70-80°C) to dissolve the precipitate. The solution was titrated with freshly
prepared 0.01N potassium permanganate solution at room temperature (29°C) until a pink
color persisted for at least 30 seconds (Munro and Bassir, 1969). Oxalate content was

computed using the following formula:


vol KMnO4 x N KMnO4 x mol weight oxalic acid/1000
% Oxalic Acid Content = ----------------------------------------------------------=-------- x 100%
weight of sample

Phytate

This analysis was done using the method of Latta and Eskin (1980). One gram (1
g) sample flour was extracted with 20 mL of 2.4% HCI (0.65N) for 2 hours at room
temperature on a rotary shaker. The extract was centrifuged for 15 minutes and the
supernatant was decanted and filtered through Whatman number | filter paper. Three mL
aliquot of the filtrate was diluted to 18mL with distilled water and the diluted sample was
passed through a 200-400 mesh AGI-X8 chloride anion exchange resin. Inorganic
phosphorus was eluted with 0.07 M NaCI followed by elution of phytate with 0.7M
NaCl. For the analysis, 0.10mL aliquot of the phytate phosphorus solution was added
with 3mL Wade reagent and was left to stand at room temperature for 15 minutes. The

absorbance was read at 500nm (Latta and Eskin 1980).

Phytochemical Components

Antioxidant

For the preparation of extract, 200 mg dry, ground samples was weighed. Then,

20 mL 50 % methanol was added and extracted by shaking in vortex mixer for 30

minutes. Mixture was centrifuge for 5 minutes at 3000 rpm and supernate was decanted.
For the determination of antioxidant activity, | mL aliquot was collected from the extract.
Four (4) mL distilled water and 1 mL of freshly prepared | M DPPH methanolic solution
was added. The resulting solutions were then left to stand for 30 minutes. Absorbance
was read at 517 nm (Shimada et al. 1992). Percent Scavenging Activity (SA) was

calculated using the formula shown below:

% DPPH scavenging activity = [1-(test sample absorbance / blank sample absorbance)] x 100

Phenols

The total phenolic content was determined by the Folin-Ciocalteu Assay wherein
0.2mL of the extract was placed on a test tube and 2.8mL distilled water were added and
mixed thoroughly. One mL 0.2M sodium carbonate (Na2CO3) and 0.2 mL Folin-
Ciocalteu Phenol reagent were added and mixed thoroughly then, it was placed in boiling
water bath for 15 minutes and cooled to room temperature. The absorbance was read at
710nm (Velioglu et al. 1998).

The total phenolic content was expressed in grams catechin equivalent per gram
sample and calculated using the standard curve for catechin and according to the
following equation:

amount of phenols

% Total Phenolic Content = ------------------------------ x 100
weight of sample


where:
weight of sample = (50mg/SmL) x (2.00 mL) = 20 mg

The total phenolic content was expressed in grams catechin equivalent per gram sample

Tannins

Total tannin analysis was conducted using the modified vanillin method. An
aliquot, 0.50 mL of the methanol extract was placed in a 17x100 mL tube. 0.5 mL of 8 %
HCI in methanol was added to the extract followed by 2.0 mL 1 % vanillin solution. The
mixture was then shaken thoroughly and allowed to stand for 10 minutes at room
temperature. The absorbance was read at 500 nm using a Cecil UV-Vis
spectrophotometer. A standard curve (see Appendix L) was prepared using catechin to
compute for the amount of tannins in the sample and the total tannins content are
expressed in vanillin equivalent per gram sample (Price and Butler 1977). Tannin content

was calculated using the following equation:

weight of tannin
% Tannin Content = --------------------------------- x 100
weight of sample

where:
weight of tannin = (slopesia X AS sample)
slopesia = abs/mg tannin


Flavonoids

The total flavonoid concentration was measured using a colorimetric assay
developed by Zhishen et al. (1999). One (1) mL of diluted sample was added to a 10 mL
volumetric flask containing 4 mL of distilled water. At time zero, 0.3 mL of 5 % NaNO2
was added to each volumetric flask; at 5 minutes, 0.3 mL of 10 % AICI3 was added; at 6
minutes, 2 mL of | M NaOH was added. Each reaction flask was immediately diluted
with 2.4 mL of distilled water and mixed. The absorbance of the mixtures upon the
development of pink color was determined at 510 nm relative to a prepared blank. The
total flavonoid contents of the samples are expressed in milligrams gallic acid equivalent

per gram sample. Tannin content was calculated using the following equation:

amount of flavonoid
% Total Flavonoid Content= -------
weight of sample

where: weight of sample = (50 mg/SmL) x (2.00mL) = 20mg

Saponins

Five hundred (500) mg of ground samples was mixed with 5 mL of 80% ethanol.
The mixture was subjected to 50°C temperature with intermittent shaking for 15 minutes.
After cooling the mixture, it was centrifuged at 3000 rpm for ten minutes. The extraction

was repeated twice and the supernatant was pooled then the total volume was adjusted to

a total of 15 mL with 80% ethanol. PVPP mini columns were prepared with PVPP
hydrated overnight. Supernate was allowed to pass in the column. About 2.0 mLeluant
was collected. And 10 mL aliquot was placed in a tube. Sample were pre-treated with 0.5
mL glacial acetic acid and shaken. Then, 3.0 mL Lieberman-Buchard reagent was added
to the mixture. Tubes were heated in a 90-100°C water bath for 30 minutes then cooled to
room temperature. The absorbance was read at 450 nm and the standard saponin from
Gysophylla (Hostettman and Marsto 1995) was used. Saponins were computed using the
following equation:

weight of saponnins

% Saponin = ------------------------nnnnnnnnnnn= x 100
weight of sample

where: weight of saponins = (slope sa X ADS sample)
slopesia = mg saponins/abs

Alkaloids

One (1) gram dry sample was weighed in 125 mL Erlenmeyer flask. It was placed
on a steam bath for 30 minutes and was filtered using a coarse filter paper. 0.25 mL
aliquot of the extract was transferred in test tube and Dragendorff reagent was added in
equal volume. A sample was rated positive for presence of alkaloids if it is positive in at

least 3 of the test reagents used in the assay (Hultin and Torsell 1965).


Computation of Nutritional Value

The nutritional value of IPB variety 6 corn flour, Lagkitanwhite corn flour, most
acceptable uncooked rice-like grains and most acceptable cooked rice-like grains was
computed for its contribution to the recommended energy and nutrient intake for
Filipinos (% RENI) for energy, protein, zinc, iron and calcium to determine if both flours
and its rice-like grain product are good sources of these nutrients for a particular age

group using the formula:

Nutrient content of food per 100 g
% RENI = -n-n-n-n-nenenenecenenenennenneneneneeeeneene x 100
RENI for age

The Philippines has adopted the Codex Guidelines on use of Health and Nutrition
Claims since January 2007. The guideline was used in addition to the existing national
laws on labeling and advertisement (Del Mundo et al. 2011).

According to the Codex Alimentarius (2007) for a food to be considered a
“source” of protein, it should be > 10 % of Nutrient Reference Values (NRV) per 100
grams while it should be > 20 % of NRV per 100 grams to be considered a “high source”.
On the other hand, for a food to be considered a “source” of minerals and energy, it
should be > 15 % of Nutrient Reference Values (NRV) per 100 grams while it should be
> 30 % of NRV per 100 grams to be considered a “high source”. The NVR is based on

the local reference nutrient intake called Recommended Energy and Nutrient Intake

(RENI).


Statistical Analyses

The results of the sensory evaluation were subjected to KruskalWalis Test, a non-
parametric statistics, to identify the differences among the treatments in terms of color,
aroma, cohesiveness, flavor, hardness, and general acceptability.

Data on proximate composition, amino acid, mineral content, carbohydrate
profile, anti-nutrient and phytochemical content were analyzed using a one-way Analysis
of Variance (ANOVA) F-test to evaluate the treatment effects. When the treatment
effects turned out to be significant, Tukey’s HSD was used for mean comparisons.

Pearson correlation coefficient was used to measure the strength of association

among the different variables.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Sensory Characteristics of Corn Rice-like Grains

The 100% IPB variety 6 was considered to be the most acceptable rice-like grains
in terms of color. On the other hand, pure Lagkitanwas considered to be the least. This is
relatively due to the fact that higher amount of IPB variety 6 in the combination resulted
in whiter grains (see Figure 4).

In terms of aroma, all treatments were not significantly different from one
another. It was observed that the higher the combination of the IPB variety 6 the harder
the grains thus the least acceptable it is. The 40:60 combination was considered to be the
most acceptable in terms of cohesiveness, flavor, and texture (Table 5). Thus, 40% IPB
variety 6 corn flour and 60% Lagkitan white corn flour combination was considered to be
the most acceptable rice-like grain sample and was further analyzed for its nutritional,

health and functional properties.


Table 5. Sensory characteristics and acceptability of IPB variety 6 flour, Lagkitan white
corn flour and rice-like grains composites.*

SENSORY ATTRIBUTES
Combinations Coh General
IPBF: LF one- -
¢ ) Color Aroma si eness Flavor Texture Accepta-

bili

0:100 4.74" 5.94 6.18" 6.00° 6.23" 6.03°
10:90 4.80° 5.79* 6.04% 5.92" 6.05" 5.82
20:80 5.12% 5.75" 6.03% 5.86" 5.91% 5.74%
30:70 5.30% 5.81° 6.20" 6.10° 6.14% 5.81%
40:60 5.6% 6.01* 6.50" 6.58" 6.64" 6.74"
50:50 5.76% 5.67" 5.72° 5.54% 5.77 5.59
60:40 5.90% 5.85* 5.298 5.398 5.314 5.49°
70:30 6.08" 5.86" 467° 4.76 4.75° 4.934
80:20 6.25" 5.69" 4.if 421° 4.07 4.26°
90:10 6.58" 5.71" 3.518 3.678 3.358 3.80°
100:0 6.60" 5.88" 3.378 3.548 3.258 351°

*Means having the same letter within rows are not significantly different at a (< 0.05).

where: IPBF: IPB variety 6 Flour; LF: LagkitanFlour

Hedonic Scale:1 = dislike very much; 2 = dislike; 3 = slightly dislike; 4 = neither like nor dislike;
5 = slightly like; 6 = like; 7 = like very much



Nutritional Properties

Proximate Composition

Moisture content.Table 6 summarizes the proximate compositions IPB variety6
corn flour, Lagkitan white corn flour, most acceptable uncooked rice-like grains and most
acceptable cooked rice-like grains. Lagkitan white corn flour had higher moisture content
at 11.41% than IPB variety 6 corn at 9.74%. According to Simsek (2013), moisture
content should be 14 % or less to prevent mold growth and spoilage. Flour with greater
than 14% moisture is not stable at room temperature. Organisms naturally present in the
flour will start to grow at high moistures, producing off odors and flavors.

Upon processing both flours to rice-like grains, the moisture content significantly
decreased (a < 0.05). Application of heat during the process and drying the noodles
before processing to grains contributed to its moisture loss.

It was also observed that there is a significant decrease in moisture content from
the most acceptable uncooked to most acceptable cooked rice-like grains (see Table 6).
This reduction in moisture content was due to further application of heat during the

processing which caused the loss of water from the food.


Table 6. Mean proximate composition of IPB variety 6 corn flour, Lagkitan white corn flour,
most acceptable uncooked and cooked rice-like grains (dry weight basis).*

SAMPLES
PROXIMATE Most acceptable — Most acceptable
COMPOSITION IPB variety 6 Lagkitan uncooked rice- cooked rice-like
(%) Flour (IPBF) Flour (LF) like grains grains

(IPBF 40: 60LF) _ (IPBF 40:60 LF)
Moisture 9.7440.13° — 11.4140.09* 10.18+0.04° 8.20+0.03
Crude Protein 10.7640.11" — 9,36+0.05° 9.48+0.05 ° 8.3940.05 ©
Crude Fat 2.1040.04*  0.9240.03 ¢ 1,3140.03 > 1.08+0.04 *
Crude Fiber 3.274#0.06" —-2.29+0.03 ¢ 2.6140.05° 2.7340.05 °
Crude Ash 1,2540.03" 1,060.03 © 1.16+0.02° 1.21+0.03”
Carbohydrate 72.88+0.08° 74.9640.12°  75.26+0.07° 78.39+0.11°

*Means followed by different letters are significantly different based on Tukey’s at a (< 0.05).

Crude protein.IPB variety6 flour had the highest crude protein content at 10.76%
among the uncooked samples.

It was also observed that there was a significant decreased of crude protein content
from uncooked rice-like grains to cooked rice-like grains. The low crude protein content
of the cooked rice-like grains was due to the effect of heat after cooking the product. Heat
could denature the secondary and tertiary structures of the protein. The decreased protein
content by boiling process could be due to the presence of heat that can be used to disrupt
hydrogen bonds and non-polar hydrophobic interactions. This occurs because heat
increases the kinetic energy and causes the molecules to vibrate so rapidly and violently
that the bonds are disrupted (Ophardt 2003). Also, the soluble amino acids leached out in

the cooking medium (FAO 1990).


Crude fat.Among the uncooked samples, IPB variety 6 corn flour had the highest
crude fat content at 2.10% while Lagkitan white corn flour had the lowest at 0.92%.
There was no significant effect on the crude fat content after processing the composite
mixtures into rice-like grains.

On the other hand, it was observed that there is a significant decrease of crude fat
content from 1.31 to 1.08% for the most acceptable uncooked and most acceptable
cooked rice-like grains, respectively. The decrease in fat content may be due to the
heating process that triggers polymerization, decomposition and oxidation of fats. These

factors contribute to its loss during boiling and other heating processes (Fennema 1976).

Crude fiber.Crude fiber is a measure of the quantity of indigestible cellulose,
pentosans, lignin, and other components of this type present in foods (Spiller 2001).IPB
variety6 corn flour had the highest crude fiber content at 3.27% while lagkitan flour had
the lowest at 2.29% among all the uncooked samples. The crude fiber content of IPB
variety 6 corn flour at 3.27 % was close to the value reported by Nagares et al. (2011) at
3.85 %.

Processing the IPB variety 6 and Lagkitanwhite corn flours combination into rice-
like grains did not significantly affect its crude fiber content. Also, there is no significant
difference between the crude fiber content of the most acceptable uncooked and cooked

rice-like grains.

Crude ash.Lagkitan white corn flour had the lowest crude ash content at 1.06%

while IPB variety6 corn flour had the highest at 1.25% among the uncooked samples.


Crude ash represents the total mineral content present in the food (Nielsen 2010). Upon
processing the flours into rice-like grains, crude ash content did not significantly change.

Generally, during cooking some of the mineral elements may be partly loss as

volatile compounds. However, there was no significant difference in the crude ash

content of uncooked rice-like grains after cooking.

Carbohydrate.Lagkitanwhite corn flour had higher carbohydrate content at
74.96% than IPB variety 6 flour at 72.88%. Upon processing the composite mixtures into
tice-like grains, the carbohydrate content significantly increased. Also, there was a
significant increase in the carbohydrate content of the most acceptable uncooked rice-like

grains after cooking.

Limiting Amino Acids

Lysine and Tryptophan.Table 7 shows the limiting amino acid content of IPB
variety6 corn flour, Lagkitan white corn flour, most acceptable uncooked rice-like grains
and most acceptable cooked rice-like grains. IPB variety6 corn flour had the highest
lysine and tryptophan content at 491.013 mg/100g and 49.32 mg/100g, respectively. On
the other hand, Lagkitan white corn flour has the lowest lysine content at 381.31 mg/100g
and tryptophan content at 32.68 mg/100g.

After processing IPB variety 6 and Lagkitan white corm flours into rice-like
grains, both of the limiting amino acids decreased. Lokuruka (2011) reported that heat

treatment during processing caused modification of the nutritional value of proteins by

decreasing the amino acid content through desulfuration, deamination or isomerization.
Reactions for both limiting amino acids lysine and tryptophan are two of the most
susceptible to damage.

However, it was observed that there was no significant difference in lysine
content between the most acceptable uncooked and most acceptable cooked rice-like
grains. In terms of tryptophan content, there was a significant increase from the most

acceptable uncooked to most acceptable cooked rice-like grains.

Table 7. Mean limiting amino acids of IPB variety 6 corn flour, Lagkitan white corm
flour, most acceptable uncooked and cooked rice-like grains.*

SAMPLES
Most acceptable Most acceptable
Lagkitan Flour uncooked rice-like cooked rice-like

COMPON IPB variety 6

ENTS Flour LF ; A
IPBF) (LF) grains grains
( (IPBF 40:60 LF IPBF 40:60 LF
Lysine i a # c b " b
(mp/100g) 491.013+0.49 381.3142.94 397.98+3.93 404.25+1.24
Tryptophan 49.3240.40" — 32.6840.54¢ —35.2520.41° 37.0420.63°
(mg/100g)

*Means followed by different letters are significantly different based on Tukey’s at a (< 0.05).
Mineral Content
Lagkitan white corn flour had the highest zinc content at 2.77 mg/100g while IPB

variety 6 corn flour had the lowest at 2.04 mg/100g among all the uncooked samples (see

Table 8). In terms of iron content, IPB variety 6 corn flour had the highest at 1.54

mg/100g while Lagkitan white corn flour had the lowest at 0.91 mg/100g. Zinc and iron
content of the composite mixtures did not significantly changed after processing both
flours into rice-like grains. Lagkitan white corn flour had the highest calcium content at
8.59 mg/100g while IPB variety 6 corn flour had the lowest at 6.63 mg/100g. After
processing the composite mixtures into rice-like grains, the calcium content increased.

Table 8 also shows the comparison between the mineral content of the most
acceptable uncooked rice-like grains and most acceptable cooked rice-like grains. It was
observed that there was no significant difference between the zinc content of the most
acceptable uncooked rice-like grains and most acceptable cooked rice-like grains.

For the rice-like grains, it was observed that the iron content of the most
acceptable uncooked rice-like grains significantly decreased after cooking. During
cooking, some of the mineral elements such as zinc and iron may be partly loss as
volatile compounds contributing to the reduction in the mineral content of the product
(Jacobs 1972). In terms of calcium content, Lagkitan white corn flour had the highest at
8.59 mg/100g while IPB variety 6 corn flour had the lowest at 6.63 mg/100g. There is no
significant difference between the calcium content of the most acceptable uncooked and
cooked rice-like grains. The results show that cooking did not significantly affect the
mineral content of the product since generally; minerals are not sensitive to heat during

processing.


Table 8. Mean mineral content of IPB variety 6 cor flour, Lagkitan white corn flour,
most acceptable uncooked and cooked rice-like grains.*

SAMPLES
conten al IPB variety S LagkitanFlour Irmsoaiea aces vooked resi
(me/1008) (PBF) “ war 40:60 LE) UPB 40:60 Lr)
Zinc 2.04+0.05 ° 2.7740.13 ° 2.40+0.03 ° 2.3240.04°
Iron 1.5440.05 * 0.91+0.03 ¢ 1.16+0.05° 1,05+0.03 ©
Calcium 6.6340.05 © 8.59+0.08 * 8.16+0.05 ° 8.2840.04°

*Means followed by different letters are significantly different based on Tukey’s at a (< 0.05).

Carbohydrate Profile

Starch

Table 9 shows the summary of the carbohydrate profile of IPB variety6 corn flour,
Lagkitan white corn flour, most acceptable uncooked and cooked rice-like grains.
Lagkitan white corn flour had the highest starch content at 78.60% (see Table 9). After
processing the composite mixture into rice-like grains, the starch content decreased.

It was observed that there was a decrease between the starch content of uncooked
(76.38%) and cooked rice-like grains (75.48%). Though starch granules are physically
durable, they can be disrupted quite easily. If granules in water suspension are gradually
heated, they begin to absorb water. The granules hydrate, increase in size and finally lose

their structural integrity. This results in loss of characteristic birefringence and opacity,

an increase in viscosity, and the eventual formation of a paste (Corn Refiners Assoc.

2006).

Amylose and amylopectin

Starch can be separated into two fractions- amylose and amylopectin. Amylose
forms a colloidal dispersion in hot water, whereas amylopectin is completely insoluble
(Ophardt 2003).

IPB variety 6 corn flour had the highest amylose content at 32.31% while
Lagkitan white corn flour had the lowest at 2.05%. Based on the classification given by
Mutters and Thompson (2009), IPB variety6 corn flour was considered to have high
amylose content while Lagkitan white corn flour was classified as waxy due to its very
low amylose content.

Amylose content determines the hardness or stickiness of the grains after cooking.
Thus, an addition of Lagkitan white corn flour to IPB variety6 flour resulted to a decrease
in the amylose content; thus, gave a product that has relatively softer grains after cooking.
Since Lagkitan white corn flour had the lowest amylose content, its amylopectin content
was the highest at 76.56%. High amylopectin content of Lagkitan white corn flour
contribute to softness of the rice-like grains. After processing the composite mixtures into

rice-like grains, both of the amylose and amylopectin decreased.


Table 9.Mean carbohydrate profile of IPB variety 6 corn flour, Lagkitan white corn flour,
most acceptable uncooked and cooked rice-like grains.

SAMPLES
CARBOHYDRATE Most acceptable Most acceptable
PROFILE (%) IPB variety 6 Lagkitan uncooked rice- cooked rice-like
Flour (IPBF) Flour (LF) like grains grains
(IPBF 40:60 LF)___(IPB 40:60 LF)
Starch 76.0340.31° 78.6040.55* —76.38+0.07° 75.48+0.35°
Amylose 32.3140.18"  2.0540.21¢ — 22.45+0.29° 23.4840.12°
Amylopectin 43.7140.29%  76.56£0.71* — 53.9340.34° 52.00+0.46 °
Dietary Fiber 3.8040.10° 2.45+0.03° 2.840.03 ° 2.99+0.03 ©
Glycemic Index 64.3840.15° 76,9240.39*  64.99+0.79 © 67.03+0.96 °

*Means followed by different letters are significantly different based on Tukey’s at a (< 0.05).

It was observed that there was a significant increase in the amylose content of the
most acceptable uncooked rice-like grains after cooking (see Table 9). It was also
observed that there was a significant decrease in the amylopectin content of the uncooked
rice-like grains after cooking. Some amylopectin leached out by heating, called hot-water
soluble (HWS) amylopectin. High-viscosity samples had less HWS amylopectin while
low-viscosity samples had more HWS amylopectin. The HWS amylopectin in low-
viscosity samples started leaching out at 50°C; in contrast, the HWS amylopectin in high-
viscosity samples started leaching out at 60°C. These results indicate that the amylopectin
structure of the low-viscosity samples is more easily damaged due to heat (Cuevas and

Fitzgerald 2008).


Dietary Fiber

Dietary fiber refers to a group of substances in plant foods which cannot be
completely broken down by human digestive enzymes. This includes waxes, lignin and
polysaccharides such as cellulose and pectin. IPB variety 6 flour had the highest dietary
fiber at 3.80% while Lagkitan flour had the lowest at 2.45%.

It was also observed that there was no significant change in the dietary fiber
content of the composite mixtures even after processing into rice-like grains. Also, there
was no significant change between the dietary fiber content of uncooked and cooked rice-
like grains (see Table 9). Moderate depolymerization and/or decreased association
between fiber molecules due to heat, may have only minor influence on the dietary fiber
content, but it may affect the functional (e.g. viscosity and hydration) and physiological

properties of the fiber (Spiller 2001).

In vitro starch hydrolysis

Starch hydrolysis is the production of maltodextrins down to glucose polymers
with an average chain length of 5-10 glucose units/molecule. Theoretically, they can be
produced by controlled hydrolysis by either enzymatic through a-amylase or acidic
through usually hydrochloric acid. However, in practice, acid hydrolysis produces too
much free glucose and maltodextrins thus produced a strong tendency to retrograde,

resulting in the formation of cloudy solutions (Kearsley and Dziedzic 1995).


The starch hydrolysis curves for each product are displayed in Figure 5. The
curves follow the first order equation: C=Coo (1-e); where C is the concentration at t
time, Coo is the equilibrium concentration, k is the kinetic constant and t is the chosen
time.

It was observed that starch hydrolysis of the samples and the control increased as
digestion time increased. The control (white bread) showed a digestion value of
approximately 70% after 180 minutes, which agreed with the value reported in the
original protocol by Goni et al (1997). The starch digestion rates of the samples were
observed to be much slower than that of the control. IPB variety 6 corn flour had slower
starch hydrolysis rate than Lagkitanwhite corn flour. The relative combinations of
amylose and amylopectin in the starch granules are known to affect enzymatic
digestibility. High amylose content of IPB variety6 corn flour has been associated with
reduced susceptibility to enzymatic hydrolysis. Cooked rice-like grains had faster
hydrolysis rate the uncooked rice-like grains. This was supported by the study conducted
by Hyun Jung Kim and White (2012). It showed that heating changes the structure of
starch in foods. When the starch granules gelatinized by heating, the structure was

disrupted, thus, enzymatic digestion increased.



S70
3 60
g white bread
3 50
= 40 QPM flour
=
EB Lagkitan flour
§ 30
3 uncooked
5 20
5 cooked

os

iY) 50 100 150 200

Time (minutes)

Figure 5. Total starch hydrolysis rate.

In vitro Glycemic Index

Blood glucose response is commonly estimated using the glycemic index (GI),
which relates the response of a test food to that of a reference food, in this experiment
fresh white bread was used. A low glycemic response is considered beneficial from a
nutritional point of view, especially for individuals suffering from impaired glucose
tolerance (Jenkins 1983). There are three ratings for glycemic index: (1) low for glycemic
index value of 55 or less, (2) medium for glycemic index value of 56-69, and (3) high for
glycemic index value of 70 or more. The estimated glycemic index for the samples
ranged from 64 to 77 (see Table 9) which falls from medium to high glycemic index
value. Lagkitan white corn flour had high glycemic index at 76.92 while IPB variety 6

corn flour had the lowest at 64.38 among the uncooked samples.


On the other hand, most acceptable cooked rice-like grains had significantly
higher glycemic index value at 67.03 than most acceptable uncooked rice-like grains at
64.99. The increase in glycemic index value of rice-like grains after heating was mostly
attributed to starch gelatinization. Related studies showed that gelatinized corn starch
hydrolyzed more readily than starch in the granular state. Starch gelatinized by heating
was easily hydrolyzed by enzymes, thus releasing glucose and increasing the glycemic

index value.

Carbohydrate Profile Correlation

Table 10 summarizes the correlation between carbohydrate profile of IPB variety6
corn flour, Lagkitan white corn flour, most acceptable uncooked and cooked rice-like
grains. The results showed that the starch content is negatively correlated with very
strong relationship with the amylose content. On the other hand, starch content is
positively correlated with very strong relationship with the amylopectin content.
Therefore, as the starch content increases, the amylose content decreases while
amylopectin increases. Dietary fiber have negatively strong correlation with starch
content while glycemic index has positively very strong correlation with starch.

Amylose, on the other hand, has negatively very strong correlation with
amylopectin. Thus, as the amylose content increases, the amylopectin content decreases.
Amylose has positively very strong correlation with dietary fiber while glycemic index

has negatively very strong relationship with amylose.


Table 10. Correlation between carbohydrate profile of IPB variety6 corn flour, Lagkitan
white cor flour, most acceptable uncooked and cooked rice-like grains.

STARCH AMYLOSE AMYLOPECTIN

FIBER
Starch 1 -0.875** 0.898** -0.612*
Amylose -0.875** 1 -0.999%* 0.879*#
Amylopectin 0.898** -0.999** 1 -0.862**
Dietary Fiber -0.612* 0.879** -0.862** 1
Glycemic 0.850** -0.950** 0.951#* -0.729**
Index

INDEX
0.850**
-0.950**
-0.951**

-0.729**

DIETARY GLYCEMIC

*correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed) using Pearson correlation.

**correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed) using Pearson correlation.

The results showed that amylose concentration is negatively correlated with very

strong relationship to glycemic index value. Thus, the higher the amylose content, the

lower the glycemic index value. There is greater hydrogen bonding between glucose units

in amylose molecule than amylopectin thus less exposure to enzymatic digestion (Behall

and Hallfrisch 2002). In addition, the larger size of amylopectin provides more open and

wide surface for enzymatic attack as compared to smaller amylose (Bennion and Schuele

2000; McWilliams 2001). The presence of amylose-lipid content also reduces the

amylose digestion rate (Hu et al. 2004).


Anti-nutrient

Table 11 summarizes the anti-nutrient contents of IPB variety6 corn flour,
Lagkitan white corn flour, most acceptable uncooked and cooked rice-like grains. The
oxalate content of food can vary considerably between plants of the same species, due to
differences in climate, soil quality, state of ripeness, or even which part of the plant is
analyzed. All the samples in this experiment had no traces of oxalate content.

In terms of phytate content, Lagkitan white corn flour had the highest content at
86.25mgP/100g. After processing the composite mixture into rice-like grains, phytate
content decreased. This is due to the application of heat that destroyed the phytic acid.
All cereals and most vegetables contain phytate (inositol hexaphosphate) which can bind
iron and zinc and reduce their bioavailability.

Bioavailability is a general term that refers to how well a nutrient can be absorbed
and used by the body. It can be affected by many factors such as the presence of anti-
nutrients, like phytates and oxalates (Paul et al. 2004).

Table 11 also shows the comparison between the anti-nutrient content of the most
acceptable uncooked rice-like grains and most acceptable cooked rice-like grains. It was
observed that cooking the grains did not significantly affect its phytate content. Also,

there were no traces of oxalate present in the samples.


Table 11. Mean anti-nutrient content of IPB variety6 corn flour, Lagkitan white corn
flour, most acceptable uncooked and cooked rice-like grains.

SAMPLES
ANTI- . Most acceptable Most acceptable
IPB Pi ue
NUTRIENT Ay “ Lagkitan Flour uncooked rice- cooked rice-like
CONTENT (IPBF) (LF) like grains grains
IPBF 40:60 LF IPBF 40:60 LE
phytate 84.2520.10° — 86.2540.08" 84.5340.27° 4.500.20°
(mgP/100g) . 5 i i 4 27 84. .
Oxalate
(mgOA/100g) 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00

*Means followed by different letters are significantly different based on Tukey’s at a (< 0.05).

Phytochemical Content

Phytochemicals refers to a wide variety of compounds made by plants, but is
mainly used to describe those compounds that may affect human health. They are found
in plant-based foods such as fruits, vegetables, beans, and grains. Phytochemicals are
promoted for the prevention and treatment of many health conditions, including cancer,
heart disease, diabetes, and high blood pressure. There is some evidence that certain
phytochemicals may help prevent the formation of potential carcinogens (substances that
cause cancer), block the action of carcinogens on their target organs or tissue, or act on
cells to suppress cancer development.

Table 12 summarizes the phytochemical contents of IPB variety6 corn flour,
Lagkitan white corn flour, most acceptable uncooked and cooked rice-like grains.

Lagkitanwhite corn flour had higher antioxidative activity at 28.47% Scavenging Activity

(SA) than IPB variety 6 corn flour at 21.92% SA. Upon processing the composite
mixtures into rice-like grains, the anti-oxidative content decreased.
There were no traces of tannins present in all the samples analyzed. Both flours have the
lowest phenolic content at 9.56 milligram gallic acid equivalent (GAE) per 100g for IPB
variety 6 com flour and 9.48 mgGAE/100g for Lagkitan white corn flour. Upon
processing the composite mixtures into rice-like grains, the phenolic content significantly
increases.

In term of flavonoid content, both flours had the lowest content while uncooked
rice-like grains had the highest at 14.13 milligram quertin equivalent (QE) per 100g. On
the other hand, there were no traces of saponins and alkaloids present in the samples.

Table 12 also shows the comparison between the phytochemical content of most
acceptable uncooked rice-like grains and most acceptable cooked rice-like grains. Most
acceptable cooked rice-like grains had higher antioxidative activity at 29.02 % SA than
most acceptable uncooked rice-like grains at 24.11 % SA. It was supported by the study
conducted showing an increase in antioxidant activity of vegetables by boiling. The pro-
oxidant activity was due to peroxidases which were inactivated at high tempratures
(Zhang and Hamauzu 2004). Another research indicated that processing may enhance the
anti-oxidant potential of vegetables due to improvement of antioxidant properties of
naturally occurring compounds or formation of novel compounds such as maillard

reaction products having antioxidant activity (Manzocco et al. 2001).


Table 12. Mean phytochemical contents of IPB variety6 corn flour, Lagkitan white corn
flour, most acceptable uncooked and cooked rice-like grains.

SAMPLES

Most acceptable Most acceptable

COMPONENTS IPB variety6  Lagkitan _uncooked rice- i
Flour (IPBF) Flour (LF) like grains (IPBF 40:60

(IPBF 40:60 LF) fis

Antioxidant b a ’

(%SA) 21,921.25  28.4741.25 24.1120.47 29.0242.06*
Tannins

(mgVanillineq/100g) oe ooo oad 0.00
Puerols 9.56£0.39° 9.4840.32° —*16,8240.67* —«:11.3720.52"

(mgGAE/100g)

Flavonoids

© ¢ a .
(mgQE/100g) 8.03+0.32 7.96+0.27 14.13+0.57 9.55+£0.44

Saponins . . . .
(Rating) Negative Negative Negative Negative
Alkaloid

(%) 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00

*Means followed by different letters are significantly different based on Tukey’s at a (< 0.05).

Also, most acceptable uncooked rice-like grains had the highest phenolic content
at 16.82 mgGAE/100g and it was observed that there is a significant decrease in the
phenolic content from uncooked to cooked rice-like grains. It was also observed that
there is significant decrease of flavonoid content from 14.13 mgQE/100g of uncooked
rice-like grains to 9.55 mgQE/100g of cooked rice-like grains.

Changes in phytochemicals upon cooking may result from two opposite

phenomena: (1) thermal degradation, which reduces their concentration, and (2) a matrix

softening effect, which increases the extractability of phytochemicals, resulting in a
higher concentration with respect to the raw material.

The final effect of cooking on phytochemical concentration depends on the
processing parameters, the structure of food matrix, and the chemical nature of the
specific compound. It was observed that there is an increase in the amount of phenols and
flavonoids from the composite mixtures (flours) to most acceptable uncooked rice-like
grains. Steaming will ensure better preservation or extraction yield of phytochemicals
than do other cooking methods. Uncooked rice-like grains were prepared by steaming
and drying and are not in direct contact with other cooking material such as water or oil.
Therefore, leaching of soluble compounds into water is minimized and thermal
degradation is limited. Upon cooking the rice-like grains, boiling was the method used.
Thus, grains were in direct contact with water causing the soluble compounds to leach
and thermal degradation occur. This is the reason why it was observed that there is a
significant decrease in the phenolic and flavonoid content from uncooked to cooked rice-

like grains (Palermo et al., 2014).

Nutritional Value

The nutritional value of IPB variety 6 corn flour, Lagkitan white cor flour, most
acceptable uncooked and cooked rice-like grains was computed for their percent RENI
(Recommended Energy and Nutrient Intake) contribution for energy, protein, zinc, iron
and calcium. According to CODEX Alimentarius (2007), for a food to be considered a

source of protein, it should be >10 % of Nutrient Reference Values (NRV) per 100 grams

while it should be >20 % of NRV per 100 grams to be considered a high source. On the
other hand, for a food to be considered a source of minerals and energy, it should be >15
% of Nutrient Reference Values (NRV) per 100 grams while it should be >30 % of NRV
per 100 grams to be considered a high source. The NRV used was RENI since this is the
dietary standards used in the Philippines.

Table 13 and 14 showed the RENI contribution (% RENI) for energy, protein and
mineral content of most acceptable uncooked and most acceptable cooked rice-like grains
per 100 grams. Rice-like grains (40:60 IPB variety 6 to Lagkitan white corn flour) were
considered to be a high source of energy for 6 months to 3 year-old. It was also
considered as a source of energy for older children 4 to 9 years of age. It was also
considered as a source of energy for all females while it was only considered as a source
of energy for males 10-12 years.

After comparing the percent contribution of cooked rice-like grains and cooked
well-milled rice, it was observed that cooked rice-like grains had comparable percent
contribution to cooked well-milled rice in terms of energy. In terms of protein, cooked
rice-like grains were considered as a high source for all the age group. And as compared
to cooked well-milled rice, cooked rice-like grains had relatively higher percent
contribution in terms of its protein content. Lysine and tryptophan are both essential
amino acids which bodily synthesis is inadequate to meet metabolic needs and must be
supplied in the diet. Lysine is important for proper growth, and also appears to help the
body absorb calcium. Tryptophan, on the other hand, is an amino acid needed for normal
growth in infants and for nitrogen balance in adults. The body uses tryptophan to help

make niacin and serotonin (Fini M., et.al. 2001).


BOIS YBIY ¢

dINOSy
e171 0012 +4985 *81°61 #48659 +9881 #6967 Ss'8 +x00°€Z 68'S seak 61<
201 «1V6l #88°9S IPI walTP9 al ULI #6167 SLL #419°7Z ves = steak 81-91
CE 01 691 aalTES 98'S 1 06109 H6S'S1 ww CELT 90'L well IZ LB SHAK SIE I
+l7El £107 +4689 +65°81 ¥x6ELL 781 aD SE 87'8 e47TLZ Is 882K Z1-01
aIVWad
0L'6 +8651 +*+60°0S €evl 4099S 60'F1 wx0L'S7 869 +1661 Orr sieak 61<
06'8 lord a lLO'SD 9s ZI #4S6°1S SeZl #x6S°EZ 09's +1781 98'¢ —- sue0K 81-91
S16 Icrl wal TLD aa wal VES €S7Z1 24ST VT 89'S +6L'81 16€ — sueaK SI-E1
*b071 «09°81 45179 +L9°91 x27 0L +6091 968° 1E rl ¥40L'Z Zs = saeaX Z1-O1
a1vW
tl'S1 88°77 ¥#450°8L *0€°7Z ++61°88 *7617 —#xS0°0b 166 x20 1E $8'9 smeak 6-1
+IVLI £787 +4788 1 €SZ +x6L66 #887 weZESPb LT axl SE LLL sreak 9-p
+10 €7 +000 LE 4498611 eeSEEL aw EPSEL ea BLZE S19 OBL wa OLD = TOL smeak €-|
hanced +487'SS eILOET _449S'6b —x9BOLT ax ZL'8Y ow s00°EZ]_—_—eB80'TZ_—n67S6 TTS SHOU ZI

%. % %, %, % %, %,
Ul9}O1g AB19Uq UIa}01g AB190q UI9}01d AB190q ula}01g A3190Uuq UI3}01g ABi0uq, aDVv
. sures (aa)
3911 payood, sutesd oy1|-3911 payood oyi]-2911 payoooury (AD) snoy uj1y307 anoy 9 Buea a]

“suiei3 QQ] Jad sured
24{[-2911 paxooo puke peyoooun “inoy unj1y307 ‘Ino g AjalIeA Gd] JO ulajoud pue ABs9uU9 Oy (INAY %) UOUNGIUOS INTA'EL G2 L


20MOS YBIYs »
9010S,

£s'b vOL 688 orl 68E xe9SIS 601 Ofb xf ES STI LEE 29519 = 680 OLS safESH  sreak 6I<
ore OL Ws €8'0 68 E xebl EE 780 Ofb x67HE 980 LEE welS6E 990 OLS = «bl62 = steak g]-9]
ove S06 90'S £80 00'S = ¥LE'6T 780 TSS eB EOE 98'0 Ep 4090SE 990 ek *@B'SZ — sueak 1-€]
ore ooor 1499 =6€80 £55 wel98E 780 [19 «s00°0r = 980 6LY vel 9b 990 IT8 — ss00°FE  sueak 71-01

aTVINGA
£S'b sco OT SL8  xxST9E 60 £96 «s0SLE STI SSL ee8ZEb = 88°0 EB TE weBB TE — sueak 61<
ore LS€l 6hb = §=£8°0 OSL L097 780 688 = «L697 98°0 0S9 seZV1E 990 OOIL *26°7Z — sseak 81-9]
ore 0s6 thr £80 STS — «8L°ST 730 08S L997 98°0 SSb xe8L0€ 990 OLL L972 sreak cI -E1
ore wrt «88S £80 808 x2 Pe 780 TO8B ee67SE = 980 0OL sebL 0p 990 SBIL  +x00°0€  sreak Z]-01

aIvn
98y elTL1 IL BTL S56 xe967H LET SSOL ssbbbh = ET L738 e0E1S = S60 OObl = xeBLLE — sreak 6-1
819 aIPIZ IPL Ist LOLL «0967 BHT 68Tl sabh bb = 9ST IVOL  «0€1S 171 aI PLE waBLLE  sreak o-p
089 SLT 688 = 991 EVEL e9SIS = EOL OSbl xafEES TL BETL 09919 EET aST61  xx€€SP steak ¢-]
oss x0061 756 LOZ OS OL xabZSS = FOZ ODT eb LE SIZ O16 445659 = 991 s0P'S1  aaLS BP ae

% %
winged = uous UZ) wMIDeD UN, ouIzZ = wnioye) uO, OUIZ = WNID|@— oy ouIZ = wngje—s dy OUIZ aov

‘B91 PIY¥OO.)

“sures QQ] Jod sures3 ayI]
-9911 pa4009 pue paxoooun ‘inoy unj1y307 ‘Ino 9 Ajo1eA Gq] JO wiNtg]ed pue UOM ‘OUIZ 10} (INTU %) UOUNGLUOS INF “pI 192.1


For the mineral content, despite being not a source of iron and calcium, based on
its RENI contribution, all samples are considered to be high sources of zinc (Table 14).
As compare to cooked well-milled rice, cooked rice-like grains had lower percent
contribution in terms of its calcium and iron content. Minerals are constituents of the
bone, teeth, soft tissue, muscle, blood and nerve cells. They are vital for over all mental
and physical well-being. Minerals also act as co-factors for many biological reactions
within the body including muscle contraction, neuro-transmission, production of
hormones, digestion and utilization of nutrients (Champe and Harvey, 1994).

Table 15 showed the percent adequacy of rice-like grains based on 2000
kilocalorie diet. One serving of boiled rice is about half-cup. One half cup of rice-like
grains was about 85 grams. The computed energy value of rice-like grains was about 303
kilocalorie per half cup. This energy value is thrice the amount of energy provided by

boiled rice (100 kcal per half cup).

Table 15.Percent adequacy of rice-like grains per serving based on 2000 kilocalorie diet.

PERCENT
ADEQUACY
%

WEIGHT IN ENERGY VALUE

SERVING PORTION GRAMS (KCAL)

% cup 85 303 15.17
lcup 170 607 30.34


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

Sensory characteristics and acceptability of corn-based rice-like grains were
evaluated to determine the most acceptable combination of rice-like grains. Results
clearly indicated that the 40:60 combination of IPB variety 6 to Lagkitanwhite corn flours
was the most acceptable sample. The nutritional, functional and health properties of IPB
variety 6 corn flour, Lagkitan white corn flour and most acceptable uncooked and cooked
tice-like grain combinations were determined.

The results of the study revealed the following:

1. Higher amount of IPB variety 6 corn flour in the combination yield whiter but harder
grains after cooking due to its higher amylose content. Thus, the least acceptable they
are.

2. Rice-like grains with the combination of 40 % IPB variety 6 corn flour and 60 %
Lagkitan white corn flour was considered to be the most acceptable in terms of
cohesiveness, flavor, and hardness. Thus, it was considered to be the most acceptable
rice-like grains.

3. Processing of IPB variety 6 corn flour and Lagkitan white corn flour into rice-like
grains significantly decreased their nutrient content and phytochemical content.

4. High amylose concentration was negatively correlated to glycemic index value. Thus,
the higher the amylose content, the lower the glycemic index value.

5. Cooking rice-like grains led to increase the estimated glycemic index of the

samples.Rice-like grains were considered to be a high source of energy for 6 months

1.

12.

to 3 year-old. It was considered as a source of energy for older children 4 to 9 years
of age and for all.
the age group of females while it was only considered as a source of energy for males
within 10-12 years of age.

It was observed that cooked rice-like grains had comparable percent contribution to
cooked well-milled rice in terms of energy.

In terms of protein, cooked rice-like grains were considered as a high source for all
the age group.

As compared to cooked well-milled rice, cooked rice-like grains had relatively higher

percent contribution in terms of its protein content.

. For the mineral content, despite being not a source of iron and calcium, based on its

RENI contribution, all samples are considered to be high sources of zinc.

As compare to cooked well-milled rice, cooked rice-like grains had lower percent
contribution in terms of its calcium and iron content.

The energy value computed for the rice-like grains was about 303 kilocalorie per half
cup. This energy value is thrice the amount of energy provided by boiled rice (100

kcal per half cup).

RECOMMENDATION

There are lot of factors needed to be considered and studied to be able to fully
utilize rice-like grains. One important factor would be the shelf-life and the effect of
storage to both of the flours and to its rice-like grains products. Proper packaging of the
product as well as the proper humidity and temperature for storage should be determined.
Moreover, the production of rice-like grains in larger scale production should be tested
and assessed for its economic feasibility and success.

Furthermore, nutrition studies like feeding trials are also recommended. The use
of rice-like grains to complement rice should also be tested to evaluate if it can help to
improve nutritional status and prevent malnutrition. Like usual rice consumed, rice-like
grains from IPB variety 6 and Lagkitanwhite corn flour, cannot supply all the nutrients
necessary for adequate nutrition. Thus, other food sources like fish, animal products and
vegetables are useful additions to the diets to give variety and to support the nutritional

needs of an individual.

LITERATURE CITED

AGGETT P J, FAVIER A. 1993. Zinc.International Journal for Vitamin and Nutrition
Research.63: 301-307.

ALLEN C J, CORBITT A D, MALONEY K P, BUTT M S, VAN-DEN TRUONG.
2012. Glycemic index of sweet potato as affected by cooking methods. The Open
Nutrition Journal. 6, 1-11.

ALONSO R, AGUIRRE A. 2000. Effects of extrusion and traditional processing methods
on antinutrients and in vitro digestibility of protein and starch in faba and kidney
beans.Food Chemistry. 68(2): 159-165.

ANDERSON J W, HANNA T J. 1999. Whole grains and protection against coronary
heart disease: what are the active components and mechanisms?.Am. J. Clin.
Nutr.70:307.

BAHADO-SINGH P S, RILEY C K, WHEATLEY A O, AND LOWE HI C. 2011.
Relationship between processing method and the glycemic indices of ten sweet
potato (ipomoea batatas) cultivars commonly consumed in Jamaica. Journal of
Nutrition and Metabolism.Volume 2011, Article ID 584832.

BALANGEN C F. 2012. Agriculture department promotes white corn. Sun.Star
Publishing, Inc. Published in the Sun. Star Baguio newspaper on January 26,
2012. Internet Access: http://www.sunstar.com.ph/baguio/local-
news/2012/01/25/agriculture-department-promotes-white-corn-202581 last
February 3, 2013.

BARAKATUN NISAK M Y, RUZITA A T, NORIMAH A K. 2005. Glycaemic index of
eight types of commercial rice in Malaysia. Mal J Nutr 11(2): 151-163.

BEHALL K M, HALLFRISCH J. 2002. Plasma glucose and insulin reduction after
consumption of breads varying in amilose content.European Journal of Clinical
Nutrition 56: 913-920.

BENNION M, SCHEULE B. 2000. Introductory Foods. 11th ed. New York: Prentice-
Hall.

BURANI J. 2006. Practical use of Gl.American Diabetes Association.University of
Sydney.


CHAMPE PC, HARVEY R A. 1994. Lippincott’s illustrated reviews of biochemistry,
2™ edition, Lippincott-Raven Publishers Inc. USA. 228-232.

CHAPLIN M. 2012.Starch.Creative Commons Attribution -Noncommercial-No
Derivative Works 2.0 UK: England & Wales. Internet Access from:
http://www. |sbu.ac.uk/water//hysta.html last January 10, 2013.

CHO S S, DREHER M L. (editors). 2001. Handbook of Dietary Fiber. Marcel Dekker,
Inc. USA.

CODEX ALIMENTARIUS. 2007. Food Labeling. 5th ed. Rome: WHO.

CONNELLY P. 2011. Nutritional advantages and disadvantages of dietary phytates: Part
I. JTMS Vol.7 No.1.

COSTELL E, DURAN L. (N.D.). Food Texture: Sensory Evaluation. In: Food
Engineering Vol.II. Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS).

CUEVAS R P, FITZGERALD M. 2008. Linking starch structure to rice cooking
quality. IREC Farmer’s Newsletter, No. 177.

DE LEON C L, CLAUDIO V, GUZMAN M. 1999. Basic Foods for Filipinos.3"
Edition.Merriam and Webster Bookstore, Inc. Manila, Philippines.

DEL MUNDO JA, FORSHAGE PJ, OCAMPO MR. 2011. Philippine Food Standards:
Development and Recent Changes. Retrieved February 12, 2014 from
http://worldfoodscience.com.

DIAZ S G. 2011.The effects of cooking on nutrition.University of Leeds. Internet

Access: http://www. leeds.ac.uk/yawya/science-and-
nutrition/The%20effects%200f%20cooking%200n%20nutrition.html. Last June
2013.

DYKES L, ROONEY L W. 2007. Phenolic Compounds in Cereals Grains and their
Health Benefits.AACC International, Inc. Vol.52 No. 3.

DYKES L, ROONEY L W. 2006. Sorghum and millet phenols and antioxidant. Journal
of Cereal Science 44:236.

ESCOBAR M M. 1992. Synthetic Rice Grains from Local Starches and Flours.PhD
Thesis. Access: UPLB Main Library, UPLB, College, Laguna. 123pp.


FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION (FAO). 2001. Human Vitamin and
Mineral Requirements. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations/
World Health Organization. Rome.

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION (FAO). 1998. Carbohydrates in
Human Nutrition. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations/
World Health Organization. Rome.

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION (FAO). 1992. Maize in Human
Nutrition. Food and Agriculture Organization of the Unite Nations. Internet
Access from: http://www. faao.org/docrep/t0395e/T0395E00.htm#Contents. Last
May 2013. Rome.

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION (FAO). 1990. Carbohydrates in
Human Nutrition. Agriculture and Consumer Protection.Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations/ World Health Organization. Rome.

FENNEMA O R. 1976. Principles of Food Science: Part 1 Food Chemistry. Marcel
Dekker, Inc. New York

FENNEMA O R. 1996. Food Chemistry.3” edition. Marcel Dekker, Inc. New York.

FESTER K. 2010. Plant Alkaloids. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published online: DOI:
10.1002/9780470015902.a0001914.pub2.

FINI M, TORRICELLI P, GIAVARESI G, CARPI A, NICOLINI A, GIARDINO R.
2001. Effect of L-Lysine and L-Arginine osteoblast cultures from normal and
osteopenic rats.Biomed Pharmacother. 55(4):213-220.

FNRI-DOST. 2002. Recommended Energy and Nutrient Intakes. Philippines: FNRI.

FLOROS J D, NEWSOME R, FISHER W. 2010. Feeding the World Today and
Tomorrow: The Importance of Food Science and Technology: An IFT Scientific
Review. Institute of Technologists. Chicago, USA.

FREI M, SIDDHURAJU P, BECKER K. 2003. Studies on the in vitro starch digestibility
and the GI of six different indigenous rice cultivars from the Philippines. Food
Chemistry 83: 395-402.

GIBSON N. 2010.Development of a rapid assessment method for glycemic index. MS
Thesis (MSc Nutrition). University of Pretoria. Pretoria.

GONI I, GARCIA-ALONSO A, SAURA-CALIXTO F. 1997. A starch hydrolysis
procedure to estimate glycemic index. Nutrition Research. 17, 427-437.


GUINAGOSSIAN VY, VAN SCOYOC SW, AXTELL JD. 1977. Chemical and
Biological Methods for Grain and Forage Sorghum. Purdue University, West
Lafayette, Indiana.

HAHN D H, FAUBION J M, ROONEY LW. 1983. Sorgum phenolic acids, their high
performance liquid chromatography separation and their relation to fungal
resistance. Cereal Chem. 60:255.

HARBORNE J B, WILLIAMS C A. 2000. Advances in flavonoids research since 1992.
Phytochemistry 55:481.

HELLER S N, HACKLER L R. 1978. Changes in the crude fiber content of the
American diet. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. Pp1510-1514. USA.

HOSTETTMAN K, MARSTO A. 1995. Saponins. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. p. 3.

HOTZ C, GIBSON R S. 2007.Traditional food-processing and preparation practices to
enhance the bioavailability of micronutrients in plant-based diets. J. Nutr. 137:
1097-1100.

HU P, ZHAO H, DUAN Z, LINLIN Z, WU D. 2004. Starch digestibility and the
estimated glycemic score of different types of rice differing in amylose contents.
Journal of Cereal Science 40: 231-237.

HUI Y H, WAI-KIT NIP, ROGERS R. 2005.Meat Science and Application. Marcel
Dekker, Inc. New York.

HULTIN E, TORSELL I. 1965.Alkaloid screening of Swedish plants.Phytochemistry. 4:
425-433.

HYUN JUNG KIM, WHITE P J. 2012. In vitro digestion rate and estimated glycemic
index of oat flours from typical and high B-glucan oat lines. J. Agric. Food Chem.
60, 5237-5242.

ICC. 2013.Determination of crude protein in grain and grain products for food and feed
by the Dumas Combustion Principle. Internet Access:
http://www. icc.or.at/standard_methods/167 last April 5, 2013.

INTERNATIONAL FOOD INFORMATION COUNCIL (IFIC). 2008. Fiber Fact
Sheet.www. foodinsight.org/Content/6/FINAL%20IF1CFndtnFiberFactSheet%201
1%2021%2008.pdf; retrieved May 1, 2014.

JACOBS M B. 1972.The Chemistry and Technology of Food and Food Products. 2nd ed.
New York: Interscience Publishers, Inc. 1760 p.


JENKINS D J,KENDALL C W,AUGUSTIN L S,FRANCESCHI S, HAMIDI
M,MARCHIE A, JENKINS A L,AXELSEN M. 2002. Glycemic Index:
overview of implications in health and disease. American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition, 76 (1), 266S-273S.

JENKINS D J A, WOLEVER T M S, JENKINS A L, THORNE M J, KALMUSKY J,
REICHERT R, WONG G. 1983. The glycemic index of foods tested in diabetic
patients: a new basis for carbohydrate exchange favoring the use of legumes.
Diabetologia, 34, 257-264.

KEARSLEY M W, DZIEDZIC S Z, 1995. Handbook of starch hydrolysis products and
their derivatives. Blackie Academic and Professional, Glasgow.

KLEINER S M. 1999. Water: An essential but overlooked nutrient. Journal of the
American Dietetic Association 99(2):200-206.

KOLAWOLE §S E, OBUEH H O. 2013. A study of the oxalate, phytate, and cyanide
contents of selected Nigerian foods and diets in Akwalbom and cross river states
of Nigeria. African Journal of Food Science and Technology (ISSN: 2141-5455)
Vol. 4(4) pp. 91-95.

KUBOTA K. 2007. Role of aroma on the palatability of food.foods food ingredient J.
Jpn. Vol. 212, No.11. Internet Access: http://www. ffcr.or.jp last January 5, 2013.

KYUNG-JOO PARK E D. 2001.Corn Production in Asia.Food and Fertilizer Technology
Center for the Asian and Pacific Region. Taipei, Taiwan.

LATTA M, ESKIN M. 1980. A simple and rapid colorimetric method for phytate
determination. J. Agric. Food Chem. 28: 313-315.

LOBO V, PATIL A, PHATAK A, CHANDRA N. 2010. Free radicals, antioxidants, and
functional foods: Impact on human health. Pharmacogn Rev. 2010 Jul-Dec; 4(8):
118-126.

LOKURUKA M N I. 2011. Effects of processing on soybean nutrients and potential
impact on consumer health: An Overview. African Journal of Food, Agriculture,
Nutrition and Development, Vol. 11, No. 4.

MACRITCHIE F. 1992. Physicochemical properties of wheat proteins in relation to
functionality.Adv. Protein Chem. 36:2-89.

MAHAN L K, ESCOTT-STUMP S. 2004.Krause’s Food, Nutrition and Diet
Therapy.11" edition. Elsevier USA.


MANZOCCO L, CALLIGARIS S, MASRROCOLA D, NICOLI M C, LERICI C R.
2001. Review of non-enzymatic browning and antioxidant capacity in processed
foods. Trends in Food Science and Technology, 11, 340-346.

MCWILLIAMS M. 2001. Foods: Experimental Perspectives. 4th ed. New Jersey:
Prentice-Hall.

MEJIA D. 2003. MAIZE: Post-harvest Operation. Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nation, AGST. Internet Access: www.fao.org last January 7, 2013.

METHODS OF ANALYSIS. 1990. AOAC. Washington: Pergamon Press.

MILLER G D, JARVIS J KMCBEAN L D. 2001. The importance of meeting calcium
needs with foods. Journal of the American College of Nutrition. Vol. 20 no.
2 168S-185S.

MILLER G D, ANDERSON J J B. 1999. The role of calcium in prevention of chronic
diseases.Journal of the American College of Nutrition. Vol. 18 no. suppl 5 371S-
3728.

MURTHY S N, JANARDANASARMA M K. 1999. Identification of L-amino acid/L-
lysine alpha-amino oxidase in mouse brain. Mol Cell Biochem. 197(1-2):13-23.

MUTTERS R G, THOMPSON J F. 2009. Rice Quality Handbook.Agriculture and
Natural Resources.University of California.

NADEEM M, ANJUM F M, AMIR R M, KHAN MR, HUSSAIN §S, JAVED M S. 2010.
An overview of anti-nutritional factors in cereal grains with special reference to
wheat-A review. Pak. J. Food Sci., 20(1-4):54-61.

NAGARES ND, HURTADA WA, RODRIGUEZ FM, DIZON EI. 2011. Nutritional
Value, Physicochemical Properties and Acceptability of Rice (Oryza sativa L.)
Composite. Asia Life Sciences 20(1):199-214.

NIELSEN S S. 2010.Food Analysis.4" edition.Springer. New York.

NRIAGU R. 2007. Zinc Deficiency in Human Health. Elsevier USA.

OFFICIAL METHODS OF ANALYSIS, ASSOC. OFF.ANAL.CHEM.
1984.Supplement, Secs. 7.066-7.069, pp. 160-161

OFFICE OF THE GENE TECHNOLOGY REGULATOR. 2008. The Biology of
Zea mays L. sspmays (maize or corn). Australian Government-DHA-OGTR.
Internet Access: http://www.ogtr.gov.au last: July 2013.


OPHARDT C E. 2003. Denaturation of Proteins. Virtual Chembook.Elmhurst College.

OPIENSKA-BLAUTH J M, CHAREZINSKI M, AND BERBEC H. 1963.A new rapid
method of determining tryptophan.Anal.Biochem.6:6976.

PALERMO M, PELLEGRINI N, FOGLIANO V. 2014. The effect of cooking on the
phytochemical contentof vegetables. J. Sci. Food Agric: 94(6):1057-70.

PASTORS J G, BLAISDELL P W, BALM T K, ASPLIN C M, POHL S L. 1991.
Psyllium fiber reduces rise in postprandial glucose and insulin concentrations in
patients with non-insulin-dependent diabetes. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 53, 1431.

PATRICE C. 2011. Nutritional advantages and disadvantages of dietary phytates.Journal
of the Australian Traditional-Medicine Society., 17:2.

PAUL I, TURNER RE, ROSS D. 2004.Nutrition. Jones and Barlett Publishers. 1004pp.

POMERANZ Y, MELOAN C E. 1994.Food Analysis Theory and Practice.3 Edition.
Aspen Publication. USA.

POTTER N N. HOTCHKISS J H. 1998.Food Science.5th Edition.Aspen Publishers, Inc.
United States of America.

PRASANNA B M, VASAL S K, KASSAHUN B, SINGH N N. 2001. Quality Protein
Maize.Current Science, Vol. 81, No. 10, 25.

PRICE K R, JOHNSON I T, FENWICK G R. 1987.The chemistry and biological
significance of saponins in foods and feedingstuffs.Critical Reviews in Food
Science and Nutrition. 26(1):27-135.

PRICE ML, BUTLER LG. 1977. Rapid visual estimation and spectrophotometric
determination of tannin content of sorghum grain. J. Agric. Food Chem. 25: 1268-
1273.

RICHARD D M, DAWES M A, MATHIAS C W, ACHESON A, HILL-KAPTURCZAK
N, DOUGHERTY D M. 2009.L-Tryptophan: Basic Metabolic Functions,
Behavioral Research and Therapeutic Indications. International Journal of
Tryptophan Research.2: 45-60.

RISPAIL N, MORRIS P, WEBB K J. 2005. Phenolic Compounds: Extraction and
Analysis. Lotus Japonicus Handbook. Internet access:
http://www. springer.com/life+sci/plant+sciences/book/978-1-4020-3734-4. Last:
August 1, 2013.


ROBERTSON G L, LUPIEN J R. (editors). 2008. Using Food Science to Improve
Nutrition and Promote National Development. International Union of Food
Science & Technology.

SATIN M. (N.D.) Funstional Properties of Starches.FAO Agricultural and Food
Engineering Technologies Service.

SEVERI S, BEDOGNI G, MANZIERI A M, POLI M, BATTISTINI N. 1997. Effects of
cooking and storage methods on the micronutrient content of foods. European
Journal of Cancer Prevention. 6 (suppl 1):521-524.

SHIMADA K, FUJIKAWA K, YAHARA K, NAKAMURA T. 1992. Antioxidative
properties of xanthan on the autoxidation of soybean oil in cyclodextrin emulsion.
J. Agric. Food Chem. 40: 945-948,

SIMSEK S. 2013. Wheat Quality &Carboyhydrate Research. Internet Access:
http://www.ndsu.edu/ndsu/simsek/about/biography.html Last: August 2014.

SINGH V, JOHNSTON D. 2004.Advances in Food and Nutrition Research. Volume 48.
Elsevier Academic Press. USA.

SPILLER G A. 2001.CRC Handbook of Dietary Fiber in Human Nutrition.3"
edition.CRC Press. Washington DC.

TSAI C Y, HANSEL L W, AND NELSON O E. 1972. A colorimetric method of
screening maize seeds for lysine content. Cereal Chem. 49:572-579.

TUBIELLO F N, SCHMIDHUBER J. 2007. Global food security under climate change.
http://www.pnas.org/content/104/50/19703.full.pdf. William Easterling,
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, and accepted by the Editorial
Board August 16, 2007.

US DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH SERVICE
2009.USDA National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference.Release 22.
Internet Access: http://www.ars.usda.gov/ba/bhnre/ndl. last April, 15, 2013.

VEGH K R, 2004. Starch bearing crops as food sources, in cultivated plants, primarily as
food sources, [Ed. GyérgyFiileky], in Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems
(EOLSS), Developed under the Auspices of the UNESCO, Eolss Publishers,
Oxford ,UK. Internet Access: http://www.eolss.net last January 5, 2013.


VELIOGLU YS, MAZZA YS, GAO L, OOMAH BD. 1998. Antioxidant and total
phenolics in selected fruits and grain products. J. Agric. Food Chem. 46 (10):
4113-4117.

WHITE CN, PROENSTING W M, HEDEN P, RIVIN C J, 2000. Gibberellins and see
development in maize I. Evidence that gibberellin/abscisic acid belence governs
germination versus maturation pathways, Plant Physiology 122: 1081-1088

WHITNEY E N, ROLFES E R. 2002. Understanding Nutrition.9" edition. Wadsworth,
Australia.

WISE A. 1995.Phytate and Zinc Bioavailability.International Journal of Food Science
Nutrition. 46:53-63.

ZHANG D, HAMAUZU Y. 2004. Phenolics, ascorbic acid, carotenoids and antioxidant
activity of broccoli and their changes during conventional and microwave
cooking. Food Chemistry, 88, 503-509.

ZHANG G, MALIK V S, PAN A, KUMAR S, HOLMES M D, SPIEGELMAN D, LIN
X, HU F B. 2010. Substituting Brown Rice for White Rice to Lower Diabetes
Risk: A Focus-Group Study in Chinese Adults.J Am Diet Assoc. 2010;110:1216-
1221.

ZHISHEN J. MENGCHENG T, JIANMING W. 1999. The determination of flavonoid
contents in mulberry and their scavenging effects on superoxide radicals. Food
Chem. 64: 555-559.
