KIMI OG AGRO

MACHER OL SOL
(orice)

DOST-STII LIBRARY

NU 0, A
STI-21-0231

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS

Master of Science in Horticulture

KIMBERLY C. AGNO

CHARACTERIZATION OF THE REPRODUCTIVE PHENOLOGY OF CALAMANSI
(x Citrofortunella microcarpa (Bunge) Wijnands) TOWARDS OPTIMIZING
EXTENSION OF ITS GREEN-MATURE FRUIT STAGE
BY GIBBERELLIC ACID (GA) APPLICATION

CALIXTO M. PROTACIO, Ph.D.

Adviser
JUNE 2022
This thesis can be made available to the general public YES
This thesis can be accessed only after consultation with the author and NA |

thesis adviser

This thesis can be accessed only by those bound by a confidenti NA

agreement
cont . At

Cchors

CALIXTO M. PROTACIO, Ph.D.

CHARACTERIZATION OF THE REPRODUCTIVE PHENOLOGY OF CALAMANSI
(x Citrofortunella microcarpa (Bunge) Wijnands) TOWARDS OPTIMIZING
EXTENSION OF ITS GREEN-MATURE FRUIT STAGE
BY GIBBERELLIC ACID (GAs) APPLICATION

KIMBERLY C. AGNO

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF THE GRADUATE SCHOOL
UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE
DEGREE OF

MASTER OF SCIENCE
(Horticulture)

JUNE 2022

The thesis attached hereto, entitled “CHARACTERIZATION OF THE REPRODUCTIVE
PHENOLOGY OF CALAMANSI (x Citrofortunella microcarpa (Bunge) Wijnands) TOWARDS
OPTIMIZING EXTENSION OF ITS GREEN-MATURE FRUIT STAGE BY GIBBERELLIC

ACID (GAs) APPLICATION” prepared and submitted by KIMBERLY C. AGNO, in
partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of MASTER OF SCIENCE

(HORTICULTURE) is hereby accepted.

JIC dete U. AGRAVANTE Keser

Member, Guidance Committee Member, Guidance Committee

Date Signed Date Signed

FS
CALIXTO M. PROTACIO

Chair, Guidance Committee
June 28, 2022,
Date Signed

Accepted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of MASTER OF
SCIENCE (HORTICULTURE).

baa BY
CONSORCIA E. REANO
Director, Institute of Crop Science — College of Agriculture and Food Science

Datg Sign

JOMAB/F. RABAJANTE
Dean, Graduate School
University of the Philippines Los Bafios

Date Signed

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

The author, Kimberly C. Agno was bom on the 29" of November 1993 in Pasay

City. She is the second eldest of the four daughters of Mr. Alfredo and Mrs. Susan Agno.

She finished her elementary education at Padre Zamora Elementary School (PZES)
in Pasay City then she finished her last year at Tagaytay Elementary School in Tagaytay
City in 2006. She pursued her secondary education at Tagaytay City Science National High
School (TCSNHS), Tagaytay City where she graduated in 2010. In the year 2010, she took
up Associate in Computer Science at City College of Tagaytay (CCT), Tagaytay City and
graduated in 2012. Because she felt inspired by her father’s occupation as a farmer, she
shifted her computer programmer career into farming. She eamed her Certificate in
Agricultural Science last 2014 and continued her Bachelor of Science in Agriculture major
in Crop Science and finished the degree in April 2016. She successfully passed the
Agriculturist Licensure Examination in October 2016. With her desire to pursue her higher
degree of education, she applied and was accepted in Master of Science in Horticulture at
the University of the Philippines, Los Bafios - Graduate School, last 2019 and was given

a scholarship grant by DOST- ASTHRDP Scholarship Program.

KIMBERLY C. AGNO

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The completion of this study would not be possible without the help and efforts of
many individuals who were with the researcher through ups and downs and helped her

achieved this milestone, so she would like to send her gratitude through these messages:

First and foremost, to ALMIGHTY GOD, for giving strength, knowledge, power,

and victory. for His guidance and immeasurable love.

To her ever knowledgeable and warmhearted adviser, Dr. Calixto M. Protacio, for
accepting and giving her the opportunity to do the research under his supervision, for his
patience and providing invaluable guidance and support throughout the study despite his

professional commitments;

To her very capable committee members, Dr. Josephine U. Agravante and Dr.
Rachel C. Sotto for their valuable time, trust, suggestions and comments with the research
topic and effort despite their academic and professional commitments and current situation

due to the pandemic;

To the accommodating and ever-supporting Department of Science and
Technology (DOST) for giving her the privilege of becoming one of the grantees of the
Accelerated Science and Technology Human Resource Development Program

Sholarship grant which gave her and her family a great help to sustain her graduate studies;

To the happy-to-serve and considerate UPLB Graduate School force headed by
Dean Jomar F. Rabajante; ICropS Family led by Dr. Consorcia Reano; for giving their

time for consultations and effort for various necessary transactions;

To her beautiful Co-advisees, Susan Del Rio and Angelica Joy Lagrimas-

Cayabyab, for their support, encouragement, advice and suggestions;

To Mrs. Milagrosa, for providing her farm and offered it for free to conduct the
research study, to kuya Mario and Cilo for helping hands for the preparation, maintenance

of the experimental area, for the happy moments and laughter they shared;

To her friends, Jezabel, Monalyn, Diane, Joe; classmates, Rean, Cherry, Ate
Tess; and cousins, Kuya Jaycee and Wilson for words of wisdom, encouragement,

positive thoughts and moral support;

And last, for her beloved family, her parents Fredie and Susan Agno, for financial
support, untiring emotional support, patience, care, guidance, sacrifices and everlasting
love, inspiration and for believing in her as well as for valuable advice, her ever supportive
sisters, Ate Karen, Krisna and Krienly, for moral support, encouragement, advice,

guidance, inspiration, prayers, for the happy moments and helping her release stress;

And for those whom she failed to mention, she sincerely appreciated all their efforts

and contribution to this study. God Bless.

vi

TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHAPTER

Title Page i
Approval Page ii
Biographical Sketch iii
‘Acknowledgment iv
Table of Contents vi
List of Tables viii
List of Figures ix
List of Appendices xi
Abstract xii
I INTRODUCTION 1

Introduction

a =

Objectives of the Study
I REVIEW OF LITERATURE

Calamansi (x Citrofortunella microcarpa (Bunge) Wijnands)

Origin and Distribution

Morphological Description

Growth and Development

Management and Requirements

Planting and Propagation

Fertilization

war Iwnnunaa

Pest and Diseases

Phenology of Flowcring of Citrus

2 ©

Effects of Temperature and Water Stress on Citrus Phenology

CHAPTER

Hl

Iv

Flowering Type of Citrus
Fruit Development of Citrus
Importance and Uses of Citrus Fruits
On-Tree Storage Method
METHODOLOGY

Time and Place of the Study
Study 1: Reproductive phenology of calamansi
Statistical Analyses

Study 2. Delaying on-tree ripening of fruits by foliar application of
GAs

Experimental Design
Statistical Analyses

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Reproductive Phenology of Calamansi

Duration of each principal stage of reproductive phenology as
affected by season

Phenology and growing degree days

Delaying on-trce ripening of fruits by foliar application of GAs
SUMMARY, CONCLUSION, AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Summary

Conclusions

Recommendations

LITERATURE CITED

vii

PAGE
12

22
26

27
27
35

36
38
53
53
56
57
58

TABLE

LIST OF TABLES

Phenological growth stages and BBCH identification keys of
citrus (Citrus spp. L.)

Effect of gibberellic acid application on fruit retention % after on-
tree storage

Effect of gibberellic acid application on peel color, peel thickness
and rind ageing after on-tree storage

Effect of gibberellic acid application on fruit weight, diameter,
juice content and fruit firmness after on-tree storage

Effect of gibberellic acid application on fruit biochemical
characteristics after on-tree storage

vill

PAGE

4

42

49

52

FIGURE

1

LIST OF FIGURES

Reproductive phenological growth stages and BBCH scale of
Citrus spp. L. (Meier, 2001)

Removal of weeds (upper left); digging of holes (upper right);
Fertilizer application: complete and urea (lower left) and
pruning and removal of diseased leaves (lower right)

Experimental layout for second experiment laid out in
Randomized Complete Block Design (RCBD) (P- plants 1-
16, B- blocks, R- replications, T- treatments)

Principal growth stages (BBCH 51-59) of calamansi (x
Citrofortunella microcarpa (Bunge) Wijnands)

Leafy (A) and leafless (B) inflorescence type of calamansi
located from the apical buds of shoot (determinate); leafy
axillary flowers (C) (indeterminate)

Principal growth stages (BBCH 60-69) of calamansi (x
Citrofortunelta microcarpa (Bunge) Wijnands)

Principal growth stages (BBCH 71-79) of calamansi (x
Citrofortunella microcarpa (Bunge) Wijnands)

Fruits tumed yellow and dropped before BBCH Stage 79.
Fruit size ranges from 4 -12 mm, weighing 0.2-12.25 g

Principal growth stages (BBCH 81-89) of calamansi (x
Citrofortunella microcarpa (Bunge) Wijnands)

Duration of principal growth stages influenced by season on
calamansi fruit

Daily weather data (rainfall, average relative humidity,
sunshine, windspeed, and temperature) in Tagaytay City,
Cavite

Accumulated Growing Degree Days (AGDD) and completed
average number of days per growth stages of calamansi

PAGE

20

22

23

28

29

30

30

31

34

36

37

37

Timetable of harvest periods of calamansi fruits as affected
by GAs treatments during on-tree storage (Numbers inside
the bars represents the percentage of fruits that had color
break; Red arrow represents 2” application of GA3)

Effect of foliar spray of gibberellic acid on peel color of
calamansi fruits.

(A) Calamansi fruits harvested on 70" day of on-tree storage.
(B) One week after spray of GAs (October 2021). (C) One
month after spray of GA3 (November 2021). (D) Two months
after spray of GAs (December 2021). T1 was terminated.

Number of calamansi fruits per color index as affected by
gibberellic acid after 70 days of on-tree storage

Peel pitting of untreated calamansi fruits after on-tree storage.

40

45

47

APPENDIX

™ 9 0 wD

™

x z 0

ozEin

LIST OF APPENDICES

Statistical Analysis for Stage 5

Statistical Analysis for Stage 6

Statistical Analysis for Stage 7

Statistical Analysis for Stage 8

Statistical Analysis for Peel color

Statistical Analysis for fruit weight

Statistical Analysis for fruit diameter.

Statistical Analysis for juice content

Statistical Analysis for peel thickness

Statistical Analysis for fruit firmness

Statistical Analysis for rind aging

Statistical Analysis for TA

Statistical Analysis for TSS

Statistical Analysis for Fruit retention (October)
Statistical Analysis for Fruit retention (November)
Statistical Analysis for Fruit retention (December)

Weather Data Obtained from PHILIPPINE ATMOSPHERIC
GEOPHYSICAL AND ASTRONOMICAL SERVICES
ADMINISTRATION (PAGASA), Ambulong, Batangas

Yellowing (Color Index)
Visual Quality Rating (VQR)

PAGE
67
67
68
68
69
69
70
70
7
7m
72
72
73
B
14

4

15

84
84

xi

xii

ABSTRACT

KIMBERLY C. AGNO. University of the Philippines Los Bajios, June 2022.

Characterization of the Reproductive Phenology of Calamansi (x Citrofortunella
microcarpa (Bunge) Wijnands) Towards Optimizing Extension of Its Green-Mature
Fruit Stage by Gibberellic Acid (GAs) Application

Major Professor: CALIXTO M. PROTACIO, Ph.D.

Calamansi (x Citrofortunella microcarpa (Bunge) Wijnands) is a highly seasonal
crop with peak production during rainy months when the farmgate price of calamansi is
meager, prompting many farmers to abandon calamansi production altogether. Because
there is a high price of calamansi during the off-season, this study examined how to extend
the availability or the harvest season of calamansi to catch higher prices during the lean
season. The hypothesis tested was that calamansi will also respond to the gibberellic acid
application like other Citrus species in retarding ripening for one to three months while still
attached to the tree; this has come to be known as “on-tree storage.” A study on
reproductive phenology was done to determine at what stage of fruit development would
be ideal for the treatment application. GAs can be applied 108 days from inflorescence
emergence during the wet season, or when fruits tum dark green, the peel is porous and
reached 90-100% (23-27 mm) of their final size. Three different GA3 concentrations were
tested: 10, 20, and 40 ppm. The first foliar treatment of GA; was made before the fruits
have reached color break (BBCH Stage 79 and 80). Application at 10 and 20 ppm were
able to maintain the mature green stage and extend the harvest period for a month or 35
days with less than 17.5% fruits having a tinge of yellow. At 40 ppm, the mature green
stage was extended even longer to 46 days and showed no signs of color break. A second
application was done for all treatments when some fruits already had a color break,
however, the fruits did not revert to green color. The second application of GAs at 40 ppm
extended the harvest season to 63 days where approximately only one-fourth of the fruits
were at color break stage. Moreover, up to 90% of the fruits were retained, had thinner
peels and decreased rind ageing, while fruit firmness, total soluble solids and titratable
acidity remained unaffected.

Keywords: Calamondin, on-tree storage, citrus phenology

CHAPTERI

INTRODUCTION

Calamansi (x Citrofortunella microcarpa (Bunge) Wijnands) is widely cultivated
and used as a condiment in dishes in the Philippines. In some parts of the world, calamansi
is called Philippine Lime, but most Filipinos call it calamansi or calamondin. In the Bicol
region, Visayas and Mindanao, it is known as limonsito. Among fruit crops, it ranks fourth

to banana, mango, and pineapple in terms of area and production (SEARCA, 2019).

The country is the only global major exporter of calamansi, either fresh or juices,
accounting for the most extensive exported products. Major markets include the UAE
(54.5%), USA (51.1%), Japan (25.6%), China (32.7%), Saudi Arabia (9.8%), and Hong
Kong (25.8%) (PSA, 2019). Data by Statista, as cited by Sanchez (2020), revealed that
the production value of calamansi in the country was worth about 2.6 billion Philippine

pesos.

Despite the importance of calamansi, production is declining. Philippine Statistics
Authority (PSA, 2020) reported that from 2015 to 2019, calamansi production dropped
from 162.68 to 125.97 thousand metric tons. The area planted decreased at an average rate
of 0.5 percent, from 19.99 to 19.62 thousand hectares. The number of bearing trees

decreased at an annual average rate of -0.6 percent, from 8.53 to 8.33 million bearing trees

in 2019. MIMAROPA Region remained the top producer of calamansi with 52.81 thousand
metric tons (41.9%) share of the total calamansi production. CALABARZON is the second
leading producer with a 13.03 thousand metric tons (10.3%) share, followed by Central

Luzon with an 8.3% share.

Calamansi production is highly seasonal, with a peak of production corresponding
to the rainy months and lean season during the dry months. In Oriental Mindoro, the lowest
farm-gate price (Php 4-6/kg) occur during the peak season months of June to September or
October and the price increased to Php 28-45/kg for the lean season months of November
to May (DA- PRDP, 2012). In 2019, farm gate price increased at Php 23.86/kg while the
retail price was Php 61.05/kg and the average cost of production per kilogram was Php
11.97 (PSA, 2019). The growers suffer because they receive a meager price during the peak
production months. Thus, this is the reason why calamansi production in MIMAROPA is

declining.

Fortunately, there is some hope, as the Department of Agriculture- Philippine Rural
Development Program (DA-PRDP) situationer noted that around 6% of the production was
off-season. In Roxas, Oriental Mindoro, they practice off-scason production by irrigating
their trees during the dry months. Thus, the growers there can take advantage of the high
prices during the dry months (Protacio, C. 2021, personal communication). However,
irrigation entails a high investment cost for deep well installation, pumps and hoses, and

fuel. Hence, alternative methods for off-season production are necessary.

One practice that could increase calamansi availability during the lean months is
on-tree storage. Coggins et al., (1966) pioneered the application of GAs on citrus fruit such
as lemons, limes, mandarins, oranges, and grapefruit in California in storing these fruits on
the tree. Foliar application of GAs has resulted in a significant delay in the rind color
development, as well as delay in rind senescence of mandarin fruits (Rokaya et al., 2016).
Application of exogenous GAs had an inhibitory effect in delaying fruit maturation in non-
climacteric fruits such as strawberry and citrus. It delays the synthesis of anthocyanin and
decrease the respiration rate when applied before the onset of color break, thus GAs aimed

in managing harvest periods of fruits while still on the tree (Alferez et al., 2021).

For calamansi, however, the effect of GAs on extending fruit availability by on-tree
storage has not been empirically proven yet. However, some promising results were seen
by the direct application of the technology in farmer’s fields in Oriental Mindoro starting
in 2017 (Protacio, C. 2021, personal communication). Carifio (2019) also reported the
inception of a study on the year-round production of calamansi in Oriental Mindoro. The
Tokyo University of Agriculture (Tokyo Nodai) cooperated with the Southeast Asian
Regional Center for Graduate Study and Research in Agriculture (SEARCA), who in turn,
partnered with the Mindoro State College of Agriculture and Technology (MinSCAT) to
study the use of pruning and plant growth regulators to delay the harvest of calamansi.
However, no definitive technology has emerged yet from these initial studies. Hence, this
study was conducted to investigate how to extend the availability of calamansi while still

attached to the tree to catch higher prices during the lean season.

OBJECTIVES OF THE STUDY

The general objective of the study was to extend the harvest season of calamansi fruits
during the peak months such that fruits will still be available during the lean months with

the application of GAs.

The specific objectives of the study are:

© to characterize the reproductive phenology of calamansi under the existing
climate of Tagaytay City.

* to determine which GAs concentrations can prolong the mature green stage
of calamansi fruit while still attached to the tree.

* to evaluate fruit quality at the end of the on-tree storage period.

CHAPTER II

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

Calamansi (x Citrofortunella microcarpa (Bunge) Wijnands)

Origin and Distribution

Calamondin was found that it was originated in Southeast Asia, including the humid
tropical regions of China, north-eastern India, and Burma (Davenport, 1990). In China, it
was believed to be a natural hybrid between a sour, loose-skinned mandarin type,
presumably Citrus reticulata var. austera Swingle, and a kumquat, Fortunella margarita.
It was believed that it had been introduced and distributed during the early years in
Indonesia and the Philippines (Sotto, 1992). Nowadays, it is widely grown in India,
Australia, the USA, and throughout Southern and Southeast Asia like Japan and especially
in Malaysia. Lim (2012) added that it is a common omamental tree in Hawaii, the Bahamas,

some islands of the West Indies, and parts of Central America.

Morphological Description

The calamansi tree, locally known as kalamondin or calamondin, is an evergreen

shrub, attaining 2 to 7.5 m in height. The tree is small with a long taproot, slender stem,

and slightly spiny and upright branches. The leaves are oval with glossy dark green color
above and pale green below that is alternately arranged. The leaves are aromatic when
crushed. The petiole is 1cm long. The flowers are bisexual, white, and grouped in clusters,
having five petals, either located in the axillary, terminal, or both. Flowers are fragrant and
white, measuring 1.5-3.0 cm long and ready to open. Stamens have 20 filaments that are
clustered in a tube. The calyx is 1 mm long with five lobbed shapes. Pedicels are 6-8 mm
long. The fruits are small and globose or oblate, ranging from 2 to 4.5 cm in diameter,
having six to ten segments. The rind is very thin and can be easily peeled, greenish-yellow
to orange-red, with numerous oil glands. The flesh is color orange and tender, and its juice
is very acidic. It has approximately 11 seeds or sometimes no seed at all. It is an obovoid,
small, plump, and usually, polyembryonic condition wherein embryos are developed in a

single fertilized egg (Sotto, 1992).

Growth and Development

Seeds usually germinate after 10-15 days. Stem elongation of the sexual plant
begins with terminal growth with successive sprouting of lateral buds. The formation of
floral shoots ends with the extension of the axis, and lateral shoots became the main
mode of branching. The tree flowers throughout the year and produces fruits. The flowers
are self-fertile. Fruits mature about five months from flowering. The harvest season lasts
for three months. The peak season of calamansi fruits is between July to October, while

the lean season is between November to May. Clonal trees bear fruits in 3 years after

planting, while the seedlings after 5-6 years, The calamondin tree can bear 5,000 fruits

after six years (Sotto, 1992).

Management and Requirements

Calamansi trees are adaptable with long dry periods provided with irrigation and
are mainly grown over many soil types, from clay loam to limestone to sand. Calamansi is
predominantly grown in lowlands, and it grows best in a slightly acidic pH at 5.5~7.0, well-
drained sandy or clay loam soil rich in organic matter, and a moderate drought tolerant and
intolerant to strong winds. The calamansi best thrives in warm to cool climates with 1,500-
2,000 mm/ycar of evenly distributed rainfall (Sotto, 1992, p. 118; Lim, 2012). The agro-
climatic conditions in Oriental Mindoro are so suitable for calamansi farming that the
province has since been known as the Calamansi King of the Philippines (DA-PRDP,

2012).

Planting and Propagation

The calamansi can be propagated sexually by seeds. Each seed contains 3-5
embryos that produce true-to-type, spiny seedlings. Calamansi seed produces plants that
originate mainly from the mother tissues giving rise to the seedlings, which have the same
characteristics as the mother tree. Superior trees arc propagated by stem cuttings,

marcotting, and grafting. For large-scale multiplication, shield budding on calamansi

rootstock and mandarin is practiced in the Philippines. In the USA, particularly in Florida,
large-scale propagation for pot culture is done by root cuttings under continuous misting.
After 4-5 months from planting, seedlings are 10-15 cm tall and ready to be transplanted
in individual containers. For field transplanting, seedlings are transplanted 4-6 m apart in

hexagonal pattems or rows and this is usually done during the rainy season (Sotto, 1992).

Fertilization

During the first year after planting, urea is applied at 50-100 g per tree and increased
to 200-300 g per tree during the second year. When the tree starts bearing fruit at maturity
in the third year and increases to 350-400g complete fertilizer per tree should also be
supplied. Correspondingly, increase the number of fertilizers as the tree gets older.
Fertilizer must apply in two applications, one at the onset of the rainy season and another
towards the end of the rainy season. Weeding under the trees helps to maintain tree growth,
and pruning removes the diseased and dead branches (Sotto, 1992; Business Diary

Philippines, 2018).

Pest and Diseases

Asian citrus psyllid, Diaphorina citri, is widely distributed in tropical and
subtropical Asia and in the Americas. It serves as a vector of Huanglongbing (HLB) or

known as citrus greening disease or leaf mottling, together with Trioza erytreae or

commonly known as African citrus psyllid. Citrus rind borer is the major problem for citrus
tree growers in the Philippines. It infests flower buds until the early development of fruits.
The Mediterranean and Caribbean fruit flies account for the decline in the number of

calamansi trees planted in Florida (Sotto, 1992; Ceballo et al., 2022).

Phenology of Flowering of Citrus

Effects of Temperatures and Water Stress on Citrus Phenology

Climate plays an important role in the growth and development of the citrus plant.
Citrus trees, like other fruit trees, are polycarpic plants undergoing repeated cycles of
flowering and fruiting. Floral induction is triggered by various environmental situations or
temperatures (Davenport, 1990). In subtropical or temperate arcas, citrus tree flowers in
response to cold stress and winter temperatures or when but also produce periodic
vegetative flushes of flowers throughout the year. Flowering takes place after a period of
bud quiescence and exposure to low temperatures and short days of winter. On the other
hand, in tropical areas, bud sprouting and flowering occurred throughout the year and were
triggered in response to drought stress (Iglesias et al., 2007).

Water stress is a substitute for chilling stress in the tropics which have distinct rainy
and dry seasons Rainfall with less than 100 to 150mm per month is sufficient to induce
flowering when the trees are relieved of stress (Davenport, 1990). Water deficit was known

as a strong inductor of flowering in citrus, which increased the floral shoots and number of

flowers (Iglesias et al., 2007; Cassin et al.,1969). Water stress seems to be the significant
flower-inducing signal under semitropical conditions. Water stress has traditionally been
used to induce flowering in lemons and related cultivars, which naturally produce some
flowers throughout the year. (Spiegel-Roy & Goldschmidt, 1996).

High temperature and water stress (drought) inhibit ovule fertilization, thus
reducing fruit set, increasing June drop, and reducing yield. From fruit button set to fruit
maturity, fruit growth is more sensitive to heat stress and reduced irrigation. Water stress,
nutrient deficiencies, high temperature, and poor health of trees are believed to be the main
cause of physiological fruit drops. Water stress during the growth and development of
citrus fruit can harm yield and fruit quality compared to well-watered trees, and fruit losses
are hard to recover (Levy and Boman, 2003).

In tropical areas, the phenological life cycle of citrus occurs the whole year from
February to the next year of January. But in subtropical areas, the flowering phase starts
from February to March and is considered a critical period for citrus production (Shafqat
et al., 2020). Exposure to low enough temperatures for a long period, initiates more
flowering than increasing exposure to cold temperature (Archer et al., 2021). During the
dry scason, there are no changes in temperature throughout the year. Thus, flower induction
is not associated with low temperature, but irrigation after drought triggers the flowering
phase (Carr, 2012). Rainfall in tropical areas is well distributed from April to November,
with high rainfall throughout the year, with dry periods of 2-3 or 5 months in between

(Agusti et al., 2022).

1

One of the main environmental factors affecting plant growth is solar radiation.
Solar radiation is the main source of energy for carbon assimilation and growth, affecting
plant evolution and acclimation. According to previous studies, the plant dry mass such as
leaf, shoot, root, and the whole plant increased, and the number of the leaves responded
similarly to light intensity or during full ambient light (FAL) and decreased as much as the
plants were shaded. This indicated that high-light grown plants yielded greater productivity
than low-light grown plants. However, plant height was increased as the light intensity
decreased. When plants were grown in shade areas, plant height increases, this resembled
to etiolated grown plants which have unusually tall appearance. Additionally, the plants
grown under 25% of FAL showed decreased photosynthetic rate, transpiration, and
stomatal conductance about 70, 30 and 50% respectively when compared with the ones
grown under 100% of FAL (Zervoudakis et al., 2012).

Temperatures of 35° C and above reduce photosynthetic activity; optimum
temperatures for citrus trees are 25 to 30° C. The rise in leaf temperature may be involved
in high-irradiation damage to the photosynthetic apparatus, which has recently been
observed in citrus leaves. In tropical conditions, citrus flower in response to dry months or
drought, Water stress during the growth and development of citrus fruit can harm the yield
and fruit quality compared to well-watered trees, and losses may not be recovered entirely
through proper irrigation. Severe water deficits result in wilting, abscission of leaves, poor
fruit quality, and small fruit size. Moreover, water stress may result in smaller, lighter fruit
with thicker peel and reduced juice content. Additionally, water deficit causes an increased

concentration of sugar, while excessive rainfall or irrigation results in dilution of the sugars

12

in the juice. Reducing irrigation before harvest may increase sugar concentration but may
reduce juice content. Additionally, drought increases peel thickness and color break is

delayed when the irrigation is increased (Levy and Boman, 2003).

Moderate drought stress reduces shoot growth and leaf expansion, slows canopy
development and cropping in young trees, and reduces vegetative growth needed to support
fruit production in mature trees. However, flooding causes asphyxiation of the roots and
can cause severe damage or death to citrus trees planted in heavy, poorly- drained soils.
Citrus foot rot, a fungal disease caused by Phytophthora spp., is related to high soil water
content, and can be found in lemon, sweet orange, sweet lime, Rangpur lime, and a self-
rooted lime. The best preventive measure is to provide good drainage (Levy and Boman,

2003).

Flowering Type of Citrus

The flowering stage is the next process after flower induction which develops from
a receptive terminal or tip of a shoot and axillary bud, located between the leaf and the
shoots when environmental conditions favor initiation of bud-break such as cool
temperatures and water stress (Stander, 2015). Terminal flower buds sprout first, and
flowers are more abundant towards the apical region of a shoot with a predominantly leafy
or leafless inflorescence and lateral axillary flowers later. The most distal flower is usually
the most developed and the first to reach anthesis. The time and duration of flower bloom

are highly variable even for the same cultivar, and slight climatic differences between

13

locations might affect the time of flowering. Even within the same tree, the southwest
quadrant (in the northern hemisphere) is usually the first to open its flowers, whereas the
northeast quadrant is the last. Additionally, the difference in time of anthesis might be in
regard to climatic conditions affecting fruit set and subsequent fruit development (Spiegel-
Roy and Goldschmidt, 1996). Iglesias et al. (2007) also stated that a high temperature
accelerates anthesis and shortens the flowering period while a low temperature extends the
flowering period.

A leafy inflorescence is a combination of one or more flowers with leaves and
sprout from the apical buds of a shoot. The leafless inflorescence is characterized by a
flower bud with no leaves and is more abundant towards the base with a low fruit setting.
In most citrus cultivars, leafy inflorescences produce higher fruit sets and eventually larger
fruit sizes than leafless inflorescences. The presence of leaves increases the CO2
assimilation (Iglesias et al., 2007), and the supply of photoassimilates is higher in terminal

shoots and has a well-developed xylem cylinder and a higher number of vascular bundles.

Fruit Development of Citrus

Fruit development of citrus is divided into three development phases which follow
a sigmoidal curve. Phase I is characterized by the cell division period, which is the
beginning of the fruit set, where the formation of most of the cellular structures like growth
in the peel of the fruit happens. El-Otmani et al. (201 1) stated the peel reaches its maximum

thickness at or the end of stage I.

14

Phase II corresponds to the fruit growth stage, this is where cell enlargement occurs,
and most of the fruit diameter comprises the rind and juice sacs enlarge and fill the locule
(segments), ultimately eventually adding total weight to the fruit. During this period, the
fruit pulp volume increases substantially and makes up most of the fruit diameter until
harvest (Stander, 2015; Spicgel-Roy & Goldschmidt, 1996). The peel tissues become
distinct into flavedo (compact tissue) and albedo (spongy tissue) at the early stages. The
peel becomes thinner as the fruit reaches the end of phase II. The final cell size during this
phase is critical for final fruit size, which is a crucial component of fruit quality in the
marketplace (El-Otmani et al.,2011).

In phase III, known as the fruit maturation phase or ripening phase, the fruit size
may increase or may not increase at all. Pulp growth stops, which leads to the formation of
cracks between the peel and pulp. Also, the albedo separates from pulp, known as “puffing”
(Spiegel-Roy & Goldschmidt, 1996). This results in damage and development of weak
areas in the peel, thus making fruit more fragile and highly susceptible to mechanical

injuries during postharvest handling (El-Otmani et al.,2011).

Importance and Uses of Citrus Fruits

Citrus fruits are produced mainly for fresh fruit consumption. Citrus fruits have
been recognized for their nutritional value and health benefits to humans. In addition, citrus
juice is the main source of vitamin C. Juice of oranges and other citrus fruits is often
recognized as an important source of vitamin C and is most preferred because of its flavor.

This was one of the main reasons for the large consumption of fresh citrus fruit and juice

15

worldwide. One important property of fresh citrus fruits is the low energy value because
of the sodium concentration and replacement by potassium, which may be important for
low-fat and restricted diets. Moreover, vitamin C is beneficial in the formation of collagen,
a critical function in the strengthening of ligaments, blood vessels, and bones, also in
wound healing. Vitamin C is not only useful for the prevention of colds but also has an
antioxidant function in protecting cells against damage from free radicals like cancer and
cataracts, and other infections of the eye (El-Otmani, 2011).

In the Philippines, calamondin is also valued for its fresh fruit for its juice, and it is
commercially processed into bottled concentrated or juice. It is also made into marmalade
or preserved whole in sugar syrup. It is also used as a flavor enhancer for kinds of seafood
or meats. The juice can also be used as a stain remover in clothes, cleaning agents, natural
body deodorant, skin bleach, and hair shampoo. Besides that, it can be used to treat skin
irritation, it can be used as a cough remedy, anti-inflammation, laxative, and can expel
phlegm when added with pepper. Calamondin tree may also serve as rootstock for lemons
and kumquat, and lastly, it is commontly used as potted omamental plants in other countries
(Sotto, 1992). Lim (2012) added that calamansi has antimicrobial activity. The findings
showed that both the crude extract and its bioactive component (2-hydroxypropane-1,2,3-
tricarboxylic acid monohydrate) might have potential as an antimicrobial agent against

pathogenic fish bacteria; thus, it can be used for aquaculture.

16

On-Tree Storage Method

Wang et al. (2019) compared the fruit quality of pummelo by on-tree and indoor
storage to determine the appropriate storage method for improving the fruit quality. As for
extemal fruit quality, the peel thickness decreased with the increase of storage times for
indoor storage. Huang et al. (1999) and Liu et al. (2010) stated that this was because of the
loss of fruit water and constriction of the spongy layer so that the peel was obviously
shrunken. The on-tree fruits could receive the supplement of water and nutritional materials
to effectively delay the shrinkage of fruit peel. After 90 days of on-tree storage, three
pummelo cultivars started to have a storage taste. In addition, vitamin C and sugar contents
decreased with the increase of on-tree storage times. To summarize, it is better to store for
90 days on-tree and indoor storage for 'Sanhongmiyou' and 'Hongroumiyou' for 60 days
for ‘Huangjinmiyou'. By comparison, fruits on-tree storage showed better quality than that
indoor storage.

Exogenous application of GAs retarded pigment changes in the fruit and prevented
puffiness of the peel. Also, GA3 prevented the late peel of growth Satsuma’ mandarin
(Citrus unshiu Marc.), which takes place after the cessation of pulp growth and retarded
the loss of juice from the ripe fruit, allowing on-tree storage of the fruit for more than two
months after commercial ripening (Garcia-Luis et al., 1985). In addition, Rokaya et al.
(2016) reported that GA3 was proved to delay the ripening of the fruits for one month by
delaying the chlorophyll development and reducing the loss of texture, decreasing sugar

content and increasing acidity.

7

Similar to Marzouk & Kassem (2010), GAs sprays (and other growth regulators
including putrescine, 2,4-D, and chelated calcium) had positive influences in decreasing
fruit external characteristics disorder and delaying fruit senescence at the harvest date of a
navel orange. Moreover, GA3 increased peel thickness and decreased rind ageing,
softening, creasing color change, and the number of unfit export fruits. They also
concluded that spraying the different used substances or their combinations will allow
growers to have longer on-tree storage for navel oranges, thus, expanding the harvest
period and export season of fruit with good quality. The GA treatments alone and the
combination of GA plus I-MCP delayed fruit degreening under both storage regimes (2,
6, 12, or 20 °C). GA significantly inhibited fruit degreening, and the fruit remained
completely green. Apart from the effects of GA on the retention of peel color, neither GA.
nor 1-MCP had any effect on internal fruit quality characteristics such as TSS and acid

content, nor on postharvest storage performance (Porat, 2001).

CHAPTER IIT

METHODOLOGY

Overview

The first part of the study focused on the phenology of flower anthesis until fruit
development using the extended BBCH scale for citrus while the second study focused on
determining the effects of gibberellic acid on prolonging the green color of calamansi fruits
while still attached on the tree. The effect of gibberellic acid on other physical and

biochemical characteristics was also analyzed.

Time and Place of the Study

The study was conducted in an orchard farm at 14°09'05"N 121°00'17"E, in
Tagaytay City, Cavite, from February 2021 to December 2021. Tagaytay is situated 663 m
(2,175 ft) above sea level. During the entire year, the area's average precipitation
aggregates up to 2546mm (100.24") from the rainy season, which falls from May to
November. Tagaytay belongs to Type I climate according to Philippine Atmospheric,
Geophysical, and Astronomical Services Administration (PAGASA). Type I climate has
two pronounced seasons, a five- month dry period from November to April and a wet
period during the rest of the year. The maximum rain period is from June to September or

until October.

19

Study 1. Reproductive phenology of calamansi

Flower and fruit development were monitored in six (6) calamansi trees based on
the Biologische Bundesanstalt, Bundessortenamt und Chemische Industrie (BBCH) scale
of Meier (2001) during dry and wet season. There were four replicate blocks for a total of
16 trees monitored. The tags contained information about the dates of tagging the floral

bud initials.

Data gathered

1. Phenological growth stages. Three (3) shoots with flower buds were tagged and
monitored until they reached maturity or commercial when the fruit peel became
smooth, shiny, and light green. Phenology of flower anthesis was observed and
recorded every other day while fruit development was recorded every week from fruit
set until commercial maturation using phenological descriptions using codes and

stages in fruit development by Meier (2001) shown in Table | and Figure 1.

Table 1. Phenological growth stages and BBCH identification keys of citrus (Citrus

BBCH Description of the scale

code

Principal growth stage 5: Inflorescence emergence

51 Inflorescence buds swelling: buds closed, light green scales visible

53 Bud burst: scales separated, floral tips visible

55 Flowers visible, still closed (green bud), borne on single or multiflowered leafy or
leafless inflorescences

56 Flower petals elongating; sepals covering half corolla (white bud)

59 Most flowers with petals forming a hollow ball


20

Table 1. Continued...

Code

Description of the scale

Principal growth stage 6: Flowering

60

First flowers open

Beginning of flowering: about 10% of flowers open
Full flowering: 50% of flowers open; first petals falling
Flowers fading: majority of petals fallen

End of flowering: all petals fallen

Principal growth stage 7: Development of fruit

71
72
3
14
79

Fruit set; beginning of ovary growth; beginning of fruitlets abscission

Green fruit surrounded by sepal crown

Some fruits slightly yellow: beginning of physiological fruit drop

Fruits about 40% of final size. Dark green fruit: end of physiological fruit drop
Fruits about 90% of final size

Principal growth stage 8: Maturity of fruit

81
83
85
89

Beginning of fruit coloring (color-break)

Fruit ripe for picking; fruit has not yet developed variety-specific color

Advanced ripening; increase in intensity of variety-specific colour

Fruit ripe for consumption; fruit has typical taste and firmness; beginning of senescence
and fruit abscission

Figure 1. Reproductive phenological growth stages and BBCH scale of
Citrus spp. L. (Meier, 2001)

2

2. Weather Data and Growing Degree Days (GDD). The daily temperature (minimum
and maximum), relative humidity, and precipitation were monitored and recorded.
Accumulated growing degree-days (GDD) from bud break to fruit maturity were
calculated using the daily minimum air temperature (Tm) and maximum air
temperature (TM), with a lower base temperature (Tb) of 12.8°C and an upper
threshold temperature (TB) of 36°C; and the formulas as suggested by Unigarro (2017)
and Ometto (1981). If the TM and Tm obtained are both lower than Tb (that is, TB >
Tb > TM > Tm), GDD value is zero.

Formula A: when 36°C > TM > Tm > 12.8°C

TM-—Tm
— + + (Tm-T)

DD, = —5

Statistical Analyses

Data gathered was tested to compare the means of two measurements taken from
the same subject using PROC TTEST with the PAIRED statement through SAS
OnDemand for Academics. Data were collected twice on the same subjects where the
season (Dry and Wet) was monitored and recorded. The p-value as Pr >| t | was specified

at the desired significance level (< 0.05).

Study 2: Delaying on-tree ripening of fruits by foliar application of GAs

Four (4) treatments with two (2) blocks, replicated twice were done. Treatments
were (T1) Control; (T2) 10 ppm GAs; (T3) 20 ppm GAs; and (T4) 40 ppm GA3, Trees were

supplemented with complete fertilizer and Urea (500 g in split application) in February

22

2021 and in September 2021. Phytosanitary pruning removal of dead and interlacing
branches and removal of weeds were done. Inducing the trees by water stress for a month

starting the dry season, then sudden irrigation weekly promoted flowering.

eal

Removal of weeds (upper left); digging of holes (upper
right); Fertilizer application: complete and urea (lower

left) and pruning and removal of diseased leaves (lower
right)

Experimental Design
The study was laid out using the Randomized Complete Block Design (RCBD)

with four treatments having two blocks replicated twice (Figure 3), The data were tabulated

in a Microsoft Excel sheet. Treatments were as follows:

23

Treatment Description

TI 0 (Control)

n 10 ppm of GAs
B 20 ppm of GAs
14 40 ppm of GAs

esece

Figure 3. Experimental layout for second experiment laid out in
Randomized Complete Block Design (RCBD)
(P- plants 1-16, B- blocks, R- replications, T- treatments)

A total of 16 trees were used in the study, and gibberellic acid (GAs) as treatment
was applied as a full cover spray on the trees using a hand sprayer at a rate of 4 L per tree
when the fruits reached BBCH scale no. 79 and 80 or before the color break. The spreader
sticker Carrier™ Natural Spray Oil (93% pure vegetable oil) was also added to all GAs

spray solutions. The first application was on September 29, 2021. Observation on color

24

change was monitored for three months. A second spray was done on November 15, 2021,

or when the fruits started to tum yellow.

Data Gathered

In this study, the determination of fruit’s physical and biochemical characteristics
was determined as given below:

L. Fruit retention (%). Ten (10) dark green 40% (BBCH scale 74 and 75) of final

size fruit were tagged at random for each tree and monitored after GAs application

for the assessment of fruit retention until harvest time. Fruit retention was

determined monthly after GAs treatments were applied. Below is the formula used:
Fruit retention (%) = total no. of retained fruits / total no. of tagged fruits x 100

2. Peel color. Pee! color was evaluated using a color index: 1-fully green peel, 2-green
with a trace of yellow, 3- more green than yellow, 4- more yellow than green, 5-
yellow with a trace of green, 6- fully yellow (PHTRC, n.d.).

3. Peel thickness. Thickness was measured by a digital caliper (mm).

4. Rind ageing. Rind ageing was estimated as the percent of fruit with peel pitting
(Kassem et al., 2012). Peel pitting is a disorder characterized with a sunken area of
flavedo (pits) that eventually spreads and affects the oil glands (Alferez et al.,
2004).

5. Fruit diameter. The diameter of the fruit was measured using a digital caliper

(mm).

25

. Fruit weight. Weight was measured by a digital weighing scale (g) to

determine juice content.

. Juice content. Juice content was measures by extracting the juice using a

hand squeezer and getting the volume of juice. Juice content percentage was
determined by getting the total volume of juice (ml) over the total fruit

weight of ten fruits (g).

. Fruit firmness. Firmness was evaluated using a handheld penetrometer (model

GY-2) by first removing the peel of citrus and slowly pushing the tip into the flesh
(against the segments) of the fruit until determined by a marking ring. Readings

were repeated thrice for better results (Kg/em’).

. Total soluble solids (TSS). Total soluble solids were determined by a handheld

refractometer. Three drops of calamansi juice were applied to the refractometer
prism, avoiding bubbles and large pulp particles. Refractometer is tumed towards
the light to see a better result. The reading where the base of the blue color sits on

the scale were recorded as percentage sugar (Brix%).

|. Titratable acidity (TA). Titratable acidity of the juice was obtained by titrating

against a 0.1N NaOH solution (AOAC, 1999). A digital weighing scale was used
to measure ten calamansi fruits. Fruit juice was extracted using a handheld
citrus squeezer and the total volume of juice was measured. The extracted
juice was filtered, and 2 ml was pipetted to each of the three flasks. Twenty
ml of distilled water was also added in each flask. One to three drops of

Phenolphthalein were added and titrated until a faint pink color persisted for

26

30 seconds. The volume of sodium hydroxide (NaOH) used to reach the
endpoint was recorded. Initial and final volumes from burette were also
recorded. The total titratable acidity was computed using the formula:

% TA= (VN) NaOH x (Meg. Wt. of predominant acid) X 100
Wt. equivalent of aliquot (g)

Where:

V= volume of NaOH used

‘Wt equivalent of aliquot = (fresh weight of sample in g/ total volume of juice in ml) x
volume of aliquot ml

N= normality of NaOH used (0.1N)

Meg. Wt of predominant acid= 0.064 g

Statistical Analyses

Data gathered was tested for homogeneity of variance using the Levene test as the
post-hoc analyses performed through the one-way ANOVA using the PROC GLM
procedure, and for normality, PROC UNIVARIATE was completed by SAS OnDemand
for Academics. Statistical significance was at P <0.05 (Gomez and Gomez, 1984). Data
with declared significant differences were subjected to a mean comparison method using

Tukey's Honest Significant Difference (HSD) test.

CHAPTER IV

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Reproductive Phenology of Calamansi

Itis essential to examine the crop’s phenology to understand the plant development
schedule, the best time for fertilizers and pesticide application, and the period from flower
to fruit development as influenced by temperature, humidity, and precipitation. Doing so
will help farmers with the right timing of agricultural practices. The first study focused on
the phenology of flower and fruit development of calamansi fruits during the dry and wet
seasons. The BBCH Scale by Meier (2001) was elaborated from inflorescence emergence
up to fruit maturity in this study. Inflorescence emergence is designated as principal growth
stage 5 with five substages as given below and illustrated in Figure 4.

Principal growth stage 5: Inflorescence emergence

51: buds start to swell and light green scales were already visible.

53: bud bursts and scales were separated, and floral tips were evident

54/55: tiny green buds are already visible, and single or multi-flowered leafy or

leafless inflorescences can be seen
56: petals starting to elongate, and sepals were covering half of the corolla (white

bud)

59: most of the flowers with petals formed a hollow ball

28

“7
Iss

Figure 4. Principal growth stage 5 (BBCH 51-59) of calamansi (x
Citrofortunella microcarpa (Bunge) Wijnands)

In stage | of floral initiation, the average size of the flower buds ranges from 0.19
mm size during the second day of development, and then followed by stage 2, the formation
sepal primordia, also known as a button, with an average length of 0.44 mm. The sepals
will tum dark green, which takes three days to open. The color will change to light green
when the size reaches 3.45 mm after the 7" day of flower development. In Stage 56, the
ovary, style stigma, were already developed. The wet and dry seasons had no significant
influence on Stage 5 (P= 0.1449). Monitoring of Stage 5 took ten days during the dry
season and 11 days during the wet season. The same outcome from the observation of
Mapalo and Rosillo-Magno (2018), 10 days after bud initiation, the ovary, stigma, and style
became visible.

Figure 5 shows the two types of inflorescences observed: the leafy and leafless.
The leafy inflorescence is a combination of one or more flowers and leaves, and this took
place in the apical buds of the shoots (determinate). In leafless inflorescence, flowers were
produced with no leaves, and located in apical shoots. The leafless types produced early
flowering and produced more flowers than in leafy type. On the other hand, leafy flowers

located in axillary buds of the shoots were most abundant towards the base of the shoots

29

(Figure 5). Carr (2012) stated that the level of fruit set is dependent on the type of

Principal growth stage 6: flowering

60: first flowers opened

61: beginning of flowering, 10% of the flowers open,

65: full flowering, where 50% of flowers open, and first falling of petals occur
67; most petals had fallen

69: all petals had fallen, and this indicated the end of flowering

inflorescence. Leafless inflorescences contain a bouquet of flowers with a low likelihood
of setting fruit. On the other hand, leafy inflorescences are associated with a better fruit set.
The fewer the number of flowers, probably have a higher chance of fruits forming. The

flower bud can be developed in 1-2 days with a prominent bulge inflorescence meristem.

Figure 5. Leafy (A) and leafless (B) inflorescence type of calamansi
located from the apical buds of shoot (determinate); leafy
axillary flowers (C) (indeterminate)

After inflorescence emergence, the next principal stage is flowering designated

as Stage 6 as illustrated in Figure 6 and its substages described below.

30

Figure 6. Principal growth stage 6 (BBCH 60-69) of calamansi (x
Citrofortunella microcarpa (Bunge) Wijnands)

‘According to Mapalo and Rosillo-Magno (2018), the size of the fully developed
flower extended to 13.71 mm. Furthermore, the period of anthesis for citrus varieties is
dependent on the species, climatic conditions, and the position of the flower in the shoot.
‘There was a significant difference in Stage 6 (flowering stage) between the two seasons
(P= 0.0013). During the dry season, it took 7-8 days for Stage 6 to complete and it starts,
from February to March. For the wet season, the process was completed in 6-8 days, and

the flowering stage occurred from June to July.

Figure 7. Principal growth stages (BBCH 71-79) of calamansi (x
Citrofortunella microcarpa (Bunge) Wijnands)

31

Principal growth stage 7: fruit development

71: start of fruit development, the beginning of the fruit set and growth of the ovary

73: fruits 30% of their final size, some fruits became slightly yellow, which was
also the beginning of physiological fruit drop

74: fruits were dark green, and the size was about 40% of the final (around 10-15
mm).

79: fruits were about 90% (around 23-27 mm) of their final size.

Two waves of fruit drop were observed per season. The first wave occurred from
late March to late April (32-36 days) from the fruit set during the dry season and from late
June to early July (11 days) during the wet season. On the other hand, the second wave
occurred in early May (9 days) during the dry season and in September (12 days) during
the wet season. According to Amparo (2021), fruit drop happened for 30 days in potted,
well-watered, and fertilized trees. Fruits that have dropped were observed primarily at
Stage 73 and before Stage 79. Increased fruit drops were observed at BBCH Stage 77
during dry season than rainy season. The size of fruits that dropped was about 4 -12 mm in

diameter and weighed 0.2-12.25g (Figure 8).

=e a9 ee) i) ,
6902-63.98303

Figure 8. Fruits tumed yellow and dropped before BBCH Stage 79.
Fruit size ranges from 4 -12 mm, weighing 0.2-12.25 g

32

The reason for fruit drop might be because there was limited water availability
during dry season. Iglesias et al. (2007) claimed that water stress or moderate water deficit
may trigger fruitlet abscission because ABA (primary sensitive signal to water stress)
accumulated in the roots which regulates the level of ethylene content, a hormone that
activates leaf and fruit abscission. The suppression of water supply during flowering and
fruit set period reduced shoot extension and increased the abscission of flower buds and
small fruits when irrigation was introduced in early summer. High temperatures and dry
environments induce dehydration of trees. Thus, growth in general, is prevented, and
abscission is triggered. When drought stress persists, abscisic acid (ABA) synthesis
increases, leading to stomatal closure also decrease photosynthetic activity. With improved
irrigation during fruit set, the number of fruits may increase (Carr, 2012).

There are two kinds of fruit drop or fruit abscission during fruit development: at the
onset of phase I (cell division) and during phase II (cell enlargement). According to
Spiegel-Roy and Goldschmidt (1996), fruitlet abscission is a self-thinning mechanism to
adjust the crop load of a tree, and less than 1% becomes a fruit and reaches maturity. It is
a natural way to balance fruit numbers to avoid carbohydrate depletion and increase fruit
size during fruit development (Vashisth ct al., 2020). However, fruit abscission during fruit
maturity is regarded as part of the evolutionary for seed dispersal and termed a “preharvest
drop.” It is assumed that auxin declines as the fruit reaches maturity. In citrus tree spp.,
fruit abscission generally occurs in abscission zone A (AZ-A), located between the twig
and the peduncle, while abscission zone C (AZ-C) is in the calyx. This is where most fruits

abscise during the ripening or maturation period (Iglesias et al., 2007).

33

Significant differences (P= <.0001) were obtained between two seasons in Stage 7.
Stage 7 was completed in 58-66 days (average of 62 days) during the dry season and 88-
95 days (average of 91 days) during the wet season. Amparo (2021) reported that the whole
process took about 70 to 84 days to complete. Mapalo and Rosillo-Magno (2018) had the
same observation; fruits attained commercial maturity at 78 to 84 days from fruit set during
November to February. Because the observations were made during the wet season in
Tagaytay City, the Principal Growth Stage 7 was prolonged as compared with the result of
‘Amparo (2021) and Mapalo and Rosillo-Magno (2018). This can be traced to the cooler
climate and less solar radiation received in this location because of cloudy or foggy
conditions.

The last growth stage is fruit maturity or Stage 8, detailed description with its
substages is listed below and presented in Figure 9.

Principal growth stage 8: fruit maturity

81: peel is smooth and shinier; fruits start to change in color (color-break)

83: fruit is ripe for picking; the color turned slightly yellow; fruit diameter ranges
from 26.16- 27.86 mm.

85: advanced ripening and intensity of peel color change increase

89: fruit is ripe for juice consumption; fruit has typical taste and firmness; the

beginning of senescence, and fruit abscission

34

Figure 9. Principal growth stages (BBCH 81-89) of calamansi (x
Citrofortunella microcarpa (Bunge) Wijnands)

A significant difference to complete Stage 8 was detected in the two seasons (P=
<.0001). The fruit development was completed in 32 days during the dry season and was
extended to 12 days longer (44 days) during wet season. Amparo (2021) states that the four
substages (Stages 81-85) of calamansi maturity can all be considered harvestable,
depending on the purpose. Calamansi fruits that fall on Stages 81 and 83 can be stored at
ambient temperature until fruits can be transported. Stage 83 can also be distributed to
nearby markets or consumed immediately. But basically, most calamansi fruits are

preferred to be harvested and consumed when still green or reached color break (Stage 81).

Ripe citrus fruits can be utilized as fresh fruit or processed into juice and specialty
products. Citrus grown for the fresh market requires more extensive inputs in production
and harvesting than citrus produced for processing. Processing of citrus fruits provide an
economical way to store and transport citrus from production regions to distant markets
(Bates ct al., 2001). Stages 85 and 89 fit in this category. Bates et al. (2001) noted that

citrus fruits that are more delicate and softer cannot be kept intact over long periods and

35

tend to deteriorate before or at harvesting; thus, juicing is the logical alternative morcover,

one practical reason for processing is to increase consumption of citrus fruits.

Duration of each principal stage of reproductive phenology as affected by season

The effect of season on the duration of reproductive phenology is summarized in
Figure 10. Stage 5 was unaffected by scason while stages 6 to 8 were influenced by season.
Stage 6 was extended by two more days during the dry compared to the wet season. One
possible explanation for Stage 6 taking longer days to complete is high temperature, which
tends to develop shoots rather than flowers. However, fruit development took a longer time
during the wet season. It took 94 days from fruit set (Stage 7) to reach fruit maturity (Stage
8) during the dry season and 135 days during the wet season or 41 days longer. Moreover,
it took 112 days from inflorescence emergence (Stage 5) to fruit maturity (Stage 8) during

the dry season and 152 days during the wet season.

In contrast to the results above, Mapalo and Rosillo-Magno (2018) obtained
commercial fruit maturity at 94 to 101 days from inflorescence emergence. However, note
that commercial maturity was harvestable at green mature stage or excluding Stage 8. The
equivalent number of days as shown in this study (Stage 5 or inflorescence emergence to
Stage 7 or fruits at maximum size) is 108 days shown in Figure 10. Essentially, the aim of
this study when stated in phenological terms is to extend the Stage 7 for as long as possible

before color break occurs.

36

. ae ks af I | |
* *
*

Average number of days

“Asterisk below the graphs were significant different at (P<0.05)

Figure 10. Duration of principal growth stages influenced by season on
calamansi fruit

Phenology and growing degree days

Season was shown to influence the duration of the various phenological stages in
the previous section which illustrated the effects of climate. In line with this, Growing
Degree Days (GDD) was calculated because it is a weather-based indicator for assessing
plant development stages. GDD or heat units are measured, and the heat accumulation is
calculated to complete the plant development or phenological stages. The temperature is
averaged daily above a lower base temperature and below a maximum threshold
temperature to complete plant development (Gordon and Bootma, 1993; Miller et al.,
2018). The daily weather data prevailing at the time of the study is shown graphically in

Figure 11.

37

Figure 11. Daily weather data (rainfall, average relative humidity, sunshine,
windspeed, and temperature) in Tagaytay City, Cavite

The GDD from inflorescence emergence (Stage 5) to fruit maturity (Stage 8) are
shown in Figure 12. It took 111 days and needed 4,314.33 GDD to reach BBCH Stage 89
during the dry season. During the wet season, it took 152 days and required 3,488.83 GDD
to reach fruit maturity. The dry season recorded the highest total accumulated GDD than
wet season. Stage 7 and Stage 8 took a longer period of average days on both season but,
growing degree days (GDD) was high during Stage 6 and Stage 7 then decreased when
Stage 8 was reached in both seasons. Similarly, Amparo (2021) reported that fruit
development (Stage 7) contributed to the longer process of growth in rainfed trees (84 days)
compared in potted trees (70 and 81 days). From bud development (Stage 0) until fruit
maturation (Stage 8), 5,977.13 heat units (GDD) were required for rainfed trees situated in

Laguna.

‘Accumulated Growing Degree Days

0.0 500.0 1000.0 1500.0 2000.0 2500.0 3000.0 3500.0 4000.0 4500.0 5000.0

Wet season

Dry season

&

60 80 100 120 140 «160 180200
Average number of days

mStageS mStage6 MStage7 © Stage 8

Figure 12. Accumulated Growing Degree Days (AGDD) and completed average
number of days per growth stages of calamansi

Delaying On-tree Ripening of Fruits by Foliar Application of GAs

From the phenological study, it was ascertained that BBCH Stage 79-80 was the
target stage for the GAs treatment that aimed in extending the availability of green fruits
for harvesting during the lean season. Calamansi fruits are harvested and consumed when
still green or just after reaching color break (Stage 81). Fruits harvested after color break
usually fetch lower price at the farm gate as compared to green fruits because there will be
‘more postharvest losses after transport and distribution.

39

Overall, the experiment was successful that GAs application at all concentrations
extended the green stage by 28 to 56 days (Figure 13). The control fruits started to change
color a week after the treatment. However, only the lower concentrations at 10 and 20 ppm
of GAs resulted in color break after 28 days but a week later only less than 17.5% of the
fruits had a tinge of yellow. By 42 days after the GAs treatment, roughly half of the treated
fruits attained color break stage. It can be safely stated that a 20 ppm of GA; treatment will
extend the green mature stage to 35 days with less than 10% of the fruits at color break
stage. Doubling the concentration to 40 ppm of GAs resulted in fruits that remained green
up to 46 days and showed no signs of color break.

However, a second application of all GAs treatments was done 46 days after the
initial treatment. The objective was to determine if the fruits at color break will revert to
the green color. The color change of fruits treated with 10 ppm and 20 ppm progressed and
did not revert to its green color. In contrast, fruits treated with a second dose of 40 ppm of
GAs remained green for 56 days, and after another week approximately one fourth of the
fruits started to change in peel color or at day 63. This study demonstrated that foliar
application of GA3 on BBCH scale 79-80 could extend the harvest time up to 28 days for
the initial treatment or for the whole month of October, which is the off-season period of
calamansi fruits, regardless of the second application of GAs, Additionally, a 40 ppm could
prolong the harvest period until 56 days or until November.

Abscisic acid (ABA) and GAs have antagonistic effects during fruit maturation,
concentration of GA declines before color break and begins the increase of ABA in the

peel, This is associated with coloration including chlorophyll degradation and pigment

40

accumulation. The greener the peel of the citrus, there was more GA3 than ABA (Alferez
et al. 2021). Gibberellic acid treatments delayed senescence, softened rind, changed
essential oil and the rind color rate, and reduced the rind crease severity in citrus fruits

(Garmendia et al., 2019).

nriconven RFs |

3 12(10ppm)
3 foal | EES
i

Figure 13. Timetable of harvest periods of calamansi fruits as affected
by GA3 treatments during on-tree storage (Numbers inside
the bars represents the percentage of fruits that had color
break; Red arrow represents 2nd application of GAs)

Fruit Retention. While the green fruit color was maintained for up to two months,
the question arose as to whether the fruits were retained on the tree and did not drop. Foliar
application of GAs significantly (P= 0.05) retained most of the fruits in 40 ppm of GAs,
accounting for 97.50% after 56 days of on-tree storage (Table 2). This is a very significant
achievement as it means only 2.5% loss in fruits after close to two months of on-tree
storage. At 70 days after the initial spray, more fruits dropped to only 80-90% retention.

The fruits should have been harvested at this time anyway as many of them were ripe.

41

Table 2. Effect of gibberellic acid application on percent fruit retention after on-tree
storage

GA3 Treatments
P-
Days TI T2 T3 74 cv
VALUE
©ppm) (10 ppm) —(@20ppm) —_ (40 ppm)
28 92.50 97.50 95.00 100 636 0.38
56 65.00" 90.00% — 87.50% 97.50" 17.48 0.05
70 52.50 80.00 82.50 90.00 26.64 __—0.10

“Means in the same column with different letters are significantly different from each other at (P<0.05)
value by Tukey HSD Test; CV= Coefficient of variation

Gibberellic acid suppresses abscission in navel orange, reducing and slowing down
chlorophyll degradation, ultimately delaying fruit senescence and harvesting period, thus
this increased packouts during postharvest and market outtums (Linhout et al., 2008).
Additionally, according to Sahu et al. (2020), foliar application of GA; found maximum
fruit retention in mango. Fruit retention up to maturity might be due to proper

supplementation of the nutrients and prevention in the formation of an abscission layer.

Peel color. At the end of the on-tree storage period, fruits treated with 40 ppm of
GAs significantly (P<.0001) maintained the green peel color (2.33) while fruits in untreated

control changed to yellow with trace of green color (5.03) as shown in Table 3.

42

Table 3. Effect of gibberellic acid application on peel color, peel thickness and rind ageing
after on-tree storage
GAs Treatments

Parameters TI T2 T3 T4 wv y LUE
(Oppm) (10 ppm) _(20 ppm) _(40 ppm)
Peel color! 5.03° 3.05? 3.15° 2.33° 10.06 <.0001
Peel thickness, mm 0.98" 0.80% 0.69 = 0.70 «14.15 0.01
Rind ageing, % 77.50° 55.00 60.00% 30.00% 27.34 0.01

TT=fully green, 2-gseen with Uaccs of yellow, 3-more green than yellow, Amore yellow than proc, S=yllow wil Uace of green,
Gefuly yellow.

Means in the same column with differen letters ae significantly differen from each other at (P<0.05) value by Tukey HSD Test
CV= Coefcien of variation

Control fruits were the earliest to change in peel color after 7 days, followed by
fruits treated with 10 and 20 ppm treatment on the 28" day. The effect of second application
of GAs on the fruits with color break did not revert to green, and the color change increased
as it reached 49 days of on-tree storage. The fruits with 40 ppm of GAs that was harvested
on 70" day of on-tree storage started to change in color (Figure 14A). Figures 14B-D shows

the changes in peel color as affected by GAs application during on-tree storage.

@000e0e 000
Hl ©0000 06960

O@0 000 0 O9@


43


Figure 14. Effect of foliar spray of gibberellic acid on peel color of calamansi fruits.
(A) Calamansi fruits harvested on 70th day of on-tree storage. (B) One week
after spray of GA3 (October 2021). (C) One month after spray of GA3
(November 2021). (D) Two months after spray of GA3 (December 2021). T1
‘was terminated.

Figure 15 shows the number of fruits in percent as affected by GAs treatment using
the yellowing or color index that was obtained from Postharvest Horticulture Training and
Research Center (PHTRC). Fruits treated with 40 ppm of GAs was at color index category
2 (green colors with a trace of yellow), about 85%, Fruits without GAs and fruits with 10
ppm were in color index category 5 (yellow with trace of green) and color index category
3 (more green than yellow) with both 47% correspondingly. Moreover, 30% of control
fruits were classified under color index category 6 (fully orange fruits).

Exogenous application of GA3 has an inhibitory effect in ripening or maturation
which delays the anthocyanin synthesis and decrease in respiration as well as reduction of
enzymes such as phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL), chlorophyllase and peroxidase
activities involved in chlorophyll metabolism (Alferez et al., 2021). Thus, this results in
the delay of degreening in citrus fruits and managing harvesting periods when applied

before the onset of color break. Foliar application of GA3 prevents fruit ripening, retards

45

fruit aging, and ultimately maintains the green peel color during on-tree storage before

harvest season.

Figure 15. Number of calamansi fruits per color index as
affected by gibberellic acid after 70 days of on-
tree storage
Peel color is the most essential and reliable ripening index in mandarin fruits. Pre-

harvest treatment of 30 ppm GAs treated fruits resulted in a significant delay in the rind

color development as well as delay in the maturity in mandarin (Rokaya et al., 2016). In

kumauat citrus fruit, application of 20 ppm GAs led to a significantly higher hue (H°) value
and increased chromaticity (C°) value, thus reducing the rate of degreening and delayed
fruit color break during on- tree storage. Furthermore, an increase in the citrus color index
(CCI) was also inhibited, indicating the lightness (L) of peel could be retained by GA3 (Cai
et al., 2022).

Peel thickness. Peel thickness was significantly (P= 0.01) affected by the

application of GA3, Control fruits had thicker peels compared to treated fruits after 70 days

46

of storage (Table 4). Fruits sprayed with 40 ppm and 20 ppm GAs had thinner peels,
measuring 0.70 mm and 0.69 mm, respectively. The same effect was also reported that peel
thickness and weight were lower in treated Sunburst fruits (Pozo et al., 2000) and pummelo
cultivars (Wang et al., 2019) during on-tree storage. During fruit development, GA3-treated
fruits moderately increased in peel thickness but decreased during maturation,
demonstrating that GAs delayed fruit aging.

In addition, the reduced peel thickness resulted in an increased peel puncture force,
indicating higher peel firmness. The total peel fresh weight increased during maturation.
However, GAs slowed down and reduced the increase of peel thickness and weight during
fruit maturation, subsequently increasing the pulp weight. As a result, significantly delayed
decrease in pulp/ peel ratio in mandarin. Delaying peel and rind senescence improves fruit

quality, prolongs the shelf life of fruit, and extends its value (Ismail, 1997).

Rind ageing. Rind ageing was estimated as the percent of fruit with peel pitting
(see Figure 16). Peel pitting is a disorder characterized with a sunken area of flavedo (called
pits) that eventually spreads and affects the oil glands (Alferez et al., 2004). Rind ageing
was prominent in untreated fruits with 77.50% occurrence while only 30% was observed
in fruits applied with 40 ppm GAs.

According to Postharvest Horticulture Training and Research Center (PHTRC),
quality of calamansi fruits can be evaluated using visual quality rating (VQR), the untreated
fruits were mostly under VQR categories 3-5, which were in fair and poor peel appearance,
moderate and minor defects, and limit of marketability. The fruits in 40 ppm were observed

to be in VQR categories 8-9, categorized as excellent and field fresh fruits, while fruits in

a7

10 ppm and 20 ppm were under VQR categories 6-7 as good and has a minor defect
condition. Only 40 ppm was the only acceptable in consumer preference among all
treatments in evaluating the external visual appearance. Additionally, mature, whole, firm,
fresh, free from superficial defects such as discoloration, mechanical damage, pests, and

diseases are the standard qualities for grading and classification in calamansi fruits (PNS-

Cee

Figure 16. Peel pitting in control calamansi fruits after on-tree
storage.

DA, 2005).

Application of GAs prevents the growth of peel thickness which delays fruit ageing
and maintains firmness during maturation. Similar observation from Kassem et al. (2012)
experiment, all foliar sprays recorded a significant decrease in rind ageing percentage (GAs
and combination of PUT, Ca, and except 2, 4-D alone). Thus, the percentage of rind
softening, and pitting was decreased by foliar sprays of GAs.

The application of GAs at the mature stage is mainly for maintaining and enhancing
extemal fruit qualities (Zekri, 2011). External fruit disorders such as peel pitting, browning
and shriveled are critical in consumers’ acceptance and preference. According to Barrette
et al. (2010), characteristics that provide distinctive quality of fruits and vegetables are

described by color and appearance as the first attributes, followed by flavor (taste and

48

aroma), taste, and nutritional value. Consumers tend to evaluate the extemal visual
appearance more than internal qualities. Nutritional value is a hidden quality attribute and
is only evaluated after consumption.

So fresh external appearance of fruits is the first parameter evaluated by consumers
in the market. Maintaining extemal qualities such as green peel color, disease-free, pecl is
not shriveled and sunken, additionally, no browning in rind for a more extended period of

storage is advantageous and could give a higher marketable price.

Fruit weight and diameter. Gibberellic acid has no significant effect on fruit weight
and diameter after on-tree storage (Table 4). However, fruits treated with all GA3
treatments have heavier weight compared to control. Application of 40 ppm of GA3
recorded the maximum fruit weight of 223.3 g and the least weight was found in control
fruits (177 g). Probably, the relatively higher CV of 13.55 was responsible for the non-
significant effect on fruit weight.

Other workers with citrus on-tree storage reported an increase in fruit weight after
GAs application. Pozo et al. (2000) reported that 25 ppm of GAs applied on full trees (stage
of fruits not recorded), fruit weight of mandarin increased until 60 days after application.
Also, El-Rahman et al., (2017) found that when sprayed with 10 and 20 ppm of GAs during
color break on mandarins, fruit weight gradually increased as harvest period proceeded up
to 3" harvest then decreased in 4" harvest. Furthermore, GA3 with a concentration of 10
to 20 ppm was the most effective treatment for fruit growth in mandarin applied at fruit

color break (Rokaya et al., 2016).

49

Table 4. Effect of gibberellic acid application on fruit weight, diameter, juice content and

fruit firmness after on-tree storage
Gibberellic Acid; Treatments

Ti Pp
Parameters @ 12 73 14 CV VALUE
ppm) _(10Ppm) (20 ppm) (40 ppm)
Fruit weight, g 177.00 208.05 194.33 223.30 13.55 0.15
Fruit diameter,mm 33.68 3432-3397 35.61 3.99 0.25
Juice content, % 41.79 43.77 4240 43.450 5.71.60

Fruit firmness, kg/cm? 1.61% 2.19 > 2.64" 21.58 0.06

feans in the same column with different letters are significantly different from each other at (P<0.05)
value by Tukey HSD Test; CV= Coefficient of variation

Talat et al. (2020) stated the length and width of Kinnow mandarin fruits were
improved with the foliar application of 65 ppm GAs during a pre-harvest stage; however,
the size of fruits when sprayed was not reported. Limequat fruits sprayed with 15 ppm of
GAs at the onset of the cell expansion stage were recorded to have maximum fruit diameter
compared when sprayed after 21 days of the cell expansion stage (Shah et al., 2017). In
strawberry, Thakur et al. (2017) also observed that fruits sprayed with gibberellic acid
resulted in highest fruit length, breadth, and weight.

The higher fruit growth with GA3-treated fruits might be due to mediating process
for faster translocation and mobilization of photosynthates from the source. It is well-
known that gibberellic acid induces cell elongation, increased organ size therefore
stimulating cell division. According to Lara (2013), gibberellic acid is a pentacyclic

diterpene acid that promotes plant growth and elongation.

50

Juice content. All GAs treatments had no significant effect (P= 0.60) on juice
content percent (Table 4). Gibberellic acid enhanced the extemal qualities such as delayed
rind ageing, prevent browning and peel pitting, thus, water loss from the fruit during on -
tree storage was minimal. this is because the pulp walls were well preserved in the GAs
treated fruit rind softening was inhibited. Because peel thickness was decreased during
maturation, juice content was maintained and preserved, this made the fruit firmer until

harvest season.

Fruit firmness. Fruits treated with 40 ppm of GA3 have a higher valuc (2.64
kg/cm’) of fruit firmness than the control (1.61 kg/cm’). All the GAs-treated fruits
maintained fruit firmness at harvest (Table 4). This observation is consistent with other
studies done on citrus. Foliar application of GAs at 10, 20 and 30 ppm applied at color
break of mandarin have higher levels of peel firmness. Fruits with 20 ppm of GAs proved
to have higher peel puncture resistance during fruit growth (El-Rahman ct al., 2017; Zekri,
2011). Because during senescence of fruit, the cell wall becomes loosened, making the fruit
soften as the fruits aged. This decreases the fruit’s firmness. Foliar application of GA; at
color break reduced the percent of fruit softening. The pro-pectin, which acts as a
cementing material for binding the cellulose and hemicelluloses, is converted to soluble
pectin, which loosens the cell wall’s binding force during ripening. GAs increased juice
extraction efficiency because the increased peel firmness provides better mechanical

support for the fruit (Rokaya et al., 2016).

51

Total Soluble Solids. Application of GA3 significantly (P=0. 002) affected the total
sugar of fruits after 70 days of on-tree storage as shown in Table 5. The value of soluble
solids in control fruits (0.78 Brix) was higher than in GA3-treated fruits, while same values
were attained by all GA3-treated fruits (0.70 °Brix). This result is to be expected as the
control fruits were already very ripe (see Fig 14A), and TSS increases in ripe fruits whereas
ripening was retarded in GA3-treated fruits. According to Jadhao et al. (2008), the soluble
sugars in control had a rapid increase than in other treatments, and this might be due to a
faster metabolic activity through respiration and transpiration. The increase in soluble
sugars during storage indicates loss of moisture, hydrolysis of polysaccharides, and

concentrations of juice because of dehydration.

Table 5. Effect of gibberellic acid application on fruit biochemical characteristics after
on-tree storage

GA3 Treatments 5
Parameters T1 T2 T3 T4 CV VALUE
(ppm) (10 ppm) (20 ppm) _(40 ppm)
TSS, °Brix 7.75 7.00° 7.00° 7.00" 3.48 0.002
TA, % 4.01 4.10 4.20 3.97 AQ 0.95

"*Means in the same column with different letters are significantly different from each other at (P<0.05)
value by Tukey HSD Test; CV= Coefficient of variation

As the aim of this study was to see if the availability of green mature fruits can be
extended and that these fruits are essentially the same as those that did not undergo on-tree
storage, the control here should have been fruits at BBCH 79-80 from untreated or control
trees. Because there were limited available fruits at the time this manuscript was being

written, TSS of control fruits were read and compared from those fruits using the same

52

methodology. The result showed that TSS content was the same or unaffected when
compared against the GA; treatments (data not shown). Sugar content of fruits increases as
the fruits mature with increasing harvest time. According to Alferez et al. (2021), in non-
climacteric fruits such as citrus, as fruits develop and mature, the level of sugar content and
ABA increases with the onset of ripening. The color change during maturation is the
consequence of reduction in levels of the active gibberellins GA and GAg, which is
involved in the regulation of sugars and ABA accumulation in the rind; moreover, ABA
enhanced the sensitivity of the fruit to ethylene. Ethylene is the stimulant of transcriptional
and biochemical changes that are associated with maturation. Pozo et al. (2000) reported
TSS decreased after foliar treatment of 25 ppm of GA3 on mandarin compared with the
control. GAs inhibited the accumulation of sugar, mainly sucrose, because the increase of

total sugars was due to the ripening phase of the fruits.

Titratable Acidity. The foliar application of GAs did not significantly (p=0.83)
affect the acidity of calamansi fruits (Table 5). Fruits treated with 40 ppm of GAs recorded
3.97 minimum acidity while fruits treated with 30 ppm and 20 ppm of GAs recorded
maximum acidity, 4.20% and 4.10%, respectively. The opposite result was obtained by Cai
et al. (2020) in Kumquat fruit, and Sen et al. (2013) in Satsuma mandarin, acidity in GAs-
sprayed fruits decreased gradually as storage time increased indicating that GAs
application, acidity decreased at the end of on tree storage. Foliar application of GA was
found to promote TA degradation. Nawaz ct al. (2008) also stated that GAs application was

also helpful in reducing acidity in Kinnow mandarin.

CHAPTER V

SUMMARY, CONCLUSION, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

SUMMARY

The reproductive phenology of calamansi trees from flowering to the fruit
development and ripening stage was observed in dry and wet seasons, from February 2021
to December 2021. Phenological observations using the BBCH scale were initially done
during the dry season and repeated in the wet season. Calamansi trees during the wet season
were subjected to different gibberellic acid treatments (T1: control; T2: 10 ppm; T3: 20

ppm, and T4: 40 ppm).

Study I focused on stage 5 (inflorescence emergence) until stage 8 (fruit maturity)
using the BBCH scale. Stage 5 was unaffected by season, with only one day difference.
Stages 6 to 8 were influenced by season, and Stage 6 was extended by two more days
during the dry compared to the wet scason. Fruit development (Stage 7) took a long time
during the wet season, which lasted 62 days during the dry season and 91 days during the
wet season. The fruit maturity stage (Stage 8) took 32 days during the dry season and 44

days during the wet season.

To sum up the total duration of growth stages, it took 94 days from fruit setting
(Stage 7) to reach fruit maturity (Stage 8) during the dry season and 135 days during the

wet season, or 41 days longer. From floral emergence to fruit development or fruits that

54

did not reach color break yet (Stage 5-7) took 80 days and 108 days in the dry and wet
seasons, respectively. Moreover, it took 112 days from inflorescence emergence (Stage 5)

to fruit maturity (Stage 8) during the dry season and 152 days during the wet season.

It took 111 days and needed 4,314.33 GDD to reach Stage 8 during the dry season.
Stage 7 contributed to the long process (62 days), followed by stage 8 (32 days). On the
other hand, during the wet season, it took 152 days and 3488.83 GDD to reach fruit
maturity, which is considered the beginning of senescence and fruit abscission. The dry
season recorded the highest total accumulated GDD (4,314.33), indicating that increased

temperatures will contribute to increased available heat energy for plant growth.

For the second study, the effects of GAs on extending the green mature stage for
on-tree storage was evaluated. The ideal phenological stage of calamansi to apply GAs was
identified to be BBCH Stage 79-80 or the green mature fruits that have attained full size

and before any color break can be detected.

Fruits treated with initial sprays of 10 and 20 ppm can delay the color change and
harvest the green stage at 28 days in which the physical characteristics are acceptable to
the consumer's visual preference. On the other hand, 40 ppm remained green for up to 46
days and showed no signs of a color break. And this one is crucial because only a one-time
application of 40 ppm could already extend and prolong the shelf life of the mature green

stage for 46 days.

A second application of GA3 was made 46 days after the initial application, when

some fruits started to change in color. The fruits treated with lower concentrations (10 and

55

20 ppm) did not remain green and color development progressed. In contrast, fruits with
40 ppm of GAs remained green until 56 days, and after another week (63 days), only one-
fourth of the fruits started to change in color and up to 90 % of the fruits were retained
until 70 days of on-tree storage. Moreover, the treatment also significantly decreased peel
thickness, delayed rind ageing, and made it firmer. Additionally, the total soluble solids

(TSS) and Titratable acidity (TA) were unaffected.

In summary, all GAs treatments successfully extended and maintained the mature
green stage (BBCH scale 79-80) of calamansi fruits by 28 to 56 days and when extended
for another week, only one-fourth had color break. It was 40 ppm of GA3 exhibited the best
results among other treatments in all the parameters examined. It was clear that GAs only
slowed down chlorophyll degradation, not inhibited it. Thus, the fruit has also delayed
ageing or maturation of calamansi fruits. It was ideal and recommended to harvest the fruits
before or until 63 days after treatment because fruits in this period were still green but

showed color break.

56

CONCLUSION

The ideal stage for applying gibberellic acid is when the fruits had reached BBCH
Scale 79-80, about 90-100% (around 23-27 mm) of their final size with no color break
visible. This stage can also be identified by counting 108 days from inflorescence
emergence during the wet season. It was ascertained that the duration of flower and fruit

development stages varied with the season.

All concentrations of GA3 were proven to successfully extend the green stage of
calamansi fruits by 28 to 56 days. A one-time application of GA; extends the mature green
stage for a month in fruits treated with 10 and 20 ppm, with less than 17.5% of fruits at
color break. In contrast, fruits treated with 40 ppm extended the green mature stage for 46
days with initial spray and a second application further extended the effect up to 63 days
with only one-fourth (27.5%) having a color break. When sprayed on fruits that had already

undergone color break, the second application did not revert back to green color.

Overall, 40 ppm of GAs showed a better outcome in all GAs treatments with or
without the second spray. GAs at 40 ppm delayed peel color change, slowed down rind
ageing, decreased peel thickness, and maintained fruit firmness. The postharvest quality
of the fruits after two months of on-tree storage was essentially the same as calamansi
fruits harvested immediately since total soluble solids, titratable acidity and fruit firmness
were unaffected by the GA3 treatment . Thus, this study demonstrated that calamansi

fruits can be made available for harvesting in the next two months after the peak season

7

by on-tree storage. Consequently, harvesting can be made during the lean scason and

calamansi growers can expect to sell the fruits at a higher farm gate price because of this

technology.

RECOMMENDATIONS

Accordingly, the following recommendations are formulated:

1.

GAs can be applied as foliar spray 108 days after inflorescence emergence during
the wet season, or when the fruits tum dark green, the peel is porous, and around

90-100 % (23-27 mm) of their final size.

. The lower concentrations of 20 ppm of GAs; can be used for short term on-tree

storage lasting for 35 days. This is suitable for trees with fruits ready for harvesting

mid to late September and the grower wants to reach the October harvesting date.

. The highest dose of 40 ppm GAs is more effective for longer on-tree storage of up

to 46 days with a single application. A second application can be advised to extend
on-tree storage for up to two months. This can be effective for trees with harvestable
fruits in August and intended for harvest in October or for trees with harvestable

fruit in September and intended for a November harvest.

58

LITERATURE CITED

Agusti, M., Reig, C., Martinez-Fuentes, A., & Mesejo, C. (2022). Advances in citrus
flowering: a review. Frontiers in Plant Science, 13.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2022.868831

Alferez, F., & Bums, J. K. (2004). Postharvest peel pitting in citrus is induced by changes
in relative humidity. Proc. Fla. State Hort. Soc., 117, 355-358. Retrieved from:
https:/Awww.researchgate.net/publication/234022614_Postharvest_peel_pitting_in_
Citrus_is_induced_by_changes_in_rclative_humidity/references#fullTextFileConte
nt

Alferez, F., De Carvalho, D. U., & Boakye, D. (2021). Interplay between abscisic acid and
gibberellins, as related to ethylene and sugars, in regulating maturation of non-
climacteric fruit. Intemational Journal of Molecular Sciences, 22(2), 669.

doi:10.3390/ijms22020669

Amparo, M. M. (2021). Effects Of Vesicular-Arbuscular Mycorthiza (VAM) Application
on The Phenological Growth of Calamansi (x Citrofortunella microcarpa). [MS
thesis). College, Laguna, Philippines: University of the Philippines Los Bafios.

AOAC. (1999). Official methods of analysis. Association of Official Analytical Chemists,
Washington., 16.

Archer, L., Brewer, M., Adhikari, B., Esteves, E., Vincent, C., & Vashisth, T. (2021).
Management options for improving flowering in citrus production. EDIS, 2021(1),
6. https://doi.org/10.32473/edis-hs1399-2020

Barrett, D. M., Beaulieu, J. C., & Shewfelt, R. (2010). Color, flavor, texture, and nutritional

quality of fresh-cut fruits and vegetables: Desirable levels, instrumental and sensory

59

measurement, and the effects of processing. Critical Reviews in Food Science and
Nutrition, 50(5), 369-389. https://doi.org/10.1080/10408391003626322

Bates, R. P., Mortis, J. R., & Crandall, P. G. (2001). Principles and practices of small-and
medium-scale fruit juice processing. UN FAO Agricultural Service Bulletin, 146.
Retrieved from: https://www.fao.org/publications/card/en/c/Sd1 62af9-b030-595b-
bbd8-2064700cedca/

Business Diary Philippines. (2018). Calamansi production guide. Retrieved from.
Retrieved April 13, 2021, from  https://businessdiary.com.ph/4343/calamansi-
production-guide/

Cai, N., Chen, C., Wan, C., & Chen, J. (2020). Effects of pre-harvest gibberellic acid spray
on endogenous hormones and fruit quality of kumquat (Citrus japonica) fruits. New
Zealand Joumal of Crop and Horticultural Science, 49(2-3), 211-224.
https://doi.org/10.1080/01 140671.2020.1806084

Carifio, C. M. (2019). Year-round calamansi production in Oriental Mindoro now possible.
Retrieved June 4, 2021, from
hittps://www.manilatimes.net/2019/04/04/business/agribusiness/year-round-

calamansi-production-in-oriental-mindoro-now-possible/534939

Carr, M. K. (2012). The water relations and irrigation requirements of citrus (Citrus spp.):
A review. Experimental Agriculture, 483), 347-377.
https://doi.org/10.1017/s0014479712000038

Cassin, J., Bourdeaut, J., Fougue, A., Furon, V., Gaillard, J. P., LeBourdelles, J., Moreuil,
C. (1969). The influence of climate upon blooming of citrus in tropical areas. Proc.
Ist Int. Citrus Symp, 1, 315-323.

Ceballo, F. A., Sta. Cruz, F. C., Revilloza, M. A., Albaytar, A. B., Beltran, M. B., Villa, J.
E., & Aguilar, E. A. (2022). Insect pests and their natural enemies and diseases of

60

calamansi in Oriental Mindoro: A field identification and management guide.
SEARCA: Los Bafios; DA-BAR.

Coggins, Jr., C. W., Hiled, H. Z., Burns, R. M., Eaks, I. L., & Lewis, L. N. (1966).
Gibberellin research with citrus. California Agriculture, 12-13, Retrieved from:
https://calag.ucanr.edu/download_pdf.cfm?article=ca.v020n07p12

Department of Agriculture- Philippine Rural Development Program (DA-PRDP). (2012).
Value chain analysis for fresh calamansi. Retrieved June 7, 2021, from
https://docplayer.net/56266636-Value-chain-analysis-for-fresh-calamansi.html

Davenport, T. L. (1990). Citrus flowering. Horticultural Reviews, 12, 349-408.
https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118060858.ch8

El-Otmani, M., Ait-Oubahou, A., & Zacarias, L. (2011). Citrus spp.: Orange, mandarin,
tangerine, clementine, grapefruit, pomelo, lemon and lime. Postharvest biology and
 doi:10,1533/9780857092762.437

technology of tropical and subtropical frui

El-Rahman, A., F, G., Hoda, & Mohamed, M. (2017). Maximazing the profitability of the
farmers by on-tree storage of Balady mandarin. International Journal of Agriculture
and Environmental Research, 3(1), 2431-2451.

Garcia-Luis, A., Agusti, M., Almela, V., Romero, E., & Guardiola, J. L. (1985). Effect of
gibberellic acid on ripening and peel puffing in ‘Satsuma’ mandarin. Scientia

Horticulturae, 27(1-2), 75-86. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-4238(85)90057-3

Garmendia, A., Beltran, R., Zomoza, C., Garcia-Breijo, F. J., Reig, J., & Merle, H.
(2019). Gibberellic acid in citrus spp. flowering and fruiting: A systematic review.
PLOS ONE, 14(9). doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0223147

Gordon, R., & Bootsma, A. (1993). Analyses of growing degree-days for agriculture in
Atlantic Canada. Climate Research, 3, 169-176. https://doi.org/10.3354/cr003169

61

Huang, Y.Z., Li, J. (1999). Changes in main characteristics of Guanxi pummelo fruit during
storage. Fujian Agr. Sinica, 11:85-88

Iglesias, D. J., Cercés, M., Colmenero-Flores, J. M., Naranjo, M. A., Rios, G., Carrera, E.,
Ruiz-Rivero, O., Lliso, I., Morillon, R., Tadeo, F. R., & Talon, M. (2007). Physiology
of citrus fruiting. Brazilian Journal of Plant Physiology, 19(4), 333-362.
https://doi.org/10.1590/s1677-04202007000400006

Ismail, M. A. (1997), Delaying rind senescence in citrus fruit. Florida Department of
Citrus, 119-129. Retrieved from:
https://irrec.ifas.ufl.edw/ficitrus/pdfs/short_course_and_workshop/citrus_flowering_

97/Ismail-Delaying_Rind_Senescence.pdf

Jadhao, S., Borkar,

Borkar, S., Bakane, P., & Murumkar, R. (2008). Effect of different
treatments and packaging materials on biochemical changes during storage of kagzi
lime. Asian Journal of Bio Science, 3(2), 247-250. Retrieved from: https://asset-
pdf.scinapse.io/prod/962986438/962986438.pdf

Kassem, H. A., Marzouk, H. A., & AlObeed, R. S. (2012). Effect of putrescine, GA3, 2, 4-
D, and calcium on delaying peel senescence and extending harvest season of navel
orange.  Joumal of +— Applied Horticulture, —14(01), 56-62.
https://doi.org/10.37855/jah.2012.v14i01.10

Lara, I. (2013). Preharvest sprays and their effects on the postharvest quality of fruit.
Stewart Postharvest Review, 9(3), 1-12. https://doi.org/10.2212/spr.2013.3.5

Levy, Y., & Boman, B. (2003). Water management in citrus. ResearchGate, 1-41.
Retrieved from
:https://www.researchgate.neU/publication/293334460_Water_Management_in_Citr

us

62

Lim, T. K. (2012). Citrus x microcarpa. Edible medicinal and non-medicinal plants, 865-
870. doi:10.1007/978-94-007-4053-2_99

Liu, S.Z., Jiang, Y.L., Li, X.M., Zhang, Z.Q., Hu, W.R. (2010) Research progress in
postharvest physiology and storage technology of pommelo fruit. Food Sci., 31(21):
394-399.

Lindhout, K., Treeby, M., Hardy, S., & Bevington, K. (2008). Using gibberellic acid sprays
on navel oranges. NSW DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY INDUSTRIES. . Retrieved
from: —_https://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/232197/Using-

gibberellic-acid-sprays-on-navel-oranges.pdf

Mapalo, N., & Rosillo-Magno, A. (2018). Morphological events on the development of
flowers, fruits, and seeds of calamansi (x Citrofortunella microcarpa Bunge). Journal
of Science, Engineering © and Technology, 6, +~—-160-168.
https://doi.org/https://www..ijterm.org/index.php/jset/article/view/45

Marzouk, H. A., & Kassem, H. A. (2010). Effect of Putrescine, GAs, 2, 4-D, and calcium
on extending harvest season of Navel orange. Alexandria Science Exchange Joumal:
‘An Intemational Quarterly Journal of Science Agricultural Environments,
31(APRIL- JUNE), 193-200. https://doi.org/10.21608/asejaiqjsae.2010.2311.

Meier, U. (2001). Growth stages of mono and dicotyledonous plants BBCH Monograph.
Federal Biological Research Centre for Agriculture and Forestry, 81-84. Retrieved
from:https://www.juliuskuehn.de/media/Veroeffentlichungen/bbch%20epaper%20e
npage.pdf

Miller, P., Lanier, W., & Brandt, S. (n.d.). Using growing degree days to predict plant
stages. Montana State University Extension, MT 59717.

Nawaz, M. A., Ahmad, W., Ahmad, S., & Khan, M. M. (2008). Role of growth regulators
on preharvest fruit drop, yield and quality in Kinnow mandarin. Pak. J. Bot., 40(5),

63

1971-1981. Retrieved from:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/272575480_Role_of_growth_regulators_
on_preharvest_fruit_drop_yield_and_quality_in_kinnow_mandarin

Ometto, J.C. (1981). Bioclimatologia vegetal. Agronémica Ceres. Sao Paulo, Brazil.

Philippine National Standard (PNS). (2005). Philippine national standard for fresh
calamondin/ calamansi- Grading and classification. PNS/BAFPS, 30.

Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA). 2019. Commodity Fact Sheets, pg. 23. Retrieved
from:https://psa.gov.ph/sites/default/files/2019%20Commodity%20Factsheets_sign
ed.pat

Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA). (2020). 2015-2019 Crops statistics of the
Philippines, pg.8. Retrieved from:
hitps://psa.gov.ph/sites/defaulv/files/Crops%20Statistics%200f%20the%20Philippin
€8%2C%202015-2019.pdf

Porat, R., Feng, X., Huberman, M., Galili, D., Goren, R., & Goldschmidt, E. E. (2001).
Gibberellic acid slows postharvest degreening of ‘Oroblanco' citrus fruits.

HortScience, 36(5), 937-940. https://doi.org/10.21273/hortsci,36.5.937
Postharvest Horticulture Training and Rescarch Center. (n.d). Quality Evaluation.

Pozo, L., Kender, W. & Hartmond, U. (2000). Effects of gibberellic acids
on ripening and rind puffing in 'Sunburst' mandarin. Proc. Fla. State Hort. Soc, 113,
102-105.Retrievedfrom: https://www.cabdirect.org/cabdirect/abstrac/20033 139793

Bums, J.

Rokaya, P. R., Baral, D. R., Gautam, D. M., Shrestha, A. K., & Paudyal, K. P. (2016).
Effect of pre-harvest application of gibberellic acid on fruit quality and shelf life of
mandarin (Citrus reticulata Blanco). American Journal of Plant Sciences, 07(07),
1033-1039. https://doi.org/10.4236/ajps.2016.77098

Sahu, C., Sharma, H. G., & Panigrahi, H. K. (2020). Effect of plant growth regulators on
fruit retention and fruit drop of mango (Mangifera indica L.) ev. Dashehari.
International Joumal of Science and Research (IJSR), 9(4), 1165-1167.
https://doi.org/DOI: 10.21275/SR20307145813

Sanchez, M. J. (2020, September). Philippines: Calamansi production Volume 2019.

SEARCA. (2019). Agritrends: There's a huge international market for calamansi. Retrieved
June 4, 2021, from  https://ww

market-

arca.org/press/agritrends-huge-intemational-

alamansi

Sen, A., Betiil Meyvaci, K., Zafer Can, H., & Teksiir, P. K. (2013). Effect of preharvest
gibberellic acid and calcium applications on on-tree storage of Satsuma mandarins.
Acta Horticulturae, (1012), 233-239.
https://doi.org/10.17660/actahortic.2013.1012.26

Shah, S. H. A., Rab, A., Sajid, M., Bacha, S. A. S., Khan, M. A., & Iqbal, J. (2017).
Influence of gibberellic acid concentrations and application time on pre and post-
harvest performance of limequat. Sci.Int.(Lahore), 29(3), 773~780. Retrieved from
http://www.sei-int.com/pd{/636366030162389205.pdf

Shafgat, W., Naqvi, S. A., Maqbool, R., Salman Haider, M., Jafar Jaskani, M., & Khan, I.
A. (2021). Climate change and citrus. Citrus - Research, Development and
Biotechnology. https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.95488

Spiegel-Roy, P., & Goldschmidt, E. E. (1996). The Biology of Citrus. Cambridge
University Press. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO978051 1600548

Stander, J. (2015). The reproductive phenology of citrus I: Introduction to the physiology
of citrus flowering. Citrus. Research ~—International, 82-87.
https://www. Istfruits.co.za/wp/wp-contentuploads/2016/02/1-JUN-JUL-citrus-
physiology _JS.pdf

65

Stander, J. (2015). The reproductive phenology of citrus II: Citrus floral ontogeny. Citrus
Research International, 65-69. Retrived From:
https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/The-reproductive-phenology-of-Citrus--II-
%3A-Citrus/283dee9065e1b27767973340439ebdb499369759

Stander, J. (2015). The Reproductive phenology of citrus III; Morphogenesis from flower
to fruit. Citrus Research International, 77-83. Retrieved from
http://www. Istfruits.co.za/wp/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/3-OKT-NOV-citrus-
phenology_JS.pdf

Sotto, R. C. (1992). x Citrofortunella microcarpa (Bunge) Wijnands. In E. M. Verheij &
R. E. Coronel (Eds.), Edible Fruits and Nuts. Plant Resources of South-East Asia
No. 2, Wageningen: The Netherlands. pp. 117-119

Talat, H., Shafgat, W., Qureshi, M. A., Sharif, N., Raza, M.

, Din, S. ud, & Jaskani, M.
J. (2020). Effect of gibberellic acid on fruit quality of Kinnow mandarin. Journal of
Global Innovations in Agricultural and Social Sciences, 8(3), 59-63.
https://doi.org/10.22194/jgiass/8.901

Thakur, Y., Chandel, J. S., & Verma, P. (2017). Effect of plant growth regulators on
growth, yield and fruit quality of strawberry (fragaria x Ananassa Duch.) under
protected conditions. Journal of Applied and Natural Science, 9(3), 1676-1681.
https://doi.org/10.31018/jans.v9i3.1420

Unigarro, C. A., Bermudez Florez, L. N., Medina, R. D., Jaramillo, A., & Florez, C. P.
(2017). Evaluation of four degree-day estimation methods in eight Colombian
coffee-growing areas. Agronomia Colombiana, _35(3), 357-364.
doi: 10.15446/agron.colomb.v35n3.65221

Vashisth, T., Dewdney, M., & Diepenbrock, L. (2020). Fruit drop of citrus in summer
months. Citrus Industry, 18-21.

66

Wang, Y., He, W., Fu, X., Chen, Q., & Wang, X. (2019). Effect of on-tree storage on fruit
quality of three pummelo (Citrus grandis osbeck) cultivars. IOP Conference Series:
Earth and Environmental Science, 330, 032052. https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-
1315/330/3/032052

Zekri, M. (2011). Factors affecting citrus production and quality. Citrus industry, 6-9.
https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Factors-affecting-citrus-production-and-
quality-Zekri/fd168a082b3126d48(907 1659d31d4925bcf70fe

Zervoudakis, G., Salahas, G., Kaspiris, G., & Konstantopoulou, E. (2012). Influence of
light intensity on growth and physiological characteristics of common sage (Salvia
officinalis L.). Brazilian Archives of Biology and Technology, 55(1), 89-95.
https://doi.org/10.1590/s1516-8913201200010001 1

67

APPENDICES

APPENDIX A. Statistical Analysis for Stage 5

Descriptive Statistics
Treatment Mean Std. Deviation N
Dry 9.55555556 2.95500019 18
Wet 10.6666667 0.9701425 18
Total 20.22222226 3.92514269 36

PAIRED TTEST between Dry and Wet

N Mean Std Dev Std Err Minimum Maximum
18 =U 3.0849 0.7271 -6.0000 6.0000
95% CL Mean 95% CL Std Dev DF tValue_ Pr>|t)
2.6452 0.4230 2.3148 4.6246 17 -1.53__0.1449

APPENDIX B. Statistical Analysis for Stage 6

Descriptive Statistics
Treatment Mean Std. Deviation N
Dry 7.55555556 1.09663776 18
Wet 644444444 0.85558526 18
Total 14 1.95222302 36

PAIRED TTEST between Dry and Wet

N Mean Std Dev Std Err Minimum Maximum
18 Lud 1.2314 0.2902 -2.0000 2.0000
95% CL Mean 95% CL Std Dev DF t Value Pr>|t}

0.4988 1.7235, 0.92401.8460__0.92401.8460 17 3.83 0.0013


APPENDIX C. Statistical Analysis for Stage 7

68

Descriptive Statistics
Treatment Mean Std. Deviation N
Dry 62.4444444 2.79120936 18
Wet 91 2.5179097 18
Total 153.5555555 5.30911906 36
PAIRED TTEST between Dry and Wet
N Mean Std Dev Std Er Minimum Maximum
18 28.6667 4.4325 1.0448 -35.0000 -22.0000
95% CL Mean 95% CL Std Dev DF tValue__Pr>jt]
=30.8709 _-26.4624 3.3261 6.6450 17 -27.44_<.0001
APPENDIX D. Statistical Analysis for Stage 8
Descriptive Statistics
Treatment Mean Std. Deviation N
Dry 317777778 1.00326265 18
Wet 43.7777718 0.87820375 18
Total 78.5555556 1,8814664 36
PAIRED TTEST between Dry and Wet
N Mean Std Dev StdEx Minimum Maximum
18 -12.0000 1.5339 0.3616 -15.0000 -9.0000
95% CL Mean 95% CL Std Dev DF__tValue_Pr>|t]
=12.7628__-11.2372 __1.1510 2.2996 17 -33.19 _<.0001


APPENDIX E. Statistical Analysis for Peel color

69

Descriptive Statistics
Treatment N Mean Std. Deviation
1 4 5.02500000 0.29860788
2 4 3.20000000 0.316277
3 4 3.15000000 0.36968455
4 4 2.32500000 0.38622101
Total
Analysis of variance (ANOVA)
Sum of | Mean | F R- Root
Source _| DF | Squares | Square _| Value | Pr>F | Square | CV_| MSE
Model_| 3 | 15.585 | 5.195 | 43.75 | <.0001 | 0.916 | 10.061 | 0.345
Error | 12 | 1.425 | 0.119
Corrected | 15 [17.010
Total
APPENDIX F. Statistical Analysis for fruit weight
Descriptive Statistics
Treatment N Mean Std. Deviation
1 4 177.000000 26.9214908
2 4 208.050000 24,5554475
3 4 194.325000 35,4652295
4 4 223.300000 19,3095831
Total
Analysis of variance (ANOVA)
Sumof | Mean | F R Root
Source | DF | Squares | Square | Value | Pr>F | Square | Cv | MSE
Model 3 | 8332 | 2.777 | 1.44 | 0.2786 | 0.265 [44] 1.386
56
Error 12 | 23.065 | 1.922
Corrected | 15 | 31.396
Total


APPENDIX G. Statistical Analysis for fruit diameter

70

Descriptive Statistics
Treatment N Mean’ Std. Deviation
1 4 33.6775000 1,40074682
2 4 34.3175000 1,13091040
3 4 33,9650000 1.77306702
4 4 35.6100000 1,07697106
Total 137.57 5.381695
Analysis of variance (ANOVA)
Sumof | Mean] F R- Root
Source _| DF | Squares | Square | Value | Pr>F | Square |_CV_| MSE
Model [3 | 8.728 | 2.909 | 1.54 | 0.254 | 0.278 | 3.993 | 1.373
3
Error__| 12 | 22.634 | 1.886
Corrected | 15 | 31.362
Total
APPENDIX H. Statistical Analysis for juice content
Descriptive Statistics
Treatment N Mean Std. Deviation
1 4 41.7925000 3.65102155
2 4 43.7675000 141902255
3 4 42.3950000 0.99000000
4 4 43.4525000 2.24150805
Total 171.4075 8.301552
Analysis of variance (ANOVA)
Sum of | Mean F R Root
Source | DF | Squares | Square | Value | Pr>F| Square | _CV_| MSE
Model | 3 | 0.120518 [3.373506 | 0.63 | 0.608 | 0.1364 | 5.3911 | 2.310
15 25 3 60 22__| 197
Error | 12 | 64.04412 | 5.337010
500 42
Corrected | 15 |74,16464
Total 315


1

APPENDIX I. Statistical Analysis for peel thickness

Descriptive Statistics
Treatment N Mean’ Std. Deviation
1 4 0.98250000 0.04991660
2 4 0.79750000 0.15041609
3 4 0.69250000 0.07410578
4 4 0.69500000 0.14011900
Total 3.1675 0.414557
Analysis of variance (ANOVA)
Sum of | Mean | F Root

Source | DF | Squares | Square | Value | Pr>F | R-Square| CV MSE

Model 3 | 0.2225 | 0.0741 | 5.91 | 0.0103 | 0.596175 | 14.15 | 0.1120

1875 7292 290 73
Error 12 | 0.1507 | 0.0125
2500 6042
Corrected | 15 | 0.3732
Total 4375,

APPENDIX J. Statistical Analysis for fruit firmness

Descriptive Statistics

Treatment N Mean Std. Deviation
1 4 1.61250000 0.47450852
2 4 2.18500000 0.27110883
3 4 2.37750000 0.60868027
4 4 2.63750000 0.48458745
Total 8.8125 1.838885
‘Analysis of variance (ANOVA)
Sumof | Mean | F Root

Source _| DF | Squares | Square | Value | Pr>F | R-Square| CV_| MSE

Model 3 2.273 0.758 3.35 | 0.055 | 0.455977 | 21.57 | 0.475388
4 790

Error 12 _|_ 2.712 0.226

Corrected | 15 | 4.985
Total


APPENDIX K. Statistical Analysis for rind ageing

Descriptive Statistics

2

Treatment N Mean Std. Deviation
1 4 77.5000000 22.1735578
2 4 55.0000000 5.7735027
3 4 60.0000000 18.2574186
4 4 30.0000000 8.1649658
Total 222.5 5436944
Analysis of variance (ANOVA)
Sum of | Mean Root
Source | DF | Squares | Square | F Value | Pr>F | R-Square | CV | MSE
Model | 3 | 4618.7 | 1539.5 | 6.66 | 0.006 | 0.624683 | 27.3 | 15.206
50 83 7 3826| 91
Enor | 12 | 2775.0 | 231.25
00 0
Corrected | 15 | 7393.7
Total 50
APPENDIX L. Statistical Analysis for TA
Descriptive Statistics
Treatment N Mean Std. Deviation
1 4 4.01250000 0.47267854
2 4 4.10250000 0.16580611
3 4 4.19750000 0.42121847
4 4 3.96750000 0.38439346
Total 16.28 1.444097
Analysis of variance (ANOVA)
Sum of | Mean F Root
Source _| DF | Squares |_Square | Value | Pr>F | R-Square | CV | MSE
Model 3 | 0.125 | 0.0415 | 0.29 | 0.8331 | 0.067196 | 9.32 | 0.3795
4478| 06
Enor__| 12 { 1.728 | 0.144
Corrected [15 | 1.853
Total


APPENDIX M. Statistical Analysis for TSS.

Descriptive Statistics

B

Treatment N Mean Std. Deviation
1 4 7.75000000 0.50000000
2 4 7.000000 0.000000
3 4 7.00000000 0.00000000
4 4 0.70000000 0.00000000
Total 25.325 0.55
Analysis of variance (ANOVA)
Sumof | Mean | F Root
Source_| DF | Squares | Square | Value | Pr>F|R-Square| CV _| MSE
Model_| 3 | 1.687500 | 0.562500 | 9.00 | 0.002 | 0.692308 | 3.478 | 0.2500
00 00 1 261 | 00
Error | 12 | 0.750000 | 0.062500
00 00
Corrected | 15 | 2.437500
Total 00

APPENDIX N. Statistical Analysis for Fruit retention (October)

Descriptive Statistics
Treatment N Mean Std. Deviation
I 4 92.500000 9.57427108
2 4 97.500000 5.00000000
3 4 95.000000 5.77350269
4 4 100.000000 0.00000000
Total 385 20.34777
Analysis of variance (ANOVA)
Sum of | Mean F Root
Source _| DF | Squares | Square | Value | Pr>F | R-Square | CV | MSE
Model | 3 | 125.000 | 41.6667 | 1.11 | 0.3829 | 0.217391 | 6.36 | 6.1237
2311 | __24
Eror__| 12 | 450,000 | 37.5000
Corrected | 15 | 575.000
Total


74

APPENDIX O. Statistical Analysis for Fruit retention (November)

Descriptive Statistics
Treatment N Mean Std. Deviation
1 4 65.0000000 23.8047614
2 4 90.0000000 14.1421356
3 4 87.5000000 9.5742711
4 4 97.5000000 5.0000000
Total 340 52.52117
‘Analysis of variance (ANOVA)
Sum of | Mean F R-

Source | DF | Squares | Square | Value | Pr>F | Square | CV | Root MSE
Model | 3. | 2350.00 | 783.33 | 3.55 | 0.047 | 0.4700 | 17.4 | 14.86046
3 9 00 _| 8290

Error 12 | 2650.000 | 220.83
3

Corrected | 15 | 500.000

Total

APPENDIX P. Statistical Analysis for Fruit retention (December)

Descriptive Statisties
Treatment N Mean Std. Deviation
1 4 52.5000000 22.1735578
2 4 80.0000000 27.0801280
3 4 82.5000000 17.0782513
4 4 90.0000000 11.5470054
Total 305 7187894
Analysis of variance (ANOVA)
Sumof | Mean | F Root

Source DF | Squares | Square | Value | Pr>F | R-Square | CV MSE
Model 3° | 3225.000 | 1075.000 | 2.61 | 0.100 | 0.394495 | 26.63 | 20.31

0 619 010

Error 12_| 4950.000 | 412.500
Corrected | 15 | 8175.000
Total


7s

APPENDIX Q. Weather Data Obtained from PHILIPPINE ATMOSPHERIC
GEOPHYSICAL AND ASTRONOMICAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION

(PAGASA), Ambulong, Batangas
Vx [ale
tm | top| seem | avers | nian sve windspeed | Satine

umayoi2021 | 27 | 229 35 2 ° 0s os
Jamayoa,201 | 9s] 237] 260 5 2a ot a
amaryos,201 | 287] 238 | 263 0 1s oor A

| junayoszon | 302 | aw | an 5 2 ooo a
tanaryoszo| 303 | 228 | 266 2 o oo 92
tomy ozo | sia | mas | an 2 oe oo 102
junayor,201 | 04] nar | 273 0 ° 03 a
Jonayos,201 | 295 | 239 | 262 fa ° 05 as
tmayon2| ne] as | ass 7» A oo 4s
tmayio20i| 265| 223 | a4 0 ° oot uu
jmayi2n| 2s| a4 26 2 ° oo 6
Jama i2.2001| 27a] aa | aa 20 ° oo 2s
jamayiz.20| 22s] nso | 262 a ° ow a
sonar 4.2021 | 303] apn | aos 2 ° oot 59
juny is,20 | 294] ass] 265 a ° = a
ansay 16,2001 | __ 30 |__4 2 15 ° oo 93
ayn] es] asa] 262 n ss oot 1s
twa it,2m| a7] | a6 2 ° 6
Jay 9201 | 200 | 235 26 %0 1 oo 0
may20201| | ass | ase 2 4a oo 2
Jonayi20| —a2s| 26 [a3 0 32 co 4
janay22,2001 | 309] 29 2 o ° oot as

| amuay2s,z01| sie] 29] are 5 ° oo 93
tunwry2.201| saa | as | a5 2» A os rn
oway2sz| 329 aaa | an 2 os oot 10s
Imuay2s2| 2 | aaa | a 2 n2 0 A
snay 27.201 | 05 | 225] 245 ou A 03 3s
tony s.20r1| os ns| ass 0 ° cot a
tama 29,2021 | 204| ass 265 “s A ot os
sana v0,2001 | ae | nia | 49 © ° so sa
imony3iz0| 702] ue] 248 a A so a
Feimayouzn| mel ail 265 2 A 0 9s
remy. | sos | | 68 7 ° 2 ou
renayo,21| 30 | as] res n A cos ws
Feomayouz | a1] as | 6 u os on ao
seonayos,z01| eo as] 22 “ a co 46


February 06,2021 | _ 305 | _ 236 21 83 n oo 43
Ferry 07,2001 | 312 | 241 ny 80 o os 101
Februnry 06,2021 | __ 313 | 241 ny in on 03 6s
Febuary 09,2021 | __293 | _225 259 a6 126 004 12
Feonary 10,2021 | __28 | __228 253 8 28 oot 26
Ferruy i201 | 302 | 222 262 8 o oo
February 12,2001 |__ 33.4 | _ 23 23 2 12 ot
Feonasy 3,201 | ra | 225 253 4 4 oon o
Febmay 4,200 | 315] 245 265 nm z oot 8
Ferra 15,2021 | __30 | _226 263 a 0 002 67
Februay 16,201 | 307 | 24 259 Ea o 02 107
Febmay 17,2001] 324 | 222 m3 26. o 03 to
Fetmay 18,201 | __ st | __ 246 263 76 16 9s 10
Fetmay 19,201 | 274 | _ 208 241 2 o 03 96
February 20,2021 |__29 | __24.6 253 20 0 03 13
February 21,2021 |__ 289 | __222 236 15 36 oo 8
Ferwny 72,001 | 29 | 3 |__ 260 4 66 oo? o
Febru 23,2001 | _ 292 | __226 259 4 18 oon 38
Febmay 24,200 | 308 | _23.4 21 4 I 02 83
Febuary 25,2001 | 343 | 205. ns 4 0 109
February 26,201 | 333 | 22 ny 2 o oon 102
Februay 27,2001 | 332 | 242 27 82 o 02 96
Fetruay 28,2001 | 315 | 241 20 a o oo 1

aarhor20 | 334] 14 24 in 0 02 on
Marhoz,201 | 33 |__ 24 25 20 ° 002 108
Marchos,201 | sia | 246 280 o 003 104
Marcho4,2001 | 316] 23.7 nz * n 002 109
Muchos,2001 | 331] 235 283 8 A 003 104
Marhos,2001 | 33] 23.6 203 1% A 003 104
Murchor,20 | 324] 237 21 0 n 002 tot
Marchoe,2001 | 307 | 242 2s » a4 02 12
Marhos,2001 | 264] 22 252 2 5 003 33
March 10,20| 32 | __23 ns 8 1 04 mn
Mucbit,2001 | 32 | __4 20 n os 02 106
Much 12,2001 | 306 | 226 266 38 182 003 07
Marchi3,2001 | 283 | 223 253 “ 36 oo 22
March 14,2001 | 295 | 238 267 16 oo 49
March 15,20 | 305 | 251 268 vi oo 23
March 16,2001 | 324] 233 ns 4 o oon 94
Muchi7,2001| 336] 235 286 » o oon a4
March ie,2001 | __342| 235 29 » o 02 103,

76

Marhis,201 | 4 | 23 25 a2 0 oo 85
Much20,2001 | 341 | 25 296 a 18 oon 62
March 21,2001 | 342 | _ 252 291 20 o 003 89
March 22,200 | 326 | 247 287 2 os 004 104
Marh23,2001 | 325] 232 29 n 0 02 40
March 24,2001 | 318 | 247 203 16 o 02 a
March2s,201 | a4 |__ 25 298 15 0 003 sas
March 26,2001 | 33.1 | 246 29 n 1 02 102
-Mach 72,2021 w|i 230 16 ° 02 m
March 28,201 | 336 | __ 225 71 n © ot 58
march 29,2001 | 042 | 227 25 a 0 on 8
March 30,2021 | 348 | __23 3 m4 o oo2 106.
Mauchs1,2001 | 349 | 252. 301 n n 03 108
Apriot.2001 | 35 | __ 219 25 Ea o 004 mn
prez, 2001 | 339 | __ aus na 2 o oo2 3
Avnies,201 | sa | 22 280 “ 0 oo2 3
Avsio4,2001 | 325 | m2 ns 2 04 oot 9
Apitos,2001 | 332] 255: 294 B 0 02
Aviios,2001 | 335 | 236 286 83 o 003 98
Aviior,201 | 33.1 | 216 24 1s o 003 34
agrtos,20r1 | __33|__ ans ms 15 0 03 io
Aprios,2001 | __s48 | _25 239 n o 02 ie
pri io.201 | 324] 226 us 0 o oo wut
Aor tt,2001 | 334] 224 ng n o 003 on
posli2,20 | 312] 22 266 Ey ma oon 56
awsits3,2001 | 343 | 24s 232 20 os oo 12
Apa t4,2001 | 346 | _ 25.6 301 a o 93 2
apeis.201| 312] 225 269 a2 14 oot 36
prit6,2001 | 343] 22 2 a o 2 to
avr i7.20 | 343] 228 mas n o oot 32
poriie,2001| 342] 23 16 o oo? 53
Avsiig,2001 | 332] 45, 29 a ° 002 95
Apst20,2001 | _326| 25 288 at o 2 4s
Apit21,20 | 33 | 47 29 » A 03 32
vri22,2071 | 343 | _245 24 ° 003 96
Aeriz3,201| 348 | _ 235 292 7% ° 03 u
Aosi24,2001 | 348 | 222 25 n 0 oon ns
Apsi2s,201 | 33 | 3 m0 » o wo 9s
Apil26,2001 | 328 | 2 ns 2 T oo? 22
agri77,201 | 298 | _ 206 252 24 oo? 36
Aori25,2001 | 28 | 224 26 n o oo 22

7

Agsi29,201 | 34 | a5 28 * o 02 87
awris0,2001 | 352] 21.6 4 » o oo? 94
Meyoi.2m1 | 357] 22 289 6 0 oon wt
Mayor,2001 | 348 | 23.4 2.1 4 0 003 wa
Mayos,20z1 | _335 | _265 300 n 1 003 94
Mayos.2m | 318 | 262 290 a0 24 04 62
Mayos,2021 | _s4s | _264 306 10 0 005 106
Mayos,201 | __35 | 256 303 n 43 204 106.

= Mayor,2021 | __34 | _253 297 n o os sa
Mayos,2001| 35] __265 308 80 22 oz 92
Mayos,2001| 354] __26 307 u 0 oo2 mn
mayio,2001 | 342] 255 299 20 n 002 58
may ti2001 | 354 | __ 255 205 % 02 on2 41
Mey 12,2021 | 352] 261 307 2 ° 003 109
Mayi3,200 | 346 | 258 302 0 o 003 104
May 142021 | 353 | _26 307 2 o 003 toa
Mayis,2001 | 368 | 262 31s in o 02 98
May 16,2001 | 34a | 265 307 B o 003 0s.
may 17,2001 | 358 | _ 265 312 os. o 03 16
May ts,2001| 332] 25 21 2 z oo 65
may 19,200 | 35 | 265 308 n o 003 54
Mey20,2021 |__352|__2as 299 n 4 oon 09
May2i,202 | __352| 245 299 “ 34 oot 68
May22,2001 | sas | _25 28 a o oo 87
May23,21 | 35 | 2s 290 a 156 ow? 6s
May24,2001 | 34 | 24 294 85 07 oot 84
May 25,200, 235 292 a 174 oon a2
May 26,2021 24 296 2 o 02 86
May27,2021 | __36 | _ 2541 306 » 0 oon 99
May28,2021 | 36 | __254 307 0 22 oot 2
May29,2021 | _362 | __264 33 4 a 002 108
Mays0,201| 356 | 25 303 2 o oor 66
maysi,20| 365 | 255 310 2 42 ot 86
Juneor,20r1 | 365] 252 309 m 13s 02 9s
juneon,2001| 29 | _2s no 1 358 03 on
June 03,2021 245 28 a" r os 28
June 04, 2021 243 298 as o4 oz 39
Jones,201 | 342 | 244 293 0 o cor 10.
juneoe,2001 | 325 | 245 mas 6 02 coz 3
juseor,2021 | __ 32 |__ 245 283 3s 02 ot s
tuoe08,201 |__292| 245 269 2 36 ot 23

78

Juneop,2001 | ss | 222 266 @. 416 oo 35
Jume0,2001| 334] 254 284 8s 2 oot 53
jose 1,201 | 314] _ 2s 12 i tr oon 36
ywoe2,20 | 334] 235 5 8 02 oon 2
se3,20 | 307 | 238 m3 3 ie oo 28
suse 142021 | __32|__23.4 na ss 04 oon 64
june 15,2001 | 338 | 233 m o 002 413
suers2mi| aa | 247 298 8s o 002 103

+ tone r7,201 | 357] 4 299 8 ° oot 8
june 18,2001 | 342 | _ 45 204 80 ° oz 24
Jose 9,201 | 348 | 248. 28 16 0 02 107
Jone 20,2001 | __328 | 245 287 a 04 oz 59
June riz | 32 | 25.7 289 a 03 59
juner2,201 | __ 334] 235 zs a 16 03 4s
june 23,2001 | 336] 25 293 33 n 02 5
June 24,2001 | 34 | 28 295 83 02 oo2 26
Jose 5,201 | 23 | _236 20 85 r oon st
june26,2001 | __32|__245 283 2 o 02 5a
juser7,2001 | 318 | 242 280 93 2 oon 39
june 26,2001 | 341 | 23 286 as m2 cot 6
Jone29,2001 | 343 | _247 295 2 o 19
junes0,2001 | 46 | 247 297 8 104 68
utyor,201 | 4a | 243 204 4 1 02 57
joiyor,201 | __ 319 | __238 213 86 342 oo 63
oly 03,2001 | _ 24 | __24 262 93 392 ° 0
uy 04,2001 | 328 | 245 281 6 16 oor 1
Jy os,2021 |__ 323 | __ 245 24 a5 04 oot 38
utyos,201 | 32 | 59 ny a 10 oot La
otyo7,2001 | 34 | 257 299 m" 02 02 94
salyos,2001 | 35 | _ 25.6 303 in 1 003 8
soyos,201 | 335 | 254 25 2 1 a 66
suiyi0,201 | 328 | 257 293 2 46 02 5
July 1.2021 | st.8 | _ 255 287 w os 03 56
Juiyi2,20 | 327 | _ 5, m9 ® 3 oo 66
Joiyt3,2001 | 328] 233 281 6 1 oon 3
July 14,2001 | 309 | 23.4 m2 A “ © 43
sty 15,2001 | 4s | m4. 206 108 oo 13
Joly 6,200 | at | 2a ns 02 oo 4
Juiyi,20 | 325 | 24 283 ° 002 62
ty 16,2001 | 33.7] 25.7 287 02 004 16
doiyig,2001 | aia] 25. 28 ss 95 1s

79

suty20,201 | 305] 249 na ao 244 03 im
July2t.2001 | __ 2s] 243 264 2 1282 on °
aly 22,2021 n| m4 259 4 1a. oot 02
suty23,2001 | 29.1 | 242 267 9. 95 04 °
suty24,2001 | a8 | 252 265 » 337 003, o
suty25,2001 | __ 29.7 | _ 259 29 » 26 4 A
uly 26,2001 | 325] 272 299 “ 34 04 53
tuly27,2001 | 305 | _ 255 239 86. 28 004 4s

< tuiy28,2001 | 31.1 | 246 29 36 a 00s o
soly29,2001 | 302] 255 29 53 02 04 os
Juiy30,2001 | __ sis | _274 296 80 © 24
suiys1,200 | sir | 275 293 n 0 04 16

Avgusio1,2021 | _318 | 269 294 76 is 05, 2

Agus 02,2021 | __2s4 282 a 0s 04 56.

Avis 03,2021 a] as 293 Ea ° 006, 2

Avgusio4,2001 | 319 | 265 292 80 4 005, 4

Auguss,2021 | 318 | 261 290 a5 22 2 18.

augusios,2001 | 31.2 2s 296 2 is 05, 66

Augusior,2001 | _ 326 | __244 25 20 ° 04 102

Augusion,2021 |__336 | __242 289 a ° 02 102

Avgus.os,2001 | __ 33.4 2s 292 n ° oo a6

Avuustto.2021 | 294 | 246 no a 6s oo 12

Avast 1.2021 | _ 321 | 235 28 a8 26 oot 69.

August 12,2021 | 32.8 | 24.7 238 a ° or 22

August 13,2021 | 32.1 2 26 2 a oot 32

Aust 14,2021 x} 2s ne » 3 oot 38

August 15,2021 a] zs 269 36. r oot A

Avgusii6,2001 | 33.2] 235 24 a o oor 402

August 17,2021 |__ 318 | 234 216 B r oo

August 18,2001 |__ 31.8 24 ns 22 oot

August 19,2021 | 336 | 226 2. fa 616. 2 61

Augus20,2021 | 332 | 235 24 as ‘ oo 64

August 21,2021 | 322 Py 21 6 52 oot 23

August 22,2021 | 339 24 fa 22 on 2

Augusi23,2001 | _ 32 2s 9 as o oo

vugusi24,2001 | 307 | 227 267 3 3 oot 24

Aust 25,2021 | 321 Pa 21 as 02 002 25

|__Avgusi26,2021 | 279 | _ 23.3 256 0 oo 1s

Avgus27,2021 | 312 | __ 25.6 24 2 02 53

‘vvgun' 28,2021 | __ 289 4 268 9 122 oo 34

Avgusi29,2005 | 3s] 241 2. 9 56 oo 24


vgs 30,201 |__s16 |__228 212 186 oo. ‘
Avpst3i,2021 |__ 316 | 246 21 86 22 on
Sepenberot,2001 | 316 | 234 23 6 o oon 0:
beror,20r1| 305 | 233 269 i os oo ‘
Sepenberos,2001| 324 | 235 280 mn" 229 oot 8
Sepenber04,2001 | 332 | _r45 29 2 o 02 94
Sepemberos,201 | __ 31 | __ 242 28 8 os oo 31
Sepuembe06,2001 |__| __ 23 | _28s a“ 96 oot 38
Sependero7,2001 | __261 | 235 238 90 @ oz 0
September 08,2021 | __266] 23 248 mn na oot o
Seplembe09,201 | 326 | 241 24 82 n 02 88
Sqpenber 10,2001 | 30 | __ 245 23 in 34 03 28
| september t,2001 | 296] 23 263 86. 32 02 o
Soenber'2,20 | 306 | 236 am o ot 36
Sepenber 13,2001 | 332 | _ 23 284 36. 18 o 24
Squnbe 4.2021 | 332 | 238 25 mn o 02 92
Squenbeis,201| 335 | 238 283 » 24 oon 63
Sepenbe 16,201 | 33.1] 236 24 7 ns ow a7
September 17,2021 ss|__ ms 288 a 5 oo 17
Sepembeit,2001 | 326 | 245 287 8 198 02 63
Sepienber 19,2001 | __285 | _232 259 8 561 oon o
Sepenber20,2001 | _30|__ 4 20 90 1 oon os
Sepuember 21,2001 | 326 | 242 24 a 1 2 45
Seema 22,200 | 332 | 24 26 a o oo? 96
Squenber23,2001 | _4|__ 24s 293 a 166 02 a4
Sepender24,2001| 33 |__ 4 285 ™ o 093 107
nber25,2001 | 332] 43 238 2 n 002
Sqpenber26,2001 | 441 | 249 295 8 ° 02 104
Squenber201| 313] 235 ns 7 A oor 0s
September 28,2021 | _334| 245 290 8s 8 002 32
Sepenber?9,2021 | __33 | __24 285 as o ot 42
Squenber30,2021| _306| 244 2s 4 156 ot mw
oeberoi,2021 | 323 | __24 282 a8 1s. ot 34
caber02,2001 | ___ 32 | _ 245 a3 a o4 or 39
cher 03,2021 |__ 25 | _ 245 25 2 Bs 02 47
cher 04,2021 |__st |__ 247 ns 5 2 oo 1s
oxcber 05,2021 | 292 | 241 267 2 as coz o
ccwbero6,20 | 15 | 24 ms 1 02 oon 07
cwbero7,2001 | 322 | 242 22 u o ove 09
ocwberos,2021 | 327 | _ 25 29 0 o on 4s
ocber 09,2021 |__ 31s |__ 257 216 mn" 2 oz 22

81

oewber 10,2001 | 332] 254 293 mM o 003 a6
ocabern,200 | __ 32 | 204 297 76 os 004 47
sober 12,2021 |_298 | _245 22 i 8 003 °
caper 13,2001 |__ 317 |__244 781 8 2 oo 24
cher 14,2021 |__ 313 | _243 28 0 52 oo o1
ocaber 15,2001 | 33 | __24 27 » oot 2s
ober 16,2021 |_ 313 | _245 23 81 2 4a
coher 17,2001 | _ ss | 253 286 ~ 003 18
ocwber 18,2001 | 30 | __ 246 ns 5 002 ua
cwber 19,2021 | _33|__ 265. 298 in o 003 i
xwber 20,2021 | 314] 248 281 4 06 oo 4
oxsbe21,2021| 314] 233, ns fa o ot 29
Oxwber22,2001 | 333 | 246 290 4 a one 107
oewber 23,2001 | 288 | 4 264 mn 122 03 19
cba 24,2001 | 292 | 242 261 3 66 oe uw
sober 25,2021 |_ 282 | __235 258 92 402 02 0
onober 26,2001 |__ 312 | __248 23 n o 02 98
oawber27,2021 | _335| 236 286 5 0 ony ot
oxobes 28,2001 | 298 | 24 269 as 24 004 59
oxcber 29,2021 | _ ss |__ 245 280 70 o 003 04
oepber 30,2021 | __ 324 | _ 255 290 a 0 003 106
October 31,2021 | ms 283 3 002 m
November 01,2021 | 52 |__243 282 2 o 03 a6
Novenbero2,201 | __s14| 249 72 in 06 005 66
Novenber3,2001 | 325 | _2s m8 “ o 003 99
Novenbero4,2001 | _312| 244 2s 1s o 02 96
Novenberas,2001 | 314] 23.6 ns wu“ su oo? 34
Novenber 06,2001 | 342] 247 295 10 o oon 2
Novenbero7,2021 | __s04| 249 m9 2 5 oo? 58
Novesber 08,2021 |__ 321 a m1 » 24 19
Novendero9,2021 | 316 | 237 22 0 Es 28
Novenber 10,2021 | 334 | 227 281 A © oo? 4
Novenberi1,2001 | 322 | _2s 26 16 ° 004 102
Novenber 12,2001 | 307 | __2s ns 0 © 03 59
Novenber 13,2021 | _302 | __25 ns 0 1 03 58
Noverber 14,2021, 2s 4 n 0 003 102
November 15,2021 246 238 2 t 03 oa
Novenber 16,2001 | __32 | _247 m4 18 16 003 A
Novenber 17,2001 | 327 | __ 245 26 18 003 to
Novenber 18,2021 | _ 329 |__ 222 m3 s r oo 82
Novenber19,201 |_ 322 | _ 227 ns oo 63

82

Novenbe:20,2001 | 304] 23.6 20 8 132 oo 17
Novenber21,201 | 33 | 235 283 a 0 oot 43
November 22,2021 254 285 “ 12 ot 65
November 23,2021 243 ns a2 3 or 52
November 24,2001 | 329 | _ 245 282 2 66 03 38
Novenber25,2001 | _304 | _ 24 n2 6 24 02 43
Novenber26,2001 | 30 | __25 ns a o 003 22
November 27,2021 sz |__2s2 26 mn o 003 18
Novenber28, 201 | 292 | _ 247 0 88 02 002 02
Novenber29,201 | 334] 235 25 2 0 02 26
Novenber30,2001 | 335 | _25 293 2 o oo A
Decemberoi,201 | 315 | __245 20 ca 0 095 23
Decenberor,2001 | 298 | 231 265 a o 003 A
December 03,2021 | __303 | _226 265 in o 004 13
December 042021 | 2a | 21.7 253 m o 03 a7
December 0s,2001 | 296 | 205 251 En o 003 9s
Decenber06,2001 | 286 | 21 249 16 o 002 64
Desenbero7,2001 | 29 |__ 3 260 * 02 004 2
Decenberos,2001 | 305 | 23 268 2B o 004 6s
Decemberos,2001 | __298 | 255 261 2 0 04 81
December 0,202 | _294 | _ 246 20 2 n 004 9s
Decembert1,2021 | 258 | __ 23 259 0 8 coz 12
December12,2021 | __2n6 | __24 263 0 5 04 os
December 13,2021 | __30 |_235 268 u 4 os 61
December 14,2001 | 302 | 229 266 n tT 04 9s
December 15,2021 | 301 | 234 268 18 o 00s 33
December 6,201 | __30 | __ 24 m1 16 2 os 29
Desenber17,2001 | 277 | _2s 264 i" “ 03 o
Decenberis,2021| 308 | 239 24 a2 56 003 14
December9,202 | __ 273 | __24 251 ot 54 ot 1s
Desenber20,2021 | 308 | 24 a mn o 02 22
Decenber21,2001| 328 | 245 287 2 o oon 93
Decenber22,201| st | __ 22s 268 ” o oon 42
December23,2001 | 318] 22 269 u 0 02 58
December 24,2021 | _s16 |__255 26 » 0 oor 96
Decenber25,2021| 302] 246 na 16 06 0s 2
Decenber26,2001 | 296 | 23 263 » 152 00s 46
December27,2001 | 264 | 222 243 “ A oo 12
December 24,2001 | 274] 228 254 ~ os oo 09
Decenber?9,2001 | 30.1 | 228 265 6 5 oo mn
December 30,2001 | 29 | 224 257 2 ° oo 19

83

December 31,2021 a] ma 259 ea 2 04

APPENDIX R. YELLOWING (COLOR INDEX)

Yellowing (Color Description

Index)

T fully green peel

2 green with trace of yellow
3 Tore green than yellow

4 more yellow than green

3 yellow with trace of green
6 fully yellow

APPENDIX S. VISUAL QUALITY RATING (VQR)

VQR(VISUAL Description

QUALITY RATING)

9,8 excellent, field fresh

7,6 good, defects minor

34 fair, defects moderate, limit of marketability
3 poor, defects serious

2 limit of edibility

1 non-edible


