
UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS
Master of Science in Genetics

GRACETINE D. MAGPANTAY

GENOME-WIDE INDEL MARKERS TO DIFFERENTIATE ORYZA
GENOMES AA AND GG AND O. GRANULATA NEES & ARN.
EX. G. WATT (GG) AS POTENTIAL DONOR OF
DROUGHT TOLERANCE GENES

CELIA B. DELA VINA, MSc
Adviser

Date: MAY 2019

This dissertation can be made available to the general public YES

This dissertation can be accessed only after consultation with the author and
dissertation adviser .

This dissertation can be accessed only by those bound by confidentiality
agreement .

en DOST-STII LIBRARY
CELIA Aa ViNA, MSe IMI INO0 I 01
STI-19-1066


GENOME-WIDE INDEL MARKERS TO DIFFERENTIATE ORYZA GENOMES
AA AND GG AND 0. GRANULATA NEES & ARN. EX. G. WATT (GG) AS
POTENTIAL DONOR OF DROUGHT TOLERANCE GENES

GRACETINE D. MAGPANTAY

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF THE GRADUATE SCHOOL
UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE
REQUIREMENTS FOR
THE DEGREE OF

MASTER OF SCIENCE
(Genetics)

MAY 2019

The manuscript attached hereto, entitled “GENOME-WIDE INDEL MARKERS TO
DIFFERENTIATE ORYZA GENOMES AA AND GG AND O. GRANULATA NEES &
ARN. EX. G. WATT (GG) AS POTENTIAL DONOR OF DROUGHT TOLERANCE
GENES,” prepared and submitted by GRACETINE D. MAGPANTAY in partial
fulfillment of the requirements for the degree MASTER OF SCIENCE (GENETICS), is

hereby accepted.

A A Ot
ME S. MENDIORO MA. CARMINA C. MANUEL
Member, Advisory Committee Member, Advisory Committee
20 Na 30 2014
Date Signed Date Signed
7 IRHOeT WwW a
SUNG-RYUL KIM CELIA B. DELA VINA
Co-Chair, Advisory Committee Chair, Advisory Committee
oN ve on
Date Signed Date Signed

Accepted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
MASTER OF SCIENCE (GENETICS)

AA\Ond
MERLWN S. MENDIORO

Director, Institute of Biological Sciences
Date we |

JOSE V. CHO, JR.
Dean, Graduate School
5H, 01

Date Signe?

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

The author is both a scientist and an artist. She worked as a researcher for the
molecular biology of trees at the Ecosystems Research and Development Bureau,
Department of Environment and Natural Resources. She also worked as a researcher at the
C4 Rice Center at the International Rice Research Institute and as a GMO Database and
Web Content Developer at the International Service for the Acquisition of Agri-biotech
Applications. As an artist, she has been involved in various plays at the University of the
Philippines Los Banos (UPLB) as a playwright, actor, designer, production staff, and
backstage staff. Currently, she continues her passion in both fields by being the Secretary
General of the Young Professionals for Agricultural Development Philippines, where she

fuses arts with agriculture to promote the science to young audience.

She graduated with a degree in BS Biology (major in Genetics) from UPLB in 2012.
She is the eldest among four children of Mr. Faustino T. Magpantay and Mrs. Margarita
D. Magpantay. She is engaged to John Carlo Marasigan, who is taking Doctor of Medicine

at the University of the East.

GRACETINE D. MAGPANTAY

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

With tears in my eyes, I wish to thank first and foremost God for giving me the opportunity to be a scholar of
the Department of Science and Technology while taking my Master’s degree and for allowing me to explore and
determine my life purpose while in the university for the second time. Not everyone who dreams turns those dreams into
reality, and yet, here I am living the life with many opportunities because of the title UPLB has given me. Yet it seems
that I cannot choose which path to take given these many choices. Nevertheless, it was the experience and the learnings
that made my Master's degree worthwhile. It was a rough road of tears and depression, but I gained more appreciation
to scientists, especially plant breeders who do what I did in this manuscript on a daily basis. They are the heroes of the
farmers, and they should be celebrated. To give my thanks, I want to express my greatest gratitude to these people who
made my MS life worthwhile. To these research teams at IRRI, Drought Physiology: Ate Nel, Kuya Carlo, and Kuya
Allan for helping me in my thesis especially in the drought set-up and data analysis. Novel Gene Resources: Kuya Terry,
Tito Boyet, Ate Annie, Ate Janice, Ate Loty, Kuya Ricky, Steff, Ate Joie, Dutch, Kuya Dafort, and Ate Larue for
the guidance and moral support. I salute your hard work for the team. I will always treasure being part of your team. C4
Rice Center: Jia, Shamik, Abhishek, Dr. Paul Quick, Ms. Jacque, Ate Gemma, Ate Juvy, Ate Flor, Ate Aya, Ate
Mae, Jojie, Paolo, Ate Kristel, and Ate Mel for the bonding, guidance, and for making me feel at home even if we were
at work. Thank you for understanding me and my mental health. I will forever keep you in my heart. To my teachers,
My ever-patient advisers Prof. Celia Dela Vina, Dr. Merlyn Mendioro, and Dr. Ma. Carmina Manuel, who served
not just as my advisers but my mothers in the institute. To the guidance of Dr. Kshirod Jena, Dr. Amelia Henry, and
Dr. Sung Ryul Kim from the International Rice Research Institute for giving me the chance to work in the most
prestigious rice research center in the world, thank you so much. I also would like to send my gratitude to Dr. Yoy Cruz,
who was my professor in Developmental Genetics. You inspired me. To my mentor Prof. Dennis Gupa, thank you for
the inspiration and for believing in the scientist in me. To my organizations, UP Broadway Company, you are my
sweetest escape. You made me grow as an ate and a leader. Thank you so much for the three sets of 525,600 minutes of
love and moments so dear. To more years measured in love! AGRA prodmates and PGU prodmates thank you so much
for the friendship and supporting me when IJ opened Indie Sweets. I will never forget you. Destiny Pro, thank you for
keeping my faith in God alive and purposeful. Thank you Kuya Wilbs, Ate Jova, Nat, Aimee, Karen, Kriz, Dana, Ate
Rheyn for the good times. SFC, for the wisdom, guidance, and most of all, your prayers. Thank you Ate Iah, Ate
Menggay, Ate Yel, Ate Aiza, Ate Wendy, and Ate Dora for the love. YPARD Ph, for giving me the opportunity to
fulfill my dream of staging a musical for a noble purpose. Thank you Kuya Jim, Jax, Darwin, Jorge, Maggie, Bards,
Carl, and Ate Rheyn for the hard work and support. ISAAA, for the opportunity to work by utilizing my skills in both
the arts and sciences, and for letting me do my Master’s thesis while working. Thank you Maam Olah, Ate Tin, Ate
Clem, and Ate Weeway for empowering me as a woman. To my best friends, My college best friends Jazz, Maggie,
Genie, Dui, Lucelle, Winnie, and Nene, thank you for encouraging me even if our relationship is long distance. You
will always be home no matter the distance. I love you, and I miss you. C2 Whitehouse roommates and Genetics-mates
Ella and Jen, thank you for our sharing moments. Soar high. ENFP best friends, Salvi and Emman, thank you because
I learned a lot from our friendship. Thank you for making me believe in fluid love and forgiveness. I am just one call
away. INFJ and INFP friends Mon, Max, Anj, Jane, Abet, Bed, Wineia, Jo, Kriz, and Alme. Thank you that I do not
need words to explain my soul. UPBC best friends and cupcakes Bed, Max, Jo, Hana, Dave, Roxy, Joshua, Jakey,
thank you for the great company and for seeing the worst in me and yet stayed. I love you. My best friend Aimee, thank
you for our crying and ranting sessions. I’Il always be here. To my family, Mama and Papa, for raising me a fighter and
for believing in me and listening to my opinions. Thank you for the unconditional love. This is for you. Tayen, Paulo,
and CJ for the random chat messages about anything. You are among the reasons I keep fighting every day. Tamie, for
being my greatest mentor ever since I was born. Thank you for your undying love and support. You are the best! Inay
for always missing me and wishing all the best for me. You are a fighter, and you are my role model. Lolo Ito and Lola
Gilda in heaven, you may not be here to celebrate with me, but thank you for loving and caring for me when you were
here. My titos, titas, and cousins, thank you for believing in me. To my little balls of fur Putput, Olive, and Orange.
You make my everyday life bearable. To my bestest friend and future husband, Carlo, thank you for your love, care,
comfort, and support. Thank you for praying for me, for helping me to be the best version of myself, for the space to
grow as a woman, and for being with me in this journey. I love you. I also dedicate this manuscript to the people with
mental health disorders but still fighting. This is for you. To the farmers, whom we researchers dedicate our work, this
is also for you. To the student reading this manuscript for a report or a thesis, keep on keeping on. If I finished my thesis,
you can too! Lastly, I want to thank the saints in heaven for interceding for us here on earth. Thank you for the miracles
in my life St. Pio, St. Michael, St. Therese of the Child Jesus, St. Dymphna, and Mama Mary.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

IPR PAGE

TITLE PAGE

APPROVAL PAGE

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

TABLE OF CONTENTS

LIST OF TABLES

LIST OF FIGURES

LIST OF APPENDICES

LIST OF ACRONYMS

ABSTRACT

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER 2. REVIEW OF LITERATURE
Oryza: Taxonomy and Phylogenetics
Rice Improvement Through Interspecific Hybridization
O. granulata Complex
Insertion-Deletion Markers
Drought Stress Response in Rice

CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
InDel Marker Design and Screening

Sequence Retrieval and InDel Marker Design

vi

PAGE

vi
viii
ix
xi
xiii

XV

13
16
19
22
28
28

28

PAGE

Plant Materials 29

Plant Sampling and DNA Extraction 29

PCR Amplification and AGE 29

Band Scoring 30

Drought Stress Screening 31

Plant Materials 31

Physiological set-up 33

Stomatal Density 35

CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 36
Development of Polymorphic InDel Markers 36
Drought Stress Response of O. granulata and O. sativa 48

Root Traits 48

Shoot Traits 52

Water Uptake 54

Stomatal Density 56

CHAPTER 5. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 61
LITERATURE CITED 63

APPENDICES 76

vii

LIST OF TABLES

Taxonomic classification of Oryza genus, including
sections, complexes, chromosome number, genome type,
genome size, distribution, and useful traits.

Agronomically important traits for each life stage, part, or
aspect of rice.

Physiological responses of plants during drought.

Species and accessions checked for stomatal density and
their genome and important traits.

List of genome-wide InDel markers designed in silico for
marker-assisted breeding of Oryza granulata Nees & Arn.
Ex. G. Watt and O. sativa L. interspecific hybrids.

List of SSR markers tested for polymorphism between AA
and GG Oryza genomes.

Comparison of marker validation results between InDel and
SSR markers used to amplify Oryza sativa L. (AA), O.
granulata Nees & Arn. Ex. G. Watt (GG), and O.
meyeriana (Zoll. & Moritzi) Baill. (GG) genomes.

Gel images of SSR and InDel markers, which were
designed from Oryza sativa L. and O. granulata Nees &
Arn. Ex. G. Watt sequences, tested for polymorphism
among O. sativa, O. meyeriana (Zoll. & Moritzi) Baill., and
O. granulata accessions.

viii

PAGE

15

23

32

37

39

42

45

FIGURE

10

11

12

LIST OF FIGURES

(a) Parts of Oryza spikelet; and (b) Spikelet structures.

Morphological diversity of representative species for each
genome type of Oryza.

Phylogenetic relationships between Oryza representative
species.

Growth duration diagrams of direct seeded (a) and
transplanted (b) rice from nursery to harvesting.

Oryza granulata Nees & Arn. Ex. G. Watt (A) plant, (B)
distribution, (C) spikelet, (D) Sri Lanka habitat, and (E)
India habitat from NIAS Genebank.

Diagram of a mylar tube and PVC tube used to test the
drought response of Oryza granulata Nees & Am. Ex. G.
Watt and O. sativa L.

Rice chromosome map showing markers that are
polymorphic between AA and GG genomes.

Drought-related root traits of Oryza granulata Nees & Arn.
Ex. G. Watt and O. sativa L. DD is drought set-up, and WW
is well-watered.

Humidity and temperature measurements during the drought
experiment

Drought-related shoot traits of Oryza granulata Nees & Arn.
Ex. G. Watt and O. sativa L. DD is drought set-up, and WW
is well-watered.

Water uptake of Oryza granulata Nees & Arn. Ex. G. Watt
(clone and seed) and O. sativa L. for 19 days. (A) Well-
watered. (B) Drought.

Stomatal density of cultivated and wild rice species. The
green bars are the species of interest, whereas the orange
bars are species that have drought tolerance traits.

PAGE

10

12

18

33

43

49

50

53

55

57

FIGURE

Correlation of stomatal density with leaf width and length of
Oryza sativa L., O. glaberrima Steud., O. rufipogon Griff.,
O. longistaminata A. Chev. Et Boehr, O. punctata Kotschy
ex Steud., O. minuta J.S. Presl. Ex C.B. Presl., O. officinalis
Wall ex Watt, O. latifolia Desv., O. alta Swallen, O.
australiensis Domin., O. brachyantha A. Chev. et Roehr., O.
granulata Nees et Am. Ex Watt, O. ridleyi Hook F., O.
coarctata Tateoka.

Abaxial leaf surface images of wild and cultivated rice
(Oryza) species.

PAGE

58

60

APPENDIX

A

LIST OF APPENDICES

Gel images of InDel markers designed from Oryza
sativa L. and O. granulata Nees & Arn Ex. G. Watt
sequences to test polymorphism among O. sativa, O.
meyeriana (Zoll. & Moritzi) Baill., and O. granulata
accessions.

Gel images of SSR markers to test polymorphism among
Oryza sativa L., O. meyeriana (Zoll. & Moritzi) Baill.,
and O. granulata Nees & Arn Ex. G. Watt accessions.

Weight measurements of pots during drought stress
experiment between Oryza sativa L. and O. granulata
Nees and Arn. Ex. G. Watt.

Drought response trait measurements for Oryza
granulata Nees & Arn Ex. G. Watt clone and seed and
O. sativa L. genotypes.

Flag leaf measurements and stomatal count and densities
in Oryza sativa L., O. glaberrima Steud., O. rufipogon
Griff., O. longistaminata A. Chev. Et Boehr, O.
punctata Kotschy ex Steud., O. minuta J.S. Presl. Ex
C.B. Presl., O. officinalis Wall ex Watt, O. latifolia
Desv., O. alta Swallen, O. australiensis Domin., O.
brachyantha A. Chev. et Roehr., O. granulata Nees et
Am. Ex Watt, O. ridleyi Hook F., O. coarctata Tateoka
wild rice species used in the study.

ANOVA tables for Oryza sativa L. and O. granulata
Nees & Arn. Ex. G. Watt root and shoot traits generated
using Statistical Tool for Agricultural Research (STAR).

Randomized complete block design of pots for drought
stress experiment between Oryza sativa L. and O.
granulata Nees & Arn. Ex. G. Watt.

Table of means of the root and shoot traits of Oryza

sativa L. and O. granulata Nees & Arn. Ex. G. Watt
seedlings subjected to drought.

xi

PAGE

76

87

98

99

100

102

106

107

APPENDIX PAGE

I Least significant difference (LSD) tests and pairwise 109
mean comparisons of drought response traits that have
significant differences.

J Scanned root images of Oryza sativa L., O. granulata 113

Nees & Arn. Ex. G. Watt (seed), and O. granulata
(clone) used in the drought stress experiment.

K Boxplots generated for the traits analyzed in the drought 119

stress set-up comparison between Oryza sativa L. and O.
granulata Nees & Arn. Ex. G. Watt.

xii

LIST OF ACRONYMS

AB Advanced Backcross

BAC Bacterial Artificial Chromosome

BB Bacterial Blight

BESs BAC-end Sequences

BIL Backcross Inbred Lines

BPH Brown Planthopper

CAM Crassulacean Acid Metabolism

CMS Cytoplasmic Male Sterility

CSSL Chromosome Segment Substitution Lines
DNA Deoxyribonucleic Acid

GLH Green Leaf Hopper

InDel Insertion-Deletion

IRGC International Rice Genebank Collection of IRRI
IRGSP International Rice Genome Sequencing Project
ISSR Inter Simple Sequence Repeat

ITS Intergenic Spacer

MAAL Monosomic Alien Addition Lines

MAGIC Multi-parent Advanced Generation Inter-Cross

MYA Million Years Ago
NGS Next Generation Sequencing
NIL Near Isogenic Lines

OMAP Oryza Map Alignment Project

xiii

PCR
QTLs
RAPD
RFLP
RIL
RuBisCO
SBH
RAP-DB
RH
RYMV
SSR
WBPH

WGS

Polymerase Chain Reaction

Quantitative Trait Loci

Random Amplified Polymorphic DNA
Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism
Recombinant Inbred Lines
Ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate Carboxylase/Oxygenase
Sheath Blight

Rice Annotation Project Database

Relative Humidity

Rice Yellow Mottle Virus

Simple Sequence Repeats

White-backed Planthopper

Whole Genome Shotgun

xiv

ABSTRACT
MAGPANTAY, GRACETINE DIMACULANGAN. University of the Philippines Los
Banos, May 2019. Genome-wide InDel Markers to Differentiate Oryza Genomes AA

and GG and O. granulata Nees & Arn. Ex. G. Watt (GG) as Potential Donor of
Drought Tolerance Genes

Major Professor: Celia B. Dela Vina, MSc.

Wild relatives of rice are good sources of genes for abiotic and biotic stress tolerance and
resistance that were lost due to domestication. Development of molecular markers is
required in assisted selection of introgression lines and characterization of the donor plant
for the trait of interest. In this study, 94 insertion-deletion (InDel) markers were designed
and validated using PCR and agarose gel electrophoresis; further, Oryza granulata was
characterized during the seedling stage for its potential as donor of drought tolerance genes.
Results showed higher percentage of polymorphic markers (93.18%) between the AA and
GG Oryza genomes using InDel markers compared with only 25.93% polymorphic
markers using 96 simple sequence repeat (SSR) markers. Comparison in the drought stress
responses between O. granulata and O. sativa did not show significant differences in
maximum root depth, root and shoot dry weights, root length density, percent lateral roots,
total root length, root to shoot ratio, tiller number, and plant height. Since the stomatal
density of O. granulata (317-378 stomata/mm?) is less than that of O. sativa (632
stomata/mm?), this trait can be tested in a drought set-up in future studies. Drought
response in terms of stomatal density, hard soil penetration, leaf greenness, and suberin
content of O. granulata may still be further studied. Overall, this study tells that designing
appropriate markers for screening and testing the potential of the target donor species as
source of the trait of interest are important especially in complicated traits like drought

tolerance.

CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION

Rice (Oryza sativa L.) is the second most planted cereal in the world and is the
staple food of more than half the world’s population, providing 40%-70% of each person’s
caloric intake (Yu et al. 2002; Bouman et al. 2007). It accounts for 86% of total cereal
production in Southeast Asia and 28% around the world (Jaffee et al. 2014). It highly
contributes to farmer livelihood, food security, and government revenue in several
countries in Asia and Africa (FAO 2004a; Wang et al. 2005; Konuma et al. 2014; Roy et

al. 2014).

As a product of domestication, rice has lost genes that are important in stress
tolerance and resistance, making them susceptible to pests, diseases, and abiotic stresses
(Kottapalli et al. 2010). Among these stresses is drought which accounts for 15%—50% loss
in yield, affecting the livelihood of thousands of farmers around the world (Kumar et al.
2008; Srividhya et al. 2011). Efforts in classical (Kumar et al. 2008) and transgenic
(Todaka et al. 2015) breeding have been done by researchers to transfer drought tolerance
traits to cultivated rice. These strategies require sources of genes for drought tolerance,

such as the wild relatives of rice (Yamaki et al. 2013).

The O. granulata complex is composed of two wild rice species, identified as
sources of genes for drought tolerance. This complex has the GG genome, which is the
farthest related genome to cultivated rice (Wambugu et al. 2013). Choosing this complex
as source of the desired trait is one way to effectively use and expand the pool of genetic

resources (Niihama et al. 2015). Although considered as different species, O. granulata

2

Nees & Arn. Ex. G. Watt and O. meyeriana (Zoll. & Moritzi) Baill. share the same genome
and have negligible reproductive barriers. They were even recommended to be placed into
the same species (Gong et al. 2000). To further explore this possibility, molecular markers
will be of great use. These markers are also applicable in assisting interspecific

hybridization between AA and GG genomes.

Microsatellite or simple sequence repeat (SSR) markers have been used in rice
marker-assisted breeding but have low applicability in wild rice species (Miah et al. 2013;
Yamaki et al. 2013). Thus, new markers must be developed to assess introgression of
important traits from wild rice to cultivated one. Wild rice sequence information is publicly
available in the form of Bacterial Artificial Chromosome (BAC)-end sequences (BESs)
and can be utilized to design markers, such as insertion-deletion or InDels. InDel markers
are codominant markers that can easily be detected via polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
and gel electrophoresis. They are as practical as SSRs in terms of cost and precision but
are more frequent in the rice genome (Lu et al. 2015). InDels have been successfully used
in genetic and breeding in rice (Wu et al. 2013; Yonemaru et al. 2015). Twenty-two InDel
primers have been designed and validated by Yamaki et al. (2013) to discriminate among
the wild and cultivated species of rice, including O. granulata. However, additional
primers that are distributed in the whole genome are needed to differentiate between O.

sativa and O. granulata complex.

Root and shoot traits contribute to plant drought resistance (Polania et al. 2017;
Suralta et al. 2012; Suralta et al. 2018). In varying water regimes, plant shoots and roots

respond differently. To determine how the O. granulata complex responds to drought,

3

shoot and root traits are appropriate for observation in water-deficient and well-watered

soil.

In the present study, the general objective is to develop genome-wide InDel markers
to differentiate AA and GG genomes in rice and determine the potential of O. granulata as

donor of drought tolerance genes. Specifically, the study aims to do the following:

1. develop InDel primers to detect polymorphisms among O. sativa, O. granulata,
and O. meyeriana;

2. compare InDel markers to SSR markers; and

3. determine drought stress response of O. granulata and O. sativa by considering

root and shoot traits and stomatal density.

The study was conducted at the Novel Gene Resources laboratory and screenhouses
at the International Rice Research Institute, Philippines from August 2016 to November

2018.

CHAPTER 2

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

Oryza: Taxonomy and Phylogenetics

In 1753, Linnaeus gave the genus name Oryza and species name Oryza sativa to
rice, whereas O. glaberrima was given to the West African cultigen by Steudel in 1855
(Vaughan 1989). Before 1965, the number of species in the genus were about 30, but today,
Oryza includes 24 species comprising two cultivated and 22 wild species (Vaughan 1989;
Sanchez et al. 2014; Shakiba and Eizenga 2014). These species, which have been collected,
studied, and exchanged since AD 1012, are arranged in 10 different genome types: AA,
BB, CC, BBCC, CCDD, EE, FF, GG, HHJJ, and KKLL; five complexes: O. sativa, O.
officinalis, O. granulata, O. ridleyi, and O. schlechteria complex; and three sections:
Oryza, Padia, and Brachyantha (Table 1) (Vaughan 1994; Ammiraju et al. 2010; Sanchez
et al. 2014; Shakiba and Eizenga 2014). The two cultivated rice species, O. sativa, which
originated from tropical Asia, and O. glaberrima, which originated from West Africa, have
AA genomes and belong to O. sativa complex and section Oryza (FAO 2004b; Shakiba
and Eizenga, 2014). These two cultigens and other members of the O. sativa complex
prefer full sun, grow near lakes, rivers and seasonal pools of water (Shakiba and Eizenga

2014).

The members of Oryza have distinguishable variation in spikelet structure, which
contains the fruit and caryopsis, and thus, it is one of the key characters for morphological

rice classification (Fig. 1) (Vaughan 1989). Other morphological characteristics used for

Table 1. Taxonomic classification of Oryza genus, including sections, complexes,
chromosome number, genome type, genome size, distribution, and useful traits
(Ammiraju et al. 2010; Sanchez et al. 2014; Shakiba and Eizenga 2014).

SPECIES: 2N GENOME GENOME USEFUL TRAITS DISTRIBUTION
TYPE ‘SIZE (MB)
Section: Oryza
Complex: O. sativa
O. sativa L. (ssp. 24 AA 420, High yielding Worldwide
japonica, ssp. indica) 466
O. nivara Sharma et 24 AA 448 Resistance to grassy stunt virus and BB Tropical and
Shastry subtropical
Asia
O. rufipogon Griff. 24 AA 439, Resistance to BB, blast, BPH, tungro virus; Tropical and
450 moderately tolerant to Shb; tolerance to subtropical
aluminum and soil acidity; increased Asia, Tropical
elongation under deep water; source of CMS _—_ Australia
and yield-enhancing loci
O. glaberrima Steud. 24 A8As 354 Tolerance to drought, acidity, iron toxicity West Africa
and P-deficiency; resistance to BB, blast,
RYMV, African gall midge, nematodes;
weed competitive
O. barthii A. Chev. 24 A&A8 411 Resistance to GLH, BB; drought avoidance Africa
tolerance to heat and drought
oO. glumaepatula 24  A®PA®? 464 Elongation ability; source of CMS; tolerance South and
Steud. to heat Central
America
O. longistaminata A. 24 Ala! 352 Resistance to BB, nematodes, stem borer; Africa
Chev. Et Boehr drought avoidance
O. meridionalis Ng 24 A"A™ 435 Elongation ability; drought avoidance; Tropical
tolerance to heat and drought Australia
Complex: O. officinalis
O. punctata Kotschy 24 BB 423 Resistance to BPH, BB, zigzag leafhopper; Africa
ex Steud. 48 BBCC (BB) _ tolerance to heat and drought
O. minuta J.S. Presl. 48 BBCC 1124 Resistance to BB, blast BPH, GH Philippines,
Ex C.B. Presl. Papua New
Guinea
O. eichingeri A.Peter 24 cc Resistance to BPH, WBPH, GLH South Asia,
East Africa
O. officinalis Wallex 24 cc 653 Resistance to thrips, BPH, GLH, WPH, BB, Tropical and
Watt stem rot; heat tolerance subtropical
Asia, Tropical
Australia
O. rhizomatis 24 cc Drought avoidance; resistance to blast; heat Sri lanka

Vaughan

tolerance

Table | continued.

SPECIES 2N GENOME —- GENOME USEFUL TRAITS DISTRIBUTION
TYPE ‘SIZE (MB)
O. alta Swallen 48 CCDD 1124 Resistance to stripped stem borer; high South and
biomass production Central
America
0. grandiglumis 48 CCDD High biomass production South and
(Doell) Prod. Central
America
O. latifolia Desv. 48 CCDD Resistance to BPH, BB; high biomass South and
production Central
America
oO. autraliensis 24 EE 960 Resistance to BPH, BB, blast; drought Tropical
Domin. avoidance; tolerance to heat and drought Australia
Section: Brachyantha
O. brachyantha A. 24 FF 338 Resistance to BB, yellow stem borer, leaf Central Africa
Chev. et Roehr. folder, whorl maggot; tolerance to laterite
soil
Section: Padia (forest-dwelling)
Complex: O. granulata
O. granulata Nees et 24 GG 862 Shade tolerance, adaptation to aerobic soil; South and
Am. Ex Watt BB, BPH resistance Southeast
Asia
O. meyeriana (Zoll.et 24 GG Shade tolerance; adaptation to aerobic soil; Southeast
(Mor. ex Steud.) drought tolerance; BB resistance Asia
Baill.)
Complex: O. ridleyi
O. longiglumis Jansen 48 HHJJ Resistance to blast, BB Irian Jaya,
Indonesia,
Papua New
Guinea
O. ridleyi Hook F. 48 HHJJ 1283 Resistance to blast, BB, tungro virus, stem South Asia
borer, whorl maggot
Complex: O. schlechteria
O. coarcta Tateoka 48 KKLL m7 Salinity tolerance; stoloniferous Asian coastal
area
O. schlechteri Pilger 48 KKLL Stoloniferous Papua New
Guinea

SOT I ooo +
BPH brown plant hopper, GLH green leaf hopper, WBPH white-backed planthopper, BB bacterial blight, Shb
sheath blight, CMS cytoplasmic male sterility, RYMV rice yellow mottle virus

9 10 11 12 13 14 15

1617 f8 {920 21 22

(a) (b)

Figure 1. (a) Parts of Oryza spikelet (Gramene 2006); (b) Spikelet structures of (1) O.
schlechteri, (2) O. brachyanta, (3) O. longiglumis, (4) O. ridleyi, (5) O.
granulata, (6) O. meyeriana, (7) O. minuta, (8) O. officinalis, (9) O. eichingeri,
(10) O. punctata, (11) O. latifolia, (12) O. alta, (13) O. grandiglumis, (14) O.
australiensis, (15) O. meridionalis, (16) O. rufipogon, (17) O. glumaepatula,
(18) O. nivara, (19) O. sativa, (20) O. longistaminata, (21) O. barthii, and (22)
O. glaberrima (Vaughan 1989).

rice classification are attachment of spikelets to pedicel, lemma structure, presence of
sterile lemmas, and type of embryo (Launert 1965; Tateoka 1964). In 1994, almost all the
species known today and their genome types were identified, except for the species O.
coarcta and the genome types of O. granulata, O. schlechteri, and O. ridleyi complexes,
which were discovered in 1997 (Vaughan 1994; Aggarwal et al. 1997). The bases of
classifications used were morphology, cytogenetics for genome relationship analysis,
isozyme analyses, restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP), intergenic spacer
(ITS) variation, SSR analysis, and chloroplast genes analysis (Vaughan 1994; OECD
1999). Figure 2 shows morphological diversity of genome type representatives of wild rice

sourced from Ammiraju et al. (2010).

Figure 2. Morphological diversity of representative species for each genome type of Oryza
(Ammiraju et al. 2010).

Several methods have been applied to study the genetic variation and relationship
present in the species of the Oryza genus, such as inter simple sequence repeat (ISSR)
polymorphism analysis (Joshi et al. 2000), genome-specific DNA probing (McIntyre and
Winberg 1998), RFLP analysis (Ge et al. 2001), and random amplified polymorphic DNA
(RAPD) analysis (Martin et al. 1997), but the results varied due to different targets in the
rice genome. With the finished O. sativa genome sequencing in 2002 (Buell 2002a; Buell
2002b; Goff et al. 2002; Yu et al. 2002; Vaughan et al. 2003) and the construction of BAC
library of Oryza wild species (Wing et al. 2005; Ammiraju et al. 2006; Ammiraju et al.

2010), more accurate phylogenetic analyses were conducted.

The year 2005 saw the launching of the Oryza Map Alignment Project (OMAP)
which aimed to construct and align BAC-based physical maps of representative species for

each genome type of Oryza to the reference genome sequence of O. sativa ssp. japonica

9

c.v. Nipponbare generated by the International Rice Genome Sequencing Project (IRGSP)
(Wing et al. 2005; Ammiraju et al. 2006). In 2006, the same group published the
completion of the BAC library construction with genome sequences of some of the wild
species, such as O. nivara, O. rufipogon, O. glaberrima, O. barthii, O. longistaminata, O.
punctata, and O. brachyantha (Ammiraju et al. 2006; Sanchez et al. 2014). The BAC-end
sequences were predominantly used for the discernment of the relationships between the
species of Oryza (Fig. 3). The distribution, abundance, and role of transposable elements
in the evolution of rice species were the focus of some of these studies (Zuccolo et al. 2007;
Roulin et al. 2008; Gill et al. 2010). In 2013, Zou et al. utilized several nuclear genes
representing all the 12 chromosomes of diploid wild species of rice to predict the
divergence times of lineages in Oryza. They estimated that Oryza originated 13 to 15
million years ago (MYA) during middle Miocene and obtained two diversifications: first
diversification involved F-/G-genomes and H-/J-/K-genomes within <1 Myr after Oryza
originated; second diversification gave rise to A-/B-/C-genomes 5-6 MYA. In 2018, 13

wild and domesticated species were fully sequenced (Stein et al. 2018).

10

Figure 3. Phylogenetic relationships between Oryza representative species (Ammiraju et
al. 2010; Sanchez et al. 2014).
---: origin of tetraploids, @: maternal parents, O: unidentified diploid species.

The identification of genes controlling useful traits in wild rice species has also
been obtained through interspecific or intergenomic hybridization and development of
mapping populations. These mapping populations may be composed of recombinant inbred
lines (RIL), advanced backcross (AB), backcross inbred lines (BIL), chromosome segment
substitution lines (CSSL), near isogenic lines (NIL), multi-parent advanced generation
inter-cross (MAGIC), or monosomic alien addition lines (MAALs) (Shakiba and Eizenga

2014).

11

O. sativa L. (2n= 24) is a rice cultigen species, which originated from tropical Asia

(FAO 2004a; Zeilang and Pattanayak 2013). Its production involves three general stages,
namely, pre-planting, growth, and post-production (IRRI n.d.). Included in these stages are
12 steps for successful rice production, which comprise usage of crop calendar, choosing
the best variety and best quality seeds, preparation of fields, planting on time, weeding
early, usage of fertilizer, water efficiency, harvesting on time, storage, efficient milling,
and understanding the market. Crop calendars are used for better planning of farm activities
and efficient costing, because they include the best date to plant, growth duration of
varieties from planting to harvest, dates for plowing, weeding, fertilizing, and harvesting,
and the needed labor and equipment for each activity (IRRI n.d.). Figure 4 shows growth
duration diagrams from IRRI featuring direct seeded and transplanted rice, which can be

used for creating crop calendars.

The selection of the best rice variety, which is suitable to the farmer’s growing
conditions, is important for cost-efficient rice farming. The farming conditions that need
consideration are water availability from rain or irrigation, soil type, and field elevation,
whereas crop duration, crop height, and grain quality are needed in selecting the best
variety. Seeds are also checked for cleanliness, pureness, and health. IRRI indicated that
good seed is free from stones, soil, or weed seeds, contains only grains from one variety,
big, of the same color, and no cracks or spotting. Float test is often used in checking for
seed viability, whereas moisture content (<12-14%) is used to evaluate vigor and life of

the seed (IRRI n.d.).

DIRECT SEEDED RICE
Growth Duration

Hong

2° 0
meee: aed =

gan
a
Peewee Las) ‘
om
(a)
TRANSPLANTED RICE
+ FIELO—++— NURSERY FIELD

|
| Vegetative Phase Reproductive Phase Ripening Phase

Hn a

ines ©
mele EY Fe

§)

(b)

Figure 4. Growth duration diagrams of direct seeded (a) and transplanted (b) rice from
nursery to harvesting (IRRI n.d.).

Besides being an important crop for food security, rice also serves as a model
system for the grass family (Ammiraju et al. 2010). In 2002, full draft sequences of O.

sativa L., which are independent efforts of Beijing Institute of Genomics, IRGSP,

13
Syngenta, and Monsanto, were already available (Buell 2002a; Buell 2002b; Goff et al.
2002; Yu et al. 2002; Vaughan et al. 2003; Yu et al. 2005). These sequences are used as
references for bioinformatics. In 2005, the Beijing Institute of Genomics group described
an improved reference genome for rice by integrating their data with those from IRSGP
and Syngenta; it described the less but comparable data quality from whole genome
shotgun (WGS) method than clone-by-clone method and demonstrated the large role of
gene duplications in the evolution of rice (Yu et al. 2005). In 2013, Kawahara et al. updated
the Nipponbare reference genome through the improvement of the genome assembly by
revising the minimum tiling path of clones using optical map and identifying sequence

error by resequencing (Kawahara et al. 2013).

With the availability of rice reference sequences, next generation sequencing
(NGS) and microarrays are the most preferred method for genotyping different varieties
and species of rice (Yu et al. 2014), although some may still use PCR (Hirotsu et al. 2010).
Rice6K, a whole genome SNP array, utilizes the Illumina Infinium technology for high
throughput genotyping, germplasm fingerprinting, and background selection in rice (Yu et
al. 2014). This platform is already being used in several laboratories, including those in

IRRI.

Rice Improvement Through Interspecific Hybridization

Rice production is expected to decline by 2050, and the world is facing a higher
demand for rice due to population growth (Abdullah et al. 2005; Sharma 2014).

Intensifying the problem is the continuous decrease in paddy area, brought about by

14
urbanization and climate change (Chen 2007; Okamoto et al. 2014; Hao et al. 2015).
Affirmatively, the growing number of studies for high quality rice is thought to have an

impact on these projections (Shakiba and Eizenga 2014; Sharma 2014).

The main goal of rice breeding is to increase food production by improving the
grain yield potential, grain quality, resistance to pests and diseases, and tolerance to abiotic
stresses (Gowda et al. 2003; Guimaraes 2009). Table 2 presents some agronomically

important traits which are present in rice (Gowda et al. 2003).

In 2003, nearly 450 genes affecting rice morphology, physiology, biochemistry,
and biotic and abiotic stress response have been identified in rice (Gowda et al. 2003).
These discoveries involved genes that code for or control morphological traits, such as,
anthocyanin pigmentation, hull and pericarp color, spikelet traits, grain size and shape,
endosperm traits, panicle traits, photosensitivity, hybrid sterility, male sterility, fertility
restoration, wide compatibility, and chlorophyll deficiency. Abiotic resistance genes
against bacterial blight, blast, Cercospora, stripe viruses, grassy stunt virus, hojablanca,
yellow dwarf virus, plant hopper, green leafhopper, zigzag leafhopper, whitebacked plant
hopper, and gall midge, were also included (Gowda et al. 2003). Interspecific hybridization
in rice is done to introduce useful abiotic and biotic stress tolerance/resistance genes and
genes for yield improvement from wild Oryza species to popular O. sativa L. varieties
(Khan et al. 2015). Through backcross breeding, researchers are able to produce MAALs,
which contain complete sets of chromosomes from the recurrent parent and an additional
chromosome from the donor parent (Yasui et al. 1997). A set of MAALs with all 12
chromosomes passed on as extras into backcross lines is useful in mapping genes, which

can be associated with resistance/tolerance traits, in wild rice chromosomes (Hossain et al.

15

Table 2. Agronomically important traits for each life stage, part, or aspect of rice (Gowda

et al. 2003).

STAGE/PART/ASPECT

DESIRABLE TRAITS

Seed

Vegetative

Physiological

Roots

Flowering

Stress (biotic or abiotic)

Yield

No dormancy and faster germination; Rich in carbohydrates,
proteins, lipids, vitamins and minerals; Longer shelf life;
Resistance to pests and diseases; Long, slender and basmati
aroma; Medium gelatinization temperature and amylose
content

Vigorous growth and development; Strong, short stem and
resistance to lodging; More, longer, narrow and erect leaves;
More productive tillers per culm

High photosynthetic efficiency and low photorespiration;
Rapid leaf area development and high biomass accumulation;
High sink to source translocation; Long greenness of flag leaf
Increased canopy photosynthesis in entire growth period

More roots with high penetration ability; Healthy root system
and rapid nutrient uptake; Adaptation to aerobic and anaerobic
soils

Early flowering, high rate of pollination and fertilization; More
spikelets per panicle and more flowers per spikelet; Complete
emergence of panicle from the boot leaf; Long, erect and large
panicle; Resistance to seed shattering

Tolerance or resistance to many diseases such as fungal (blast
and sheath blight), bacterial (leaf blight), viral (tungro and
grassy stunt) and insect pests including BPH, stem borer and
hoppers etc.; Tolerance to salts, metal toxicity, submergence
etc.

Higher yield in a wider soil and climatic zones


16
2012). From these MAALs, disomics, which are diploid lines containing 24 chromosomes
introgressed with small segments of DNA from the wild rice donor, may be produced
through backcrossing (Angeles-Shim et al. 2014). In 2014, Sanchez et al. listed cases of
introgression of abiotic/biotic stress resistance/tolerance genes from different wild Oryza
species into rice. Many of the genes controlling the traits are not yet identified.
Nevertheless, many varieties with useful traits from wild Oryza developed through wide
hybridization and marker-assisted selection (MAS) have already been released. These
varieties carry the genes for grassy stunt resistance, BPH resistance, acid sulfate tolerance,
salinity tolerance, tungro resistance, BB resistance, blast resistance, high yield, weed

competitive ability, and heat tolerance (Sanchez et al. 2014).

O. granulata Complex

The O. granulata complex is composed of two species, namely, O. granulata and
O. meyeriana. Both species have the GG genome and identified to be drought tolerant,
shade tolerant, and bacterial blight resistant. O. granulata and O. meyeriana are considered
as different species, but they share the same genome, have negligible reproductive barriers

and were recommended to be placed into the same species (Gong et al. 2000).

O. meyeriana and O. granulata are drought and shade tolerant wild species of rice,
with resistance to bacterial blight and adaptation to aerobic soil (Duncan 1994; Gao et al.

2000). They are the most basal and farthest related species to cultivated rice in the Oryza

17
genus and have diploid GG genomes (Fu et al. 2008; Wambugu et al. 2013). They are also

insensitive to photoperiodism (Vaughan 1989; Vaughan 1994; Fu et al. 2008).

O. granulata is widely distributed in South and Southeast Asia, and thrives in forest
floors of full shade (Gao et al. 2000). It is a short (usually <1 m) herb, with lanceolate dark
green leaves, and awnless spikelets (<6.4 mm) with granulate texture of palea and lemma.
O. granulata is distinguished from O. meyeriana mainly by the length of the spikelet. It
was observed to be flowering all year long, with peaks in July and August (Vaughan 1994;
Gao et al. 1996). It was also found to be a colonizing plant, which populates hectares of
space through clonal propagation and exhibits seed dormancy (Gao et al. 2000).
Accordingly, they have high genetic diversity among populations and low genetic diversity
within populations in Yunnan, China (Qian et al. 2001; Gao et al. 2000; Wu et al. 2004).
Figure 5 shows the O. granulata plant, spikelet structure, distribution, and habitat. Hybrids
and advanced progenies of O. sativa and O. granulata were produced in 1991, but all lines
showed negative results for the introgression of O. granulata traits to cultivated rice (Brar

et al. 1991; Sanchez et al. 2014).

Oryza granulata Nees & Am. Ex. G. Watt (A) plant, (B) distribution, (C)
spikelet, (D) Sri Lanka habitat, and (E) India habitat from NIAS Genebank
(https://www.gene.affre.go.jp/index_en.php).

19

O. granulata has no existing expressed sequence tags (ESTs) in the National Center

for Biotechnology information (NCBI) database, but BESs are available in the Rice
Annotation Project Database (RAP-DB) (rapdb.dna.affrc.go.jp/) (Ammiraju et al. 2006;
Ammiraju et al. 2010). In 2018, its genome was sequenced to study its expansion and
evolution (Wu et al. 2018). These BAC-end sequences have enough information for

molecular marker design.

Insertion-Deletion Markers

Molecular markers speed up the breeding process by serving as landmarks in the
genome that can be associated with a trait and detected during the early stages of a plant.
Several markers may be used, including isozymes and DNA markers. SSR or microsatellite
markers are commonly used because of their relative abundance in genomes, high
polymorphism, codominance, wide distribution throughout the genome, and inexpensive
requirements (Miah et al. 2013). However, they have limited genome abundance and
coverage (Liu et al. 2013). SSRs have been extensively used in rice, and to complement
the limitation of these markers, other markers are used in association studies to cover the

whole genome.

Insertion-deletion (InDel) markers are cheap and easy to use and can be mined from
Next Generation Sequencing data (Vali et al. 2008). They are codominant markers that can
easily be detected via PCR and gel electrophoresis and are as practical as SSRs but are

more frequent in the rice genome (Lu et al. 2015). They have been used in plant breeding

20
and in identifying various traits in rice and other plants (Pacurar et al. 2012; Markkandan
et al. 2018). In 2012, 229 InDel markers were developed to distinguish between two
accessions of Arabidopsis thaliana. These markers were used to map 35 mutations in a
hybrid of the tested accessions (Pacurar et al. 2012). Using the reference sequences of
Hedou 12 and Williams 82 soybean accessions, Song et al. (2015) developed 243 candidate
InDel markers, which were validated and tested among 14 soybean cultivars and were used
in mapping CRINKLY LEAF gene in chromosome 7. Quantitative trait loci (QTLs)
underlying flowering time in soybean were also identified using InDel markers (Wang et
al. 2018). Recently, Jain et al. (2019) generated and validated a total of 8307 InDels through
Dindel software using genome sequences of intraspecific and interspecific hybrids of
chickpea. InDels have also been used along with SNPs in identifying genes for pathogen
resistance in potato (Rickert et al. 2003). Organellar genome can be a source of InDels too
as shown in the study by Cho et al. (2017), who developed five InDel markers from the
chloroplast genome of tartary and common buckwheat and tested them in identifying traces

of the two species in processed foods.

In rice, InDel markers were developed to distinguish between two rice cultivars
Nipponbare and 9311 (Liu et al. 2015) and between indica and japonica landraces (Zeng
et al. 2013; Sahu et al. 2017). These markers were also applied by Steele et al. (2007) to
distinguish Basmatis from other fragrant rice varieties. They designed 47 InDel markers,
in which 71% showed polymorphisms between Basmati and non-Basmati rice varieties. In
2015, Yonemaru et al. developed two sets of InDel markers for breeding of Japanese rice

cultivars from elite line Koshihikari. InDel markers have also been used in the

21
determination of genetic diversity of rice landraces in Chhattisgarh, India (Sahu et al. 2017)

and in marker-assisted introgression of rice blast resistance gene in rice (Hua et al. 2014).

InDel markers can be mined between wild and cultivated rice genomes rice
characterization and improvement. In 2013, 22 InDel primers have been designed and
validated by Yamaki et al. to discriminate among the wild and cultivated species of rice.
In 2014, Angeles-Shim et al. used InDel markers together with SSR markers and single
nucleotide polymorphisms to identify introgression segments from O. latifolia to O. sativa.
Niihama et al. (2015) designed InDels for breeding chromosome segment substitution lines
(CSSLs) between O. sativa, japonica cultivars and wild Oryza species, which include O.
rufipogon, O. barthii, O. glumaepatula, O. meridionalis, and O. longistaminata. InDel
markers were also used in assisted introgression of salt tolerance genes from O. rufipogon
line Dongxiang to rice (Quan et al. 2017) and in characterization of genetic structure of O.

rufipogon populations in China (Jin et al. 2018).

22

Drought Stress Response in Rice

Water is vital in plant growth. Apart from being an important substrate in
photosynthesis, it also regulates plant temperature and turgor pressure in vascular tissues,
aids the entry of carbon dioxide, and distributes minerals to the different parts of the plant
(Chavarria and dos Santos 2012). Because of its large role in plant development, it is a

limiting factor in crop production (Soren et al. 2010; Shamsi and Kobraee 2011).

Drought stress has been the focus of several crop researches, especially on rice and
wheat (Babu 2010; Soren et al. 2010; Khakwani et al. 2011). It greatly affects crop yield,
especially in tropical countries where most crops are grown (Babu 2010; Li et al. 2011). In
rice, several quantitative trait loci (QTLs) were identified to be potentially linked to
drought tolerance and some were introgressed to popular varieties (Steele et al. 2006; Babu
2010). However, most of these loci have not been fine-mapped and cannot be used in MAS
yet (Babu 2010). Continuous mining for sources of drought tolerance genes from other
germplasm, especially the wild species of rice, is currently being done in different research

facilities (Neelam et al. 2018; Donde et al. 2017).

Drought-adapted plants thrive in arid conditions by three ways: escape, avoidance,
and tolerance (Leonardis et al. 2012). Different plants, including O. sativa, manifest these
drought responses (Sack et al. 2003; Babu 2010; Soren et al. 2010). Table 3 presents
different physiological responses exhibited by plants to escape, avoid, or tolerate drought.
In the past years, some of the genes involved in these responses have been identified and

may be used as target genes when screening for drought tolerant lines.

23

Table 3. Physiological responses of plants during drought (Cattivelli et al. 2008).

MODULATION
PLANT TRAITS EFFECTS RELEVANT FOR YIELD UNDER STRESS
Stomatal More/less rapid water consumption. Leaf Stomatal resistance increases
conductance/leaf temperature reflects the evaporation and hence is _ under stress
temperature a function of stomatal conductance
Photosynthetic Modulation of concentration of Calvin cycle Reduction under stress
capacity enzymes and elements of the light reactions
Timing of Early/late flowering. Maturity and growth Wheat and barley advanced

phenological phases

Anthesis-silking
interval (ASI) in
maize

Starch availability
during ovary/embryo
development

Partitioning and stem
reserve utilization

Stay green

Single plant leaf area

Cuticular resistance
and surface

roughness

Photosynthetic
pathway

Osmotic adjustment

Membrane
composition

Antioxidative defense

Accumulation of
stress-related proteins

duration, synchrony of silk emergence and
anthesis, reduced grain number

ASI is negatively associated with yield in

drought conditions

A reduced starch availability leads to abortion,
reduced grain number

Lower/higher remobilization of reserves from
stems for grain-filling, effecting kernel weight

Delayed senescence

Higher/lower tapping of soil water resources

Higher or lower water loss, modification of
boundary layer and reflectance

C3/C4/CAM, higher WUE and greater heat
tolerance of C4 and CAM

Accumulation of solutes: ions, sugars, poly-
sugars, amino acids, glycinebetaine
Regulation in response to water potential
changes

Protection against active oxygen species

Involved in the protection of cellular structure
and protein activities

flowering, rice delayed, maize
asynchrony

Drought stress at flowering
causes a delay in silk
emergence relative to anthesis

Inhibition of photosynthetic
activity reduces starch
availability

Compensation of reduced
current leaf photosynthesis by
increased remobilization

Reduced total mass but
increased root/shoot ratio,
growth into wet soil layers,
regrowth on stress release

Slow response to water
potential

Acclimation of defence
systems

Accumulated under stress


24

The reproductive stage of a crop, especially pollen formation, is highly affected by

water loss or deficit (Babu 2010). To escape drought, plants undergo a short life cycle or
developmental plasticity (Leonardis et al. 2012). Here, the plant completes its life cycle
during periods with sufficient water before the onset of drought. Using the phenology of
the plant, the breeder may know the most suitable time to plant the crop in order to avoid
the onset of drought (Warren and Barnett 2014). However, tropical countries, especially
the Philippines, have unpredictable rainy and sunny seasons, brought about by climate
change (Dulce et al. 2012). Consequently, phenological calendars cannot be used all the

time.

Drought avoidance is another mechanism by which plants survive in arid
conditions. It involves enhanced water uptake and reduced water loss (Leonardis et al.
2012). By this definition, drought avoidance involves morphological adaptations of the

roots and leaves.

Photosynthesis results to the production of glucose and oxygen by reacting carbon
dioxide (CO2) and water (H2O) through the light energy from the sun (Krishnan 2011).
About 90% of the water uptake by the roots are transpired or lost into the atmosphere
through the stomata. The stomata have to be opened in order for CO> to enter the plant cell.
In other words, transpiration is needed for photosynthesis to proceed. Also, plants need to
transpire in order to regulate plant temperature and turgor pressure in vascular tissues and
distribute minerals to the different parts of the plant (Chavarria and dos Santos 2012).
During hot dry days, plants lose more water than in humid conditions. Therefore, water

deficit is detrimental to the crop’s yield and life. To overcome this, some plants have

25

evolved to close their stomata, roll their leaves, increase leaf glaucousness, and undergo

senescence of older leaves, or reduce their leaf area (Leonardis et al. 2012).

Crassulacean Acid Metabolism (CAM) photosynthesis is a way plants reduce water
loss and increase yield in plants, because this process happen during the day, with the
stomata partially or completely closed (Males and Griffith 2017). C4 plants utilize CO2
more efficiently than C3 plants at high light intensity because CO? is directly delivered to
ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO) (Rizal et al. 2012). CAM
plants, on the other hand, open their stomata at night and closes them at daytime. CO2 is
stored in acid form, which is broken down during the day and delivered to RuBisCO
(Cushman and Bohnert 1999). CAM plants are mostly desert plants, some of which also
have reduced or lost their leaves and have succulent bodies in order to reduce water loss

and store water, respectively. They also never use photorespiration.

Root morphology is also important in drought avoidance. Some plants exhibit root
elongation to deeper soil in order to reach available water (Hodge et al. 2009; Cattivelli et
al. 2008) while some plants have suberin, which prevent water loss in the roots to avoid
cell death in the area (Meyer and Peterson 2013). The expansin gene in soybean was
correlated with root elongation (Lee et al. 2003). In rice, several QTLs associated with root
development have been detected. Among these QTLs are phosphorus uptake 1 (PUP 1),
which contributes to phosphorus (P) uptake in low P content soils, and deeper rooting]
(DRO1). PUP! is actually a gene termed phosphorus starvation tolerance (PSTOL1),
which was discovered as a receptor-like cytoplasmic kinase (Gamuyao et al. 2012),
whereas DRO] encodes an unknown protein that is associated with plasmalemma. DRO!

is regulated by auxin response factor (ARF).

26

Suberin is a fatty acid that is highly expressed in the roots of some plants during
drought stress (Meyer and Peterson 2013). When suberin layers get thick, water cannot go
out of the roots, preventing the root cells from desiccation (Pollard et al. 2008). Genes
CYP86A33, a fatty acid oxidase, and STKCS6, a gene responsible for cutin biosynthesis,
greatly affect the production of suberin (Figueras 2006). Drought tolerance involves
osmoregulation, osmotic adjustment, and stomata regulation. In a recent review by Soren
et al. (2010), several genetic engineering techniques that aim to improve drought tolerance
in rice were described. Drought stress affects plant metabolism and results to upregulation
and down-regulation of certain genes. It could follow three different response pathways,
namely, abscisic acid (ABA)-dependent, ABA-independent, and WRKY pathways. This
regulation of gene expression involves changes in membrane integrity and modulation of
lipid biosynthesis. The accumulation of compatible solutes that causes decreased water
potential inside the cell and forcing water to be pulled inside also happen. Further, H*-
ATPase and Ca”*-ATPase activities change, triggering change in Ca”* influx, cytoplasmic

pH and reactive oxygen species (ROS) production (Soren 2010).

Some solutes that contribute to drought tolerance are glycine-betaine, mannitol,
raffinose, galactiomol, fructans, trehalose, and proline (Soren et al. 2010). Their production
is controlled by different genes. For instance, glycine-betaine is produced by oxidizing
betainealdehyde by betainealdehyde dehydrogenase (BADH). Betainaldehyde is a product
of choline oxidation by choline oxidase (COX). COX and BADH can be found in the

stroma and are induced by stress.

During stress, the levels of control include expression of transcription factors,

mRNA splicing, epigenetic regulation, and mRNA translation. The transcription factors

27
that are regulated during stress are of the bZIP, MYB, MYC, ERF, and WRKY families.
The bZIP family depends on ABA and respond to transcriptional and post-transcriptional
level during drought stress. MYC and MYB act as positive regulators once endogenous
ABA has accumulated. Ethylene responsive factors (ERFs) function in both ABA-
dependent and independent pathways, are ethylene responsive, and involved in the
expression of dehydration and low-temperature-responsive genes. Lastly, WRKY are
transcription factors involved in the development, response to stress, and hormone-

requiring mechanisms of a plant (Sahoo et al. 2013).

In a study by Islam et al. (2018), seedling stage drought tolerance was highlighted
to be critical in seed germination, seed establishment, and seedling development. Among
the mentioned effects of drought to rice in the seedling stage are inhibition of cell
enlargement, impaired seed germination, lower seedling height, reduced biomass

production, and lower tiller number.

Another mechanism that may be involved in rice drought response involves the
stomata. In 2018, Caine et al. discovered that fewer stomata in rice leaves contributes in
drought tolerance by requiring less water to survive and having enough water to cool itself
in arid conditions. Additionally, low stomatal count was also associated with low stomatal
conductance, which is related to photosynthesis (Ouyang et al. 2017). In the same study,
smaller stomata were associated with strong drought response. No literature is available on

the study of stomatal density and size in wild rice species at the time of the present study.

CHAPTER 3

MATERIALS AND METHODS

InDel Marker Design and Screening

Sequence retrieval and InDel marker design

BAC-end sequences (BESs) of O. granulata and homologous O. sativa sequences
were retrieved from Rice Annotation Project Database (RAP-DB) (Sakai et al. 2013). The
BESs were aligned against the reference genome sequence of rice (O. sativa spp. japonica
cv. Nipponbare) in MSU-RGAP release 7 — genomic sequences using BLASTn on Rice
Genome Annotation Project

(http://rice.plantbiology.msu.edu/analyses_search_blast.shtml) website without changing

the default parameters (expect threshold = 1e-5; max number of alignments reported = 10;
word length = 11; filter = none), and gaps of more than 18 bp were searched every three
megabases. These gaps represent insertions or deletions in either of the two aligned species.
Primers were designed around these InDels using AmplifX ver. 1.7.0 (http://en.bio-
soft.net/pcr/AmplifX.html) (Jullien 2004). The difference in the expected product size
between the two parentals was determined by performing in silico PCR using the same
software. Gap sizes of 10% to 20% of the product size were selected for easy detection of
band size difference using agarose gel electrophoresis as done by Yamaki et al. (2013).
The primers were then ordered from Macrogen, Korea. This protocol was derived from
previous studies (Lang et al. 2010; Melloul et al. 2014; Pang et al. 2014; Scascitelli et al.

2010).

29

Plant materials
O. sativa ssp. indica cv. IR64 (AA), O. sativa ssp. indica cv. IRRI 154 (NSIC Re
222) (AA), O. granulata (IRGC 102118) (GG), O. granulata (IRGC 106474) (GG), O.
meyeriana (IRGC 89241) (GG), and O. meyeriana (IRGC 89243) (GG) were used as plant

materials in primer testing.

Plant sampling and DNA extraction

Total genomic DNA was extracted from leaf tissues of plant samples using TPE
(100 mM Tris-HCI pH 9.5, 1 M KCI, 10 mM EDTA pH 8.0) Buffer based on the simple
DNA preparation protocol (Kim et al. 2016), as follows: (1) 2-cm young leaf was sampled
from the plant of interest; (2) the leaf was frozen using liquid nitrogen and ground using
GenoGrinder for 8 minutes; (3) 400 pL TPE buffer was added, and the solution was shaken
and kept at 65 °C for 30 min; (4) the samples were centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 15
minutes; (4) 20 wL of the supernatant was aliquoted and diluted with 130 4L nanopure
water and was directly used for PCR. Crude DNA solution was stored in -20 °C until PCR

amplification.

PCR amplification and AGE
PCR reactions were performed using a final volume of 20 1 with the following
components: 2 1 L crude genomic DNA, | unit Tag DNA polymerase, 1X PCR buffer, 0.25

mM dNTPs, and 0.25 mM of each primer. The PCR program was done as follows: 2.5 min

30
at 95 °C, 35 cycles (25 s at 95 °C, 25 s at 55 °C, and 50 s at 72 °C), and 5 min at 72 °C.
The primers used in the PCR reactions are listed in Appendices A and B.

The amplified fragments were resolved via electrophoresis runs on 3.5% agarose
gels. The images were captured using a gel imager. Polymorphic bands between the plants

can be used to detect introgression from one species to the other.

Band Scoring

The gels were scored according to the presence of the expected band sizes. The
following scores were assigned to each marker: 0 — monomorphic between AA and GG
genomes; | - polymorphic between AA and GG genomes; 2 — polymorphic between O.
meyeriana and O. granulata, 3 — polymorphic between O. sativa accessions; 4
polymorphic between O. granulata accessions; 5 — absent bands in either genomes; 6 no
PCR products among all samples; and 7 — polymorphic between AA and GG genomes, but
bands other than the expected sizes are present. The percentage of the amplified and
polymorphic markers were computed for the InDel and SSR markers. The polymorphic
markers were plotted against rice chromosomes’ using PhenoGram
(http://visualization.ritchielab.org/phenograms/) based on Proximity Algorithm (Ritchie

Lab 2012).

31

Drought Stress Screening

Plant Materials

Oryza sativa ssp. indica cv. IR64 and O. granulata 102118 were used as plant
materials in the drought study. The seeds and leaf samples were obtained from Novel Gene
Resources Laboratory with the approval of Dr. Kshirod K. Jena and Dr. Sung-Ryul Kim.
In the drought test, seed dormancy was broken before germination by placing seeds at 40
°C to 42 °C for two days. O. sativa seeds were pregerminated for two days on a petri dish
at 28 °C, whereas O. granulata was germinated in MS media (after not germinating on a
petri dish on the first try). For the seedlings to have approximately the same ages, O. sativa
was germinated later than the O. granulata plants. The clones were tillers from an existing

plant.

The species tested for stomatal density included O. sativa, O. glaberrima, O.
rufipogon, O. longistaminata, O. punctata, O. officinalis, O. minuta, O. latifolia, O. alta,

O. australiensis, O. brachyantha, O. granulata, O. ridleyi, and O. coarctata (Table 4).

32

Table 4. Species and accessions of Oryza checked for stomatal density and their genome
and some important traits (Ammiraju et al. 2010; Sanchez et al. 2014; Shakiba

and Eizenga 2014).
SPECIES VARIETY/ACCESSION GENOME IMPORTANT TRAITS

O. sativa L. IR31917 AA High yield

O. sativa L. IR64 AA High yield

O. glaberrima Steud. IRGC 96717 AA Drought tolerance

O. rufipogon Griff. IRGC 80671 AA Increased elongation under
deep water; source of yield-
enhancing loci

O. longistaminata A. Chev. Et IRGC 110404 AA Drought avoidance

Boehr

O. punctata Kotschy ex Steud. IRGC 105690 BB Drought and heat tolerance

O. officinalis Wall ex Watt IRGC 100896 cc Heat tolerance

O. minuta J. S. Presl. Ex C. B. IRGC 101141 BBCC Insect and pathogen

Presi. resistance

O. latifolia Desv. IRGC 100914 CCDD High biomass production

O. alta Swallen IRGC 105143 CCDD High biomass production

O. australiensis Domin. IRGC 100882 EE Drought avoidance
Drought and heat tolerance

O. brachyantha A. Chev. Et IRGC 101232 FF Insect and pathogen

Roehr. resistance

O. granulata Nees et Am. Ex IRGC 102118 GG Drought tolerance

Watt

O. granulata Nees et Am. Ex IRGC 100879 GG Drought tolerance

Watt

O. ridleyi Hook F. IRGC 100821 HHJJ Insect and pathogen
resistance

O. coarctata Tateoka IRGC 104502 KKLL Salinity tolerance

33

Physiological set-up

Two-day old seedlings were planted on sterilized and fertilized soil placed in mylar
tubes. These tubes are long and slender to allow measurement and comparison of root
length. The mylar tubes were placed inside PVC tubes, which were arranged randomly on

a case with 5x7 slots (63.5 cm x 88.9 cm). The set-up is shown in Figure 6.

barcode,
mice
deat pe: el) (pied ie)
lath puny sealed

Figure 6. Diagram of a mylar tube and PVC tube used to test the drought response of Oryza
granulata Nees & Arn. Ex. G. Watt and O. sativa L.

At the beginning of the experiment, mylar tubes were assembled using mylar plastic
sheets, which were cut into 45 cm x 8 cm and joined end-to-end using duct tape. The
bottom of the tube was covered with fabric to allow passing through of water from the tube.
Dried, sieved, and sterilized upland soil was weighed and placed into each tube up to 40
cm height. The mylar tubes were placed inside PVC tubes, which were epoxy-sealed at the
bottom, painted white, and checked for leaks at the beginning of the experiment. The

weight of the PVC tubes together with the mylar tube and dry soil were determined.

34

Two treatments, namely, well-watered (WW) and drought (DD), were set-up. The
WW treatment was maintained at field capacity, whereas the DD treatment was dried down
from 75% of the field capacity throughout the experiment. To determine the field capacity
of the soil, soil-filled mylar tubes were saturated with water by adding water at the top and
soaking the bottom of the tube for two hours, and then, water was allowed to drain from
the bottom of the tube. The remaining water was determined as the field capacity. Seventy -
five percent of the field capacity was computed and placed in the DD tubes. The tubes were
arranged in a case with 5x7 slots using a randomized complete block design.

Five replicates per genotype were set-up for the experiment. The genotypes tested
were O. sativa L., O. granulata cloned from an existing plant, and O. granulata from seed.
Each tube was barcode-labeled. The germinated seeds and clones were sowed in a
screenhouse and were kept moist until established. The pots were weighed every two days,
with watering of the WW plants to maintain field capacity and drying down of the DD
plants. The plants were harvested after 21 days.

During harvesting, the maximum root depth and plant height were first measured.
Then, the shoots were placed inside envelopes and placed inside the oven to determine the
dry weight. Before being dried in the oven, the roots were placed in 25% ethanol solution
(v/v) and was scanned and analyzed using WinRhizo to determine the total length and
lateral length of the roots. Once measured, the roots were placed inside the oven and
weighed to obtain dry weight.

ANOVA was performed using the Statistical Tool for Agricultural Research (STAR)

package. Graphs with error bars were created using Microsoft Excel.

35
Screenhouse temperature and relative humidity were measured using Hobo™ to

determine if the environment is the factor affecting plant response.

Stomatal Density

The flag leaves of mature wild rice plants were obtained from the screenhouse,
measured for leaf length and width, soaked in water, and put in 4 °C until scratching. The
middle part of the flag leaves was scratched using blades until only one layer of cells at the
abaxial side was left. The leaves were viewed under 10X magnification using a light
microscope (Olympus BX61) under bright field, and five replicates were included for
counting. The stomata included inside the field of view were counted, and stomatal density
was computed using Eqn. 1. Five fields of view per species were sampled, and stomata
were counted using the cell counter function in Image J software (Arena et al., 2016). To
normalize the data, a field of view correction factor (CF) of 359 was used. The CF is the

area (mm?) of the field of view computed from x:692.23 * y:518.59/1000

(Eqn. 1) Stomatal Density = Stomatal count (no./field of view) x 1000
CF

Pearson’s Correlation coefficients were computed between leaf length and width, leaf
length and stomatal density, and leaf width and stomatal density. Scatter plots were

generated to show the relationships among these factors.

CHAPTER 4

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Development of Polymorphic InDel Markers and Comparison with SSR Markers

To assist breeding programs, molecular markers are essential to track the exchange
of genomic sequences among crossed lines. Using O. granulata BAC-end sequences from
RAPDB (https://rapdb.dna.affrc.go.jp/), many insertions and deletions (InDels) were found
by aligning these BESs with the Nipponbare genome using BLAST in MSU-TIGR
(http://rice.plantbiology.msu.edu/analyses_search_blast.shtml). Gaps that are not
necessarily continuous and can come from either genome were searched in every three
megabases in the Nipponbare genome. Some BESs contain sparse number of InDels, and
thus searching the subsequent BESs was done until InDels with the correct size and have
flanking sequences from which primers can be designed were found. When the following
criteria were set in AmplifX ver. 1.7.0 software (http://en.bio-soft.net/per/AmplifX.html)
in designing a useful primer, namely >50 °C melting temperature, > GC percent, 3' end
stability, no polyX, and no self-dimer and self-end dimer formation, 121 InDel primer pairs
were designed. A total of 94 InDel primers with product size difference of more than 20%
of the product sizes were finally selected for synthesis and testing. Manual mining of
InDels and designing of the primers were tedious and took a substantial amount of time in

the research process.

A total of 94 InDel markers and 96 SSR markers were tested for polymorphism

between the AA and GG genomes (Tables 5 and 6). The InDel sizes ranged from 16 bp to

sD ot vse eee ‘DWOLVDLIDVOVIDD IVIDVIVIDDWIIILVILID —__ puans +) BPODPE z 1009059 w
QO ew ‘SID ig eee vse SVIDLVILIDVIVIILLID DDLVVIOOVILLVOLVILLVD (puans +) 689¢90%2 9007S0DD w
si sr via 639 DLVLVIOVIIIIOWVIOVWID LVILLIDDLIOLILIVVIOLLIO (puans +) $00 $099 ty
sw er on elt VOVVOLVIIOLLIDOLVOIOL ADDLVILOLLOLVDIOVIOLY (puns +) ¥00_s099 w
si If 007 lee LVDIVVIIIDDINIINIIOLY YODVILVVDIDVIDOVWIOLD (poens +) £00_s099 iy
m er vey uy DIDOVWVOLOOLLLYDLOD LVDLOVIOVWVSVIVDOV (pens ‘200_s090. Li
sa Le see wy LLVLNOVOLILLVIOVIO VOILVOIVIVLIOVVDDIOL (pouns 100_$099 6
vd ww oz Lt WVLODLIVIODVILOOV SVIVLLODDLLLOVLVD (puens, 900_90D9 Lid
Ln) (74 zt eee IDVOOVIOLIOLYIINNLD DVVLVDLVIODDLIOLIWY (pouns +) 400-¥0DD oe
Land ve vor yi4 VLVIODDIODLOLOVIVVIVD: LOVIDLVOOLVLVIVIOILY (porns -) 900 09D La
aD oe zoe zee LD2D1VIII1NILOO1NIVLLI QLDOLLIDVIODILVILY (puans $00" r0DD se
cae) oe 187 oze DVVIDLOVIDLOVIOVIOVOVVD DLYIDVILIDLOLVIVVIOVOL (poens +) $00_¥0DD ig
vay ts o8z zee LQ0VOVIVOVWILIOLIIL DVDVVIDLVIIIVIOVOVLLVD (poens -) £00_y095 z
vad Or oz 091 YDDVDLODYDLVDLOVID LYDVVLDDVIOVWVIDDLOD (puens ‘700_0DD te
rar) Is eee 66£ DDLLVIDILYVILIOVIVIVIOD DYDLLVIDDWWOLYDLODVLVD (poens 100-7099 Ie
Os) a za vot VOLIDLVIVOVVIVIOVIOL DDLIDIVDLLILLOVDDLYIVWVO (puens -) 10 £099 0€
el a 4 tt VLVODDVVOWWDLOVOVODVOL DVVOVLYIDWVDDLYDVYVDD: (poens -) £10609 4
bs) or see Sut DVVVDDDVIVOVILLIDLLLIVD WOVVIDLOVVOVIODLID (Puans +) 66160687 7S060E87:EOP t10-€099 4
a 4 vie az VOOVLIDLIDLLVDLI9VLOD LLLODIOVILVIOVVOOWVLVD (poens -) 110-6099 ww
i) i $9t we VOLLLVODLVOODLLVDVI VOVLIOVOVVOLOOVWIOL (pons - 010-6099 %
(D9 0N ‘eID we TOE ee OLIDWVIIDLVODOVOV OLOOLLIODLLVDLLIILSV (puns +) 600 E099 s
bs) % 6st ete DDLVIDIODLYDDVDLYDWVO LIQDLLYDLLODVVOVVDD199 (pons - 8007c0D9 "
QD Z1'9"199 ‘EHD &- we see LVIIVOVIDLIOIOIOOL DLVDOVWVIDLIVIVYWIIIDLO (pours +) 4007€099 &
Gy ve tor oer DILYOVODLOOILLLVDLL DVLVOVIDILIOOIILILVIV (pvens 900-6099 id
Cy st uy ey YLLOVOVLIIOVVI01D99 ADOVIDLVDDLVOVVOIDVIIIL (pvens $00_€099 zw
Cy ve wt loz LVYOOI0VILVILVVDIILVII VOLDVIIOVILDLYVIVD (puns - ‘v0 €0D9 4
Ot) ee 891 107 DAIDIVLLVOVOLIOLYIILLLID AD2LIDOLIOVIILDIOV1I0D (puans +) cce6ezsz"s998EzS7:EORP £00_€099 Ci
Ge 1z Wwe oor LIDVODVODVDOVOVILID DOIDLLVIOLVIOLIDVILLD (porns -) 1st" 2089L:£0% 100_£099 a
™ we one zor VV299VIDVLLOLYVVLIOLVII DYVDVIOLIDOVLLLIVLOVIVOV (wens -) 600-2009 u
™ a sey uy DYVILLYVVVDVOIDVD1IILID VODDVIOVIDLYDLLLOLLVILOL9 (puna -) 800_720DD gt
~™ Ie tee 969 ALVLIOVODLILIOLIILLVVOD VLIOVIVVIOVODVOVVOLL (puens +) 92001991 "1ZZ60991:20 400-2099 5
™ of ols osy OW DDVDDLYIOVIOVIOLD PLLIDLLVIIIIOLVINID (pens 900° 20DD rl
Zia ‘THD [4 ee sol IDIVLLIDDIVIODLVIDLO QVILOVVIOWVIILVIIOL (pens $00_2099 a
md Oe 4 log IDDOVDLVIINDLILVLLOL VODVVDDDLYVIILVOLDIO (puns - £00209 t
™m Is- sel oat ALLVDLIDLVILLLIOVIVILIO IVILIILOVOLOVVILVDLIIO (poans -) ‘7002090 ts
™ we 607 Wwe YODVDLIDLILVLILVLIIIVOVD IDVIDLIDDVILLDLVLVOVDLOV (puens 100-2009 ot
™ ae It sar VOLLIDDIDIDIVIODLYD YVVIDVWOVIVIILVD909 sv 600-1099 6
i) Ie out ist AQVOVYDVVIOVILVVIII0 YOWVDVLVILIDDIDOINIO 66 800109 4
™m £07 sz LOQLIDLVIDLYVI2VD999 DLLIOLVOIDLVVID1OLD oe 4001099 L
i) a siz ez IDLVDODLYIIOLIONLID VLVODDVYDDLLLIDIID v1 90071095 9
i) at Ist ee LLOVOLIDIOVOLILV.LIIO DIDLOWLILVVODOVOLIO (puens $00_1099 s
mo st sw Ost VOLDOVIVWWLIVWILNII9 VOVIDDLODILVWVVODVVIVOD (pons - ¥00_1099. v
wo ue et ost YOIDDVOILVIDVVIDDYDD LLVLD9VODVDIOVILIOD a4 £00_1099 €
12 uy ti44 LL VVVIOVIIVIOOVVIOVDLY VOVWIIOLLIDOLIDDIDLD (@oens 200_1099 z
19 w GSE SIE YOOVLIOVWVLIOVVDVIIO YOOLVOLLYWIIVWIOVDID (poems +) SpLLEIE PEOLELE:1ORP 19071099 1
me Way @® ‘arequoddin,
9H SVG apie ceaaa tc azn ieoae (¢ OL s) wma ISHIATE (¢ OLS) Wma TAVMHOR “va ejuode{ dds eager 929 30 2DNANDIS = MEDION
Qnaoes dows ‘WONA9 SONTALANA TAL NI NOLLISOd

| eta ee UU EEEE IEEE

‘spliqdy diyisadssaqul “] vayws ‘CE pue
NEM ‘D “xq “Wy 7 Soon ByHjnUDAd HzU_ Jo BuIpaeq PojSIsse-1ayxIEUI 1OJ OII/1S Us PoUBIsop sJoyJeUl [>QU] OplM-sWOUAd Jo js] “S B1GUL

Cy
“

ADDLVDVILIIVLLVIIIVWDIV
DIDDWVOLOLVVIODLLIVVOD

AVOVWILVIOVILIDVILVVILIO

LOVIDVIOVIOVIVIDLIOLIOLY

QOVILVVIVIDDVWVVOVOVLLLD
VDLVDLVWVIDLIOLIOOLVIV

VWVDVV2099VDLOOLLVOL

VOVIDIVODOLLIVIVLVVOLD VOVIVDDVDDIDIIOLIVIIDIO

VOVIDLIVIILVIVVDLVIOVD LYVOOLIDDIDDLVDLILLIOL

IIDDLOVDDLLIDLVDLVIVILY

AVDDOVVDVIOVIIIVLIILIO

ADDLVIIIOLIDLIOOLLIOVILVL

(paens -) peor coc e6v69607:90"P
(puans +) pZLL 764" vE6926L:90%

OVVDLVDVIIDVDOLOLOVILVV

“19 exjunds| ds mage #20 40 ZONEADTS

1102199 16
010 z199 id
600-2199 %
800 ZIDD 16
400-2199 06
9002199 a
S00 15D @
00 21D es
€00_Z1DD a
700_Z199 se
100 2195 n
600-11 &
800119 i
400-1199, (8
900-119 08
$00-1199 be
00119. La
£00"1199 u
2001190 o
100-1159 sk
$00 01DD a
00 0199 73
£00_0199 wu
40076099
90076099 oe
006059 9
00 60D 9
100609 ro
4008009 »
900809 59
$00 8095 i)
vod B0DD 9
€00_80D9 ic)
700_80D9 19
100809 9
9007409 6s
$007409D ts
¥00_L099 ts
£00_L09D 9S
700_L0DD $s
100-4099 1s
600-9099 ts
8009099 ts
4009009 Is
9007909 0s
$00"9099 ov
¥00_90DD w
200-909 fa
‘<pnvW ON

‘DWONID TONIMLATY TAL NI NOLLISOT

“*panutjuod ¢ 91qe 1,


Ga)
sunyz IVOLY Tina 15
on aN 08 ——~r — = By tor DIOOVIODVLOIDLIVVD SLVYVILOOLVDVO. a

be a 0s ost QODLOVWWVDLOVDDLIDOL DVLVDDIOOLIILLLOWVDDL fe
2 N t a nw rst LVOLIILLV¥LIDVIIIIO QODLIVLODLLLVOLVWII9 Goze
an ax % ° fet o st DDLIDLOLOALWVILVILOV DVILVIDVILIOVILIOVIL ats a
ne ax a é Fs ss oer SODLIVDLVOVIOLLLVIOV DOVIDLIINILLVIOOID sey
an ax 0 ard os ont DLIDIDILVDLVONIDLOVI DIOVIOVVDIOLLODOLLD SOW
“oon ax oe o : ss 9 Ist DLLIOOVOVOLIODLLLLVS AVOVOVIVIDLLIOIVVLVV viewed Sy
amd ax @ c . s £07 DDLVDODLOVIDDDLOLVIY QVIDLVDIVODLOWVIOOLY Sea
a ax Ef ‘ mo s wor DDLIOVIILYDIVIOOVLIO DODDLILLIVVILIOLVIVY isn
Az ox H 5 ar s LT DVDVLIODDDOVVODVDLID DOLYDOVVILIDLVIVLDOLD cose tr
Pe Py I a .* $ 9 ofr VLLVVOVVVVIIOVIIDLVD QVIDVLALVIDVV.LIDVIOV icc ad
arnt ax x ° = 0s 1 DIVOLLLDLIOVIILLWVD QVLIDIDLDIIIILOILLVY ESOL OF
ORAL TA an 9 6 py Bé o mH SDLIIWWDILVDVILODLLY DIIDIOLLLLIIIDILIOLL ISNA OE
“rt ox ve : tm 4s 0s aut DLIDLIDVILIOLIDDIDLL QVILLVDOOVIILDILLVOV vowed
vor an vw 8 ind ° our DLIDIDLLLLIIDVIOVDDVY OVILLIDVILLODLILVIID oLesWu LE
xn ax * te . s 5 m DLLIDVOWVIVOVOODLYVL AIVOVILLVLYDOIVLLVODY vLPWA 9
omant ax s rf : s $ wet DLVDLVIDIDLOVVDDLID YDLVVVOLLYIOVVDLYVD cose SE
omit ax ra te * s oot YVOVLLODVDLVOVOOLVLY DPVLLLIDOVIVVIDOLV9D Lssenu te
arn an @ it _ 0 vst D19DLL2D9ILLALLIOVWY DLYVIDLVDILLVDVII009 SIU fe
“som ox m ° ar ss " DODVVDDOVODLIDLIDVLO DVIMLILLYDIVID1IIO vIELNM TE
2 ax & i om oy $ ust D9OL9LLIVVIIVIVIID DLIDID1DO1D2VVDIOVO “unde
a an oe 7 > 8 3 ut Q21LDLVDLOIOVIIODLY QVIDVVLVWOILVVDIIVII R09 OE
xn an 3 * 2° $ a VOVDOVWLLVVLIVVOIDLL OVVLVDVOOIVOVIDIOLVL ers 6
ome an % a 5 $ ’ ut DLODLVVOVVILLLYVOLOY VOVYVIDIDDLDVLLLLVOV OKosWE AT
bed an ze ot Pi s eer JODLIOLIDIOLILOVVLY SVLIDVLIOVILVOIOVDIO SELON
" an Hi x a * $ v Sst DLLOVVOVVLOVDVDVDNID DOVWV1DL99V1991999V ICANT
oman ax ot i @ is * mm VOWVOLDVLLLVILLI99V9 DIVIOVIVILVVDVVILVLD eI §T
mtr an Hi n $ SPLLDLIVIIDLIOLIILD D2VDIDVIDLOLWVLVOLLVS corde
“ara aN i Ki sy os ust DPVYDOVILLILLNDIND 2920VIIIDLDLLII e109
“OMA on re i ie ss € 19 AVVOVOVVDYYODLLYDVID DVLIDILOLIEVLVVVIOVI sO
oman an s Fa = § €1z VIVLILDLLIDLYVVDDIOV LLVLOVLLLVV1991999V9 tor IZ
Bere ax % a as s an SOVDVVOVLIOVOILVDIVIV DVIODVDVIIOVOVOVOVYD SRSEAU OT
on an % Fa » * $ or DLLVLLYVWVOLYVVOIVOO DVVOLLWVDVDDOLVLVLVD ZSEIN 6
ane on rd fe s ra SLLVLLVWWVOIVVVOLVOO DVVOLLWVDVDOLVLVLVO zseIWd A
met ax i i = s Ost DOLLLLVIODIVLIVVDVID DOVWVIDLLLLID99LVIV a a
An an i st $ mi DOVIDLLIDIOVOVYLLIDY AIVOVVOVWVDIDVVOIDLLL sO
oman an % te 7 i ost YVDVVOVVOVODLVOLLID VLLILLIDLOLILLLYII9 cos I
sore) an ‘A Mf 2 s : uz DLYVLIDIDIDDV199199199 DIDIVOOWVLIVOVIVIVLL verend rl
Feat an it 3 ai s gor QVDVYDLLYDIDIVIIOL QDDDLVOVILIVVVIVIOLY Tee
an an o t “ $ t wt VLOVVIIDVLLLYDYD9901 QVIOLLLDVOVLLYVWVOLLYD veo
aru an oe ot L Fs eat DIDDLIDLLVIOLVIOLVI DDLOVIVOLDLVIIIOLOY sscwd
ane an % a = Fa ut DOVDLODVIOVIOVOVLLLL QILIIDLLLOIVIODOVIOVL eevee Ol
nz an ¢ mo $ on 22091 VVIOVILLLOOLIV PVOLIDLINIIID1INIVDD vow 6
nz an Ha c s § vet DYDVDDVIVVDDDYVDIOV 2DDIIWWVLVLVIIILIID lyswed 8
an ay 9 fe 2” $ tet DVDDLILVILIOIOLLIY DDLLLWVLVDIDLLVLLLVIO aod k
oA an 99 €€ a ss ou i :
QVIDIDOVIOVLY — VDIDLLLIDIDLVILVLLYYVOLOLVD §=— BOR
ne ae 7 = i ‘ tr SybazavavevaaNvao¥ SywvDa1D991LVIDO1201 ood
an an i 6 a OL er 2029VIDIILIIIDLIID DDYDDOLOVVVVIODVD9 a
are an a ‘1 ‘ne oF wr DVOVOVDIIIVWVIDVOLIY SLDPIDLIIVOLLOOILL wwe
oo an ot i Be os tor DDDVOVVIIDDDLLLVOIOV DLLLIOIOIDLLALOLIIL SEU Z
ane an ve tt ho i 1 SPIDLIDAIDLLIDLLIID DVVOVVOVVV299VV20VI9 aut
Zz aN ve ais op 19 ou
min ALAR, ALLOW noo nao SAYN
4 monet TOON, arm mares SONTAAS waATUd ISAATE ZONANDAS WAWTEd TEVMUOS $0901 __ ON
mppuvisn! JONTLN ALLOW 40 ‘ON ‘BSS 20__“oxrvauy _ SWOSOWOUH cuisiarna
eS cd ___NANOAS MATE ESAT SONNOAS MEW TEVMUOd S907 ON

“saulouad 9241C DD pue yy usemjoq wistydsowIA]od Joy pajso} SIOYIEUI YSS JO IS] “9 IQUL

40

DALVVOLVIDIDOVIOL

DDIDIVIIVIOLVILVDLIOV

WL 96
sanz’ on vw 9 my ss eet QD19L191991999999V1 DLDLIOILLIOIDIDLLVD SrrUNd 6
Suez an 4 6 99 ss eet DOVOVDDIOILLIVOIWV ILLVIIOLILLLOIALLVD SION 16
sanz}. ain [ia 6 fm oy ss st OVIDLOOVLOVIOLOOLISL DLVDLVLVVOIIDLOVIIOD Sons £6
TZ an 7 ot a 6s 19 eur DDLIDVIIIVOVLIIILIVV SOOLOLIOLLLIIVLILIOV cut
vor oN % a PS 05 6 DDVVLYLVDDODLVIDLVII DOVOVWVDLODIIDDLLD oT 6
mons aN wy vw a ss a 091 OVVVDVDVVDLLLIVVOVVD DILVILVVLLIDVVOVOLOV L6ITWU 6
sawz'd on % uw fs ss oe DBLVIOLVIOLOIVIOLIVII DIOVIVLOVLIDLIOLIOVI cow 8
s0nz'D on 9€ 6 om 1s ss eat DOVLODLOVIODIOVIOID DLDLODIDIOLLIODIVIID YSN 88
Bam’ an [x4 6 fe 8s ss 6 DIDDDLVIVLOVIOVIOVIO DVDLODLOIIVOLODLVI eA ed
ore oN of or a ss u vst QVDVILLLVIVOVWVDIOOL VIOVWVLVDDILLLVVO TOE
VOTEANA, an of or cal ss u set DLVILLOLIVIDVIVIIIOV DLODVIDLYVVILILLVOVL went 8
sonzO an w 6 a ss u set OLVVILLOVVOLOLLVILVV QOLVDVWVILLOLVVLVVOV OWN
IZ an 9 el as ss cor QILIDIIILLLLLVIILILD DODLOVLOVDOVOIVODLYD a
‘vOURA TAL dn % a a ss u mt OLLIDLVIOLLLYVVVIOLY DLVOIDDVIIDVLLIOVLIO woud 8
Zz an % et a 99 ss wor DOLIDOIDLLLLLVII1ILD DDDLDVIOVDIVOOVDDLVD SOOM IB
om ay 09 of a ss or DDLDVLLDVVVVLIOWVYVD LIDLLLVIVLLVOVOVLLVDL seIU OF
nz ain w u foe ue 19 oz SIVILIDVIOVILLLYDOOD DDDLOIVIVDLVDOVIOLLL LIU
Sanz an ” 8 % 19 os sor QIOVLLIVOVWILDDIVVIIL DDDIDLILVIIIOILILV SLI aL
ORT on % €L a ow 05 on QOLLIDVIIVLLIALIOLLY LOVIOVIOVLVLIDLYDVOO wend
vou on 4 6 2a ss or zr VOVIODVVLOVVIOLVVVOV DDLYVOODLVLIVOLVIVLD SOW OL
Sawqz'd ain wm 8 = ss or ou LYVOOWWLVOLVIOOVVDVD QVDDVIDVWOVYVIIIID SSW SL
ONAN TAL an % zt ew 0s 161 DVVOVVII9NI9901D19 D1D9ILILVIVOVIOILLLY IHL
Bamz'D an we a & oO ss we SVDOVOVIVODLIDLVDOLD QVODLYVILVVDODI199. sold
wor an wv 9 wn oy os oor DLIVOLODVOLOVIOLIIOOD DDOVIDLLVIODLLLYDVID a
1z din, te 8 an ow ss at SLYDDLIVIODVILIDVD DLD92VILLLVVLI990VV srOLd iL
Bonz} an az 6 my ss a DODDLVIVILIDOOVOVLVL PVLVDLLVIOIILINOLIOD SIEM OL
woe TA ay we 8 m9 os tI DVLOIIIDLYVDLIDOVIDD DLVILVDDVILVIILIOIII tse 8
s0ez'} aN o€ or fo 19 ss eT SLLILLVDLINDV99II0 SLVIDLVDVVIOLVDLIOOV 1s09W 89
oA on 05 St 3 ss aut DLVVOVVDIIVVOVIDOVV QODLDOLVIOVIVOLLLVIV word 19
wo an % at @ os 0s 01 DLDDVILDILIOVDIILIID DVLIOVILIDILLOLVIOL SLO 9
woyeA TAL an fd vt aos 05 191 SLIVILOLOWWOIOVLIOL 29DI0VIVIDLILVVDOLWY cea 89
mons e aN S451 vo)N(vo) ss 907 ALLWVLOVIDVIVILIOVIO OVIILLLIOILIOLIOIV wun 19
wong on 09 [4 pad 05 a el QVWVOOVOLIOVDIDIDIVD DOLODILVVLILVOVLIOVY oro 9
wore A din sy st tue os ust DVDDDVODLIALLIVVDLD DOVDILVIIIVODOLDIVLL Ct
Zz ain a 6 sa 9 ss 6 IDIDLLOIVIOIVLILIOOV DLVIDVILYDILDLVIVOOV stu ID
ome W an oe ot 1" $s ‘ aut DDLDLOVILVOWVIVDIVIO YDIVVLLVWVYD92VILLIO LesPWe 08
‘Iz ain cd vt P99 19 ist D2VIOVVIOONIVWVLY1D99 21991991991 DVLLVIS¥ COLE 6S
om TW in ou se " ss war DOVVOVLLDIVLVDDVLOVD OVYVVLLIVOVIODLIDLYY sts aS
IZ an 9% et Psy ss ist DO99LLVILLDVILIOVDL OLVOVIILILIOVOLVDIOV wean Ls
om, ay gat %6 " $s uz DVIDLIVLIVIVIIIDDLYY DLVLLLIVVLIDLI99 001 sone 9S
sO TA ain % 9 fon sy 0s oe DLOVILDVVVVOVVIII99. DODDVOVILOLOLLLVDLY Zio $5
var TA ay % 8 M69 os oat DDVOVIDILOVIIOVIOLOD DLLOVOWVOVDOVIDLIIL RI 9S
ome TW. din 6e € m $s t 961 VOVVIYDLLOVODVLOVDVD OVLIDVOVOLLVVVLVD129 ous ofS
1z aN vw g Sooo 19 at DILVOVOVIOIOLIVLDODLI QIOLILILLIDLVIIVILLE Los tS
Tay SaLLOW =m
awn __ALSREVA BIONTT = LvaaTE MILO HINOD pour sondowa TWN
wppwyism JONTUTA ALLOW 40 ‘ON ass 20_“anvasy _ZNOSOWOWH auiniania___IONANDAS OATHS ISUIATE SONANDAS WOWTEd MIVAEOS $N201__ ON

**panunuos 9 21qe |


4l
61 bp (Table 7). Among 94 InDel primers tested, 88 (93.62%) primers amplified, and 82
(93.18%) primers are polymorphic between AA and GG genomes (Table 7 and Fig. 7).
These polymorphic primers can therefore be used to determine interspecific hybrids
between O. sativa and O. granulata or O. meyeriana. Notably, 9.09% or eight markers,
namely, GG06_001, GG11_004, GG12_004, GG02_007, GG03_005, GG06_007,
GG09_005, and GG09_006 were polymorphic between O. granulata and O. meyeriana.
These markers can be used in distinguishing between the two species with the GG genome
and can be applied in diversity studies in the O. meyeriana complex. In addition, 4.55% or
four markers, namely GG05_001, GG11_04, GG02_007, and GG09_006 were also found
to be polymorphic between the two accessions of O. sativa, and none of the markers were
polymorphic between the two accessions of O. meyeriana and those of O. granulata (Table
7). Lastly, 1.06% or one marker (GG08_006) was found to amplify in all the tested
accessions but is monomorphic among the samples. The rest of the markers were found to
amplify only in one genome but had no PCR products in the other genome. These markers
were not considered for recommendation for use in genotyping. Table 8 presents

representative gel images of the two kinds of markers and the corresponding gel scores.

Figure 7 shows the chromosome map with location of the polymorphic InDel
markers. Chromosomes 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 have large regions that are not represented
by markers. These unrepresented regions can be covered by using other markers such as
SSRs and SNPs in addition to InDels in marker-assisted screening of plants. In summary,
eight markers were designed for chromosome 1, seven for chromosome 2, 11 for
chromosome 3, eight for chromosome 4, six for chromosome 5, six for chromosome 6,

three for chromosome 7, seven for chromosome 8, five for chromosome 9, four for InDels

42

Table 7. Comparison of marker validation results between InDel and SSR markers used
to amplify Oryza sativa L. (AA), O. granulata Nees & Arn. Ex. G. Watt (GG),
and O. meyeriana (Zoll. & Moritzi) Baill. (GG) genomes.

InDels SSRs
Number of tested primer 94 96
pairs
Product range 16-61 bp -
Percent amplification 93.62% (88 pairs) 28.12% (27 pairs)

Percent polymorphism
AA vs GG
GG vs GG
AA vs AA
Monomorphic

Disadvantages

93.18% (82/88 pairs)
9.09% (8/88 pairs)
4.55% (4/88 pairs)

1.14% (1/88 pair)
Manual design

25.92% (7/27 pairs)
7.41% (2/27 pairs)

7.A1\% (2/27 pairs)

1.11% (3/27 pairs)

low cross-transferability

43

“(Z10Z 9eT e1yoIry) (swesBousyd/B10qejaryoysuOHEZtensiay/:dyy) wrerdousyd
SuIsn poyerouss sowoued HH pue Wy udomjoq o1ydsoulcjod aye yey} sloyreU JoqU] 7g Sulmoys dew! awosoulory sory *, aunty

44

are relatively most abundant and regularly distributed in chromosomes 3 and 12 and is least

abundant in chromosome 7.

To highlight the advantage of InDel markers, SSR markers were also tested for
amplification in the six Oryza accessions (Table 8). Results showed that only 28.12% or
27 primers out of 96 were able to amplify the tested samples (Tables 6 and 7). More
importantly, 25.93% markers (7/27), namely RM5753, RM3769, RM7217, RM4069,
RM2197, RM7448, and RM8216 were found to be polymorphic among the AA and GG
genomes. Only two markers (7.41%), namely, RM5753 and RM5607 were polymorphic
between O. meyeriana and O. granulata. Also, two markers (7.41%) were polymorphic
between the two accessions of O. sativa; these were RM5753 and RM3320. None of the
markers were polymorphic between the accessions of O. meyeriana and those of O.
granulata, whereas the three markers, namely, RM6024, RM3123, and RM5373 were
found to be monomorphic (3.12%) among the two genomes. Sixteen markers (16.67%)

were able to amplify in the AA genome only.

With the growing sophistication of New Generation Sequencing technologies, the
genomic sequences of the species of choice can be obtained, and markers that are based on
this information can be designed with more accuracy. The designed InDel markers in this
study were proven to have higher success rates in amplification and detection of
polymorphism between AA and GG genomes (93.62% and 93.18%, respectively)
compared with rice SSR markers (28.12% and 25.92%, respectively). These markers are
cost-efficient but requires time and intensive labor in designing. Manual designing of these
markers was performed in this study because automated pipelines, such as InDel Markers

Development Platform or IMDP, require sophisticated technical and computational

45

Table 8. Gel images of representative InDel and SSR markers which were designed from
Oryza sativa L. and O. granulata Nees & Arn. Ex. G. Watt sequences tested for
polymorphism among O. sativa, O. meyeriana (Zoll. & Moritzi) Baill., and O.

GG01_001

GG06_00i

GG09_006

GG08_006

GG01_006

‘GG03_007

granulata accessions.

1,2,3

Table 8 continued...

MARKER BAND SIZE AA GG SCORE
OS: OS; OM: OM: OG: O

RMS753 + + + (1,23
+ + +

RM3320 + + + + + 3
+

RM6024 + + + + + + 0

RM7643 + + = = = 5 5

RM6618 5 5 5 5 B = 6

RM7217 + + + + 1,7

+ +

LEGEND: OS - O. sativa IR64; OS2 - O. sativa NSIC Re 222; OMi — O. meyeriana Acc. 89241; OM2- O. meyeriana
Acc. 89243; OG: - O. granulata Acc. 102118; OG2 - O. granulata Acc. 106474; 0 — monomorphic; 1 - polymorphic
between AA and GG genomes; 2 — polymorphic between O. meyeriana and O. granulata; 3 — polymorphic between
O. sativa accessions; 4 — polymorphic between O. granulata accessions; 5 — absent bands in either genomes; 6 no PCR
products among all samples; 7 — new bands present

47
requirements (Lu et al. 2015). Nevertheless, the software and parameters in AmplifX 2.0
used in designing the InDel primer pairs in the present study were shown to be optimal.
Modifications in the PCR protocol, such as adjustment of the annealing temperature and

extension time, can still be applied and optimized for multiplex screening.

The low amplification and polymorphism rates obtained in the SSR markers were
mainly because these SSR markers were not specifically designed to differentiate between
the AA and GG genomes, whereas the InDel primers were designed directly from
differences between the sequences of the two genomes. The obtained rates of success are
quite expected. Low rate of polymorphism was also observed in a cross-transferability

study of SSR markers to O. granulata (Gao et al. 2005).

Some chromosomes, such as chromosomes 6 and 10, have smaller number of
designed, amplified, and polymorphic InDel markers than the rest. Other markers, such as
SNPs and gene-specific markers, or genotyping-by-sequencing can be added in genotyping
to compensate for the low number of InDel markers in these chromosomes. InDel markers
specifically designed between O. sativa and O. meyeriana may also be used for
chromosomes 6 and 10. This is the first time that genome-wide InDel markers were

designed for the differentiation of AA and GG genomes.

48

Drought Stress Response of O. granulata and O. sativa

The members of the O. granulata complex are claimed to be drought tolerant by
some researchers (Wu et al. 2004; Qian et al. 2006), but others say otherwise (Ammiraju
et al. 2010; Sanchez et al. 2014; Shakiba and Eizenga 2014). Thus, in this study, O.
granulata 102118 was subjected to seedling-stage drought stress, and its response was

compared with cultivated rice O. sativa IR64.

Root Traits

Root architecture is key to plant drought avoidance, wherein plants avoid water
stress by root elongation and ability to penetrate hard soil (Kato et al. 2008). When
maximum root depth, dry weight, root length density, percent lateral roots, and total root
length were investigated in O. sativa and O. granulata seed and clone (Fig. 8), variations
among genotypes and treatment were observed. However, no significant differences were
found in the genotype: treatment interaction; this result implies that the drought stress
treatment did not affect root response in all genotypes (P<0.05). Furthermore, large
standard error (SE) values were computed as shown by the error bars in the graphs, which
probably affected the groupings. The SE values may have been caused by the non-uniform

environment where the set-up was placed.

Figure 9 shows the relative humidity (RH) and temperature measured near the
drought set-up throughout the experiment. Up until September 19, 2016, which spanned
more than 80% of the experiment, temperature and RH had an inverse relationship with

each other. From August 29, 2016 to the morning of September 04, 2016 the highest values

Maximum Root Depth °° Root Dry Weight =DD
eww eww
60 0.1
50 2 0.08 a :
= =
E 3 : S 0.06
¥
oy
& 20 i : 0.04 b
s 10 ws % 0.02 ds
zg <
an ade °
O. granulata  O. granulata O. satin O. gramilata_—_O. gramilata ‘
102118 to2118 Ro SH ribo peu Laois
(clone) (seed) (clone) eo)
A B
Root Length Density =DD Percent laterals =DD
eww eww
QQ fr a
0.8
15 < fs b
° & 0.6
2 10 5
5 ‘ 204
<5 J | al 0.2
0 0
O. gramlata QO. gramlata__—_O., sativa O. gramulata.—_O.. gramulata O. sati
5 102118 (clone) 102118 (seed) IR64 102118 (clone) 102118 (seed) i
Cc D
Total Root Length ited Root to Shoot Ratio
ew
_. 3000
& 2500 A
Fo
€ 2000
= 1500
2 1000 b
3 500 b
ey | sell ah
O. gramilata —_O. gramilata’__), sativa
102118 (clone) 102118 (seed) IR64 O. gramlaia O. gramilata O. sativa
102118 (clone) 102118 (seed) IR64
E F

49

Figure 8. Drought-related root traits of Oryza granulata Nees & Arn. Ex. G. Watt and O. sativa
L. DD: drought set-up; WW: well-watered.

50

Figure 9. Humidity and temperature measurements during the drought experiment
performed between Oryza sativa L. and O. granulata Nees & Arn. Ex. G. Watt.

of RH were observed from 5:00 AM to 6:30 AM. In the afternoon of September 04, 2016,
RH suddenly rose at 2:00 PM and peaked at 3:30 PM. In the succeeding days until
September 19, 2016, the highest RH values were observed from 1:00 AM to 6:30 AM.
However, the lowest RH values during this time were higher than the past days, indicating
a more humid environment. In the third to the last day of observation, RH values were not
going down for the whole day, and the temperature values were relatively low. In the last
two days of observation, the RH values went down a little, but the temperature values were
still low. These last three days of observation must have affected the set-up the most,

because the plants during this stage were more rapidly growing and taking up more water

51
than the earlier part of the experiment. Also, the location of the set-up was near the edge

of the roof, where raindrops must have entered the tubes and watered some of the plants.

Nevertheless, the root traits of O. granulata had significantly lower values than O.
sativa regardless of treatment except for root dry weight and root-to-shoot ratio. In terms
of maximum root depth, the three genotypes all had deeper reach into the soil in the well-
watered treatment compared with the drought stress treatment, implying that none of the
genotypes had further elongation of roots in the latter treatment to reach more water at the
bottom of the soil. In terms of the root dry weight, the seed-derived and clone-derived O.
granulata plants were grouped differently, suggesting that the two genotypes cannot be
used interchangeably in experiments. The clone-derived plants had already obtained more
biomass than the seed-derived ones because they were tillers obtained from older plants.
In the total root length and root length density traits, the values in the drought set-up were
higher than the well-watered set-up in all genotypes, suggesting that the plants responded
to drought by building more roots laterally to take up more water. The percent lateral values
almost had no difference in both set-ups in all genotypes. In terms of root-to-shoot ratio
values, no significant difference was found across all genotypes and treatments.
Nevertheless, the seed-derived O. granulata plants had the highest values regardless of
treatment, suggesting that these plants allotted more energy in their roots than the shoots
compared with O. sativa. This trait may be important in the adaptation of O. granulata in
water-limited soils and can be explored further in a more uniform environment. Generally,
the tested O. granulata accession did not show drought avoidance root traits that were

superior to O. sativa.

52

Shoot Traits

Rice is also known to have reduced plant height and lower dry matter production
when subjected to drought (Kumar et al. 2015). Figure 10 shows the plant response to
drought of O. sativa and O. granulata in terms of shoot dry weight, tiller number, and plant
height. No significant difference in the genotype: treatment interaction was found in tiller
number and plant height (P<0.05), suggesting that drought stress did not affect the response
of all genotypes tested. Genotypes were also grouped together in terms of tiller number
regardless of treatment. The plant height of O. sativa was grouped differently from the two
genotypes of O. granulata regardless of treatment. Out of all the traits tested, significant
difference was found in the genotype: treatment interaction in terms of shoot dry weight
(P<0.05). However, the resulting groupings still did not show different response of the

genotypes from the well-watered treatment when subjected to drought.

Shoot Dry Weight *DD Tiller number
aww
0.6 4
a
04 3
C) cy a
re b £2 °
 o2 b a B
£ ab b =
z 1
0
O. gramilata —_. gramilata O. sativa 0
102118 (clone) 102118 (seed) TR64 O. gramilata —_O. gramulata
-0.2 102118 (clone) 102118 (seed)
A B
Plant Height
70

60
fee
340 b b
£30 =DD
= 20 aww
2 iid
0

O. granulata O.granulata 0. sativa

102118
(clone)

102118 IR64
(seed)

Cc

53

=DD
eww

O. sativa

Figure 10. Drought-related shoot traits of Oryza granulata Nees & Arn. Ex. G. Watt and O. sativa
L. DD: drought set-up; WW: well-watered

54

Water Uptake

Figure 11 shows the trend of water uptake by the three genotypes, where the two
O. granulata genotypes showed almost the same response. The O. sativa plants showed
higher water uptake than the other two and generally in an increasing trend because of plant
growth. This trend can be supported by the root and shoot trait values obtained for O.
sativa, which are comparably higher than those of O. granulata. In both set-ups, the water
uptake suddenly went down on the sixth day of measurement. These measurements were
obtained from September 13, 2016 to September 15, 2016. By looking at the RH and
temperature data from Figure 9, the RH changed its pattern to relatively more humid
values. Thus, less water was transpired from the plants and the moisture from the air might

have wetted the soil during these dates, making the water uptake values decrease.

In the drought stress set-up, the water uptake values of the clone-derived and seed-
derived O. granulata plants showed difference from each other. These two genotypes have
also different values from O. sativa. The trends shown in the drought stress set-up may be
supported by the root and shoot dry mass and height values observed. Water uptake was
generally decreasing towards the end of the study but suddenly increased in the latter part

of the experiment probably because of higher relative humidity and lower temperature.

O. granulata was generally not performing superiorly compared with O. sativa in
this study in terms of the used parameters for drought response, except for the root-to-shoot
ratio trait. In the mentioned trait, the clone-derived and seed-derived O. granulata plants
have significantly different responses in terms of root dry weight, suggesting that they

cannot always be used interchangeably in drought experiments. Additionally, O. granulata

55

Average water uptake (Well-watered)

&
°
ag
4
a
a
5
Bs
° iaccaiasbiathiniae aera «cae
Day of Measurement
=" O. granulata 102118 (clone) “=O. granulata 102118 (seed) O. sativa IR64
A
Average Water Uptake (Drought stress)
Cc}
©
3
a
=)
5
Gl
Ss
2
i}
ro
o
=
=<

Day of Measurement

——= 0. gramulata 102118 (clone) =O. gramulata 102118 (seed) O. sativa 1R64

B

Figure 11, Water uptake of Oryza granulata Nees & Arn. Ex. G. Watt (clone and seed)
and O, sativa L. for 19 days. A. Well-watered B. Drought.

56
was harder to germinate compared with O. sativa. Thus, the germination rate of O.
granulata cannot be used as a donor trait for breeding.

Nevertheless, O. granulata may have other mechanisms in adapting to water-
limited environments. O. granulata naturally lives on fully shaded forest floors, where
moisture is still present and shade is protecting the plants from high transpiration. Its
relatively small shoot structure and dark green leaves may be helping it thrive in low-
moisture soil. In addition, the roots of the clone-derived O. granulata plants used in the
present study are woody and hard. This trait may be contributing to its survival in dry lands
by being able to penetrate hard soil. Also, the species tend to allot more of its energy
reserves to the roots instead of the shoots, based on the root-to-shoot ratio values. Other
possible drought resistance-contributing traits that can be investigated in O. granulata are
the level of greenness of its leaves, suberin content and topography in the roots, and hard
soil penetrability. Drought stress may also be tested in other stages of development and

different level of severity in O. granulata or interspecific hybrid-derived lines.

Stomatal Density

In 2018, Caine et al. discovered that fewer stomata in rice leaves contributes in
drought tolerance by requiring less water to survive and having enough water to cool itself
in arid conditions. Additionally, low stomata were also associated with low stomatal
conductance, which is related to photosynthesis (Ouyang et al. 2017). At the time of the
present study, no literature is available on the study of stomatal density and stomatal size

in wild rice species. Figure 12 shows the mean stomatal density of cultivated rice species

57

Figure 12. Stomatal density of cultivated and wild rice (Oryza) species. The gray bars
are the species of interest whereas the green bars are species that have
drought tolerance traits.

O. sativa and O. glaberrima and wild rice species O. coarctata, O. alta, O. ridleyi, O.
australiensis, O. granulata, O. punctata, O. latifolia, O. minuta, O. longistaminata, and O.
rufipogon. Among the tested species, five are known to show drought tolerance, namely
O. glaberrima, O. longistaminata, O. punctata, O. australiensis, O. granulata. Based on
the graph, these drought tolerant species have 269-472 stomata/mm? stomatal density, with
O. granulata 102118 having 317-378 stomata/mm?. O. sativa IR64, which is not drought
tolerant, was found to have the highest stomatal density (632 stomata/mm?). When the leaf
width and length were analyzed in terms of their contribution to stomatal density, weak
correlation was found (Fig. 13). Leaf width has a very weak negative correlation with

stomatal density, whereas leaf length showed weak positive correlation with stomatal

58

“i ee @ ® o
ee ga oe ee? e1cue
R = 0.0654 (very weak positive) R = 0.3585 (weak positive)

R=-0.0124 (very weak negative)

Figure 13. Correlation of stomatal density with flag leaf width and length measurements
of Oryza sativa L., O. glaberrima Steud., O. rufipogon Griff., O.
longistaminata A. Chev. Et Boehr, O. punctata Kotschy ex Steud., O. minuta
J.S. Presl. Ex C.B. Presl., O. officinalis Wall ex Watt, O. latifolia Desv., O.
alta Swallen, O. australiensis Domin., O. brachyantha A. Chev. et Roehr., O.
granulata Nees et Am. Ex Watt, O. ridleyi Hook F., O. coarctata Tateoka.

59
density. The contribution of stomatal density to drought tolerance may also be tested in a
drought-treatment experimental set-up.

Stomatal size and arrangement may also be important traits contributing to drought
tolerance. Figure 14 shows images of the cultivated and wild rice species scratched
epidermis. At 10X magnification, the stomata of each species can be seen to have different
arrangements and sizes. O. coarctata showed the lowest stomatal density and had relatively
larger stomatal size compared with other species. In a study by Hughes et al. (2017), several
evidences were cited on the negative correlation between stomatal density and size.

With the species of interest O. sativa and O. granulata having different stomatal
densities, the tested trait may be a factor of O. granulata drought response such that water
loss is prevented through lower transpiration. However, this claim must be tested first in a

drought experiment.

“sooads (92449) 2011 poyealyno pur pjim Jo soBeuyy sovy.ns Jeg] [eEKeqy “py emnBhq

ZOSPOL DOU 2M724009 ‘-O €vISOl DOU M17 ‘0 178001 ODM LPO TSBNOT DDUI Ssuayvasnv ‘Q

6L8001 DOU Mjnusd ‘Q ZETIOL DUI Pyundyovsg ‘O  N69SOL DOU Mund Q —-SLTZOL DUI PINUDLT CO

¥16001 DOU 270/01 ‘0 TPLLOl ODUI MHunU QO POPOL DOU PMURUNs1BU0] “O LIL96 DOU Mussaqns3 ‘oO

968001 DOUI sHPUIAYO ‘0 LIGIEML DOU HVS‘ = 1908 DD UT wOSodYns ‘CO POUT Dans ‘O


CHAPTER 5

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

Rice (Oryza sativa L.), the second most planted cereal in the world, has lost genes
that are important in stress tolerance and resistance during domestication. Classical and
transgenic breeding have been done by researchers to transfer stress tolerance genes to rice.
These genes may be sourced out from wild relatives of rice, which include the O. granulata
complex. The members of this complex, namely O. granulata and O. meyeriana were
found to possess drought tolerance genes. However, the mode of action of their drought
response and useful markers that can be used in breeding are not yet available. Thus, the
present study aimed to develop genome-wide InDel markers to differentiate AA and GG
genomes in rice and determine the potential of O. granulata as donor of drought tolerance
genes. Specifically, the study aimed to design InDel primers to detect polymorphisms
among O. sativa, O. granulata, and O. meyeriana; to compare InDel markers to SSR
markers; and to determine drought stress response of O. granulata and O. sativa by

considering root and shoot traits and stomatal density.

A total of 94 InDel primers that can be used in screening interspecific hybrids
between AA and GG genomes were manually designed and tested for polymorphism
among O. sativa, O. granulata, and O. meyeriana. The applicability of these markers was
compared with that of SSR markers. The designed InDel markers were shown to have
remarkably higher rate of polymorphism (93.18%) between AA and GG genomes

compared with SSR markers (25.93%). These InDel markers may be used in breeding

62
programs to identify plants that have introgressions from the species with GG genome O.
granulata and O. meyeriana. Low rates of polymorphism (1.11%-9.09%) were found
when distinguishing between different accessions and within the same genome using both
InDel and SSR markers. Thus, the designed primers may be limitedly applicable in
diversity studies among O. granulata and O. meyeriana accessions and species in the O.
granulata complex. However, a larger sample size will be needed for testing before coming
up with an acceptable conclusion regarding the usefulness of InDel markers in genetic

diversity studies in these Oryza species.

Asa preliminary step in its use in interspecific hybridization, O. granulata was also
evaluated as a donor plant for drought tolerance in rice through seedling stage drought
physiology set-up and morphological and stomatal density analyses, which have not been
done in wild rice species. In general, O. granulata did not show superior drought response
traits over O. sativa except for root to shoot ratio. Nevertheless, improvement in the set-up
for the drought experiment, that is, providing a more uniform environment for the plants,
can still be done in the future in order to lessen standard error values. Since the stomatal
density of O. granulata (317-378 stomata/mm7’) is less than that of O. sativa (632
stomata/mm2), this trait can be tested in a drought set-up in future studies. Other traits such
as stomatal size, hard soil penetrability, suberin content, and greenness of leaves response
to drought stress can be investigated in O. granulata in future studies. Preliminary tests on
the response of the target donor parent material for breeding for drought stress, which is
governed by complex mechanisms are indeed necessary before proceeding to a breeding

program in order to have efficient usage of materials, costs, and efforts.

LITERATURE CITED

ABDULLAH AB, ITO S, and ADHANA K. 2005. Estimate of rice consumption in Asian
countries and the world towards 2050. Japan, Tottori University. pp. 28-42.
http://worldfood.apionet.or.jp/alias.pdf.

AGGARWAL RK, BRAR DS, and KHUSH GS. 1997. Two new genomes in the Oryza
complex identified on the basis of molecular divergence analysis using total genome
DNA hybridization. Mol. Gen. Genet. 25: 1-12.

AMMIRAJU JSS, LUO M, GOICOECHEA JL, WANG W, KUDRNA D, MUELLER C,
TALAG J, KIM H, SISNEROS NB, BLACKMON B, FANG E, TOMKINS JB,
BRAR D, MACKILL D, MCCOUCH S, KURATA N, LAMBERT G, GALBRAITH
DW, ARUMUGANATHAN K, RAO K, WALLING JG, GILL N, YU Y, SAN
MIGUEL P, SODERLUND C, JACKSON S, and WING RA. 2006. The Oryza
bacterial artificial chromosome library resource: Construction and analysis of 12
deep-coverage large-insert BAC libraries that represent the 10 genome types of the
genus Oryza. Genome Research 16: 140-147.

AMMIRAJU JSS, SONG X, LUO M, SHINEROS N, ANGELOVA A, KUDRNA D, KIM
H, YU Y, GOICOECHEA JL, LORIEUX M, KURATA N, BRAR D, WARE D,
JACKSON S, and WING RA. 2010. The Oryza BAC resource: a genus-wide and
genome scale tool for exploring rice genome evolution and leveraging useful genetic
diversity from wild relatives. Breeding Science 60: 536-543.

ANGELES-SHIM RB, VINARAO RB, MARATHI B, and JENA KK. 2014. Molecular
Analysis of Oryza latifolia Desv. (CCDD Genome)-Derived Introgression Lines and
Identification of Value-Added Traits for Rice (O. sativa L.) Improvement. Journal of
Heredity doi:10.1093/jhered/esu032.

ARENA ET, RUEDEN CT, HINER MC, WANG S, YUAN M, and ELICEIRI KW. 2016.
Quantitating the cell: turning images into numbers with ImageJ. Developmental
Biology 6:2 https://doi.org/10.1002/wdev.260

BABU RC. 2010. Breeding for drought resistance in rice: an integrated view from
physiology to genomics. Electronic Journal of Plant Breeding 1(4): 1133-1141.

BOUMAN B, BARKER R, HUMPHREYS E, TUONG T P, ATLIN G, BENNETT J,
DAWE D, DITTERT K, DOBERMANN A, FACON T, FUJIMOTO N, GUPTA R,,
HAEFELE S, HOSEN Y, ISMAIL A, JOHNSON D, JOHNSON S, KHAN S, SHAN
L, MASIH I, MATSUNO Y, PANDEY S, PENG S, MUTHUKUMARISAM IT, and
WASSMAN R. 2007. Rice: Feeding the billions. In: Water for Food, Water for Life:
A Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture. Colombo:
International Water Management Institute: pp. 515-549.

64

BRAR DS, ELLORAN R, and KHUSH GS. 1991. Interspecific hybrids produced through
embryo rescue between cultivated and eight wild species of rice. Rice Genet Newsl
8:91-93.

BUELL CR. 2002a. Current status of the sequence of the rice genome and prospects for
finishing the first monocot genome. Plant Physiol 130: 1585-1586.

BUELL CR. 2002b. Obtaining the sequence of the rice genome and lessons learned along
the way. Trends Plant Sci. 7: 538-542.

CAINE RS, YIN X, SLOAN J, HARRISON EL, MOHAMMED U, FULTON T, BISWAL
A, DIONORA J, CHATER CC, COE RA, BANDYOPADHYAY A, MURCHIE EH,
SWARUP R, QUICK WP, and GRAY JE. 2018. Rice with reduced stomatal density
conserves water and has improved drought tolerance under future climate conditions.
New Phytologist 21: 1. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.15344

CATTIVELLI L, RIZZA F, BADECK FW, MAZZUCOTELLI E, MASTRANGELO AM,
FRANCIA E, MARE C, TONDELLI A, and STANCA AM. 2008. Drought tolerance
improvement in crop palnts: an integrated view from breeding to genomics. Field
Crops Research 105:1-14.

CHAVARRIA C and DOS SANTOS HP. 2012. Plant water relations: absorption, transport
and control mechanisms. In: Montanaro G and Dichio B. Advances in Selected Plant
Physiology Aspects. DOI: 10.5772/33478.

CHEN J. 2007. Rapid urbanization in China: A real challenge to soil protection and food
security. Catena 69: 1-15.

CHO K, HONG S, YUN B, WON H, YOON Y, KWON K, and MEKAPOGU M. 2017.
Application of InDel markers based on the chloroplast genome sequences for
authentication and traceability of tartary and common buckwheat. Czech J. Food Sci.
35(2): 122-130.

CUSHMAN JC and BOHNERT HJ. 1999. Crassulacean acid metabolism: molecular
genetics. Annual Review of Plant Physiology and Plant Molecular Biology 50:305-
332.

DONDE T, MUKHERJEE M, BARIK M, BAKSH S, PADHI B, MAHADANI P,
BEHERA L, SWAIN P, SAHU K, SINGH N, CZECHOWSKI T, GRAHAM I,
MCCOUCH SR, SINGH ON, and DASH SK. 2017. Marker-assisted introgression
of drought tolerance from wild ancestors into popular Indian rice varieties using a 7K
Infinium SNP tray. Canadian Journal of Biotechnology 1:205.

DULCE CB, OBIAS SB, TALAVERA AG, FURIGAY JN, ORTINERO XA, PLOMOS
RP, GEPTE ADG, BUCOG ECA, ALCID ML, ARCILLA MJD, DULCE MSA.
2012. Community Based Disaster Risk Management. Assistance and Cooperation for
Community Resilience and Development Inc. (ACCORD). Retrieved May 10, 2019

65

from https://resilientphilippines.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/ACCORD-
manual-vol-1-Community-Based-Disaster-Risk-Management.pdf.

DUNCAN AV (Ed.) 1994. The wild relatives of rice. A Genetic Resources Handbook.
International Rice Research Institute pp. 50.

FAO. 2004a. International year of Rice: All about rice. Retrieved May 9, 2015 from
http://www. fao.org/rice2004/en/aboutrice.htm.

FAO. 2004b. International Year of Rice: Rice and Human Nutrition. Retrieved May 9, 2015
from http://www. fao.org/rice2004/en/f-sheet/factsheet3.pdf

FIGUERAS OS. 2006. Functional genetics of suberin: the role of CYP86A33 and STKCS6
in potato tuber periderm. Universitat de Girona. Retrieved May 8, 2019 from
https://www.tdx.cat/handle/10803/7634;jsessionid=82 14461 B1CO0E452D5AB16B
76699B21E

FU X, LU Y, LIU X, and LI J. 2008. Crossability barriers in the interspecific hybridization
between Oryza sativa and O. meyeriana. Journal of Integrative Plant Biology 51(1).
https://doi.org/10.1111/).1744-7909.2008.00728.x

GAMUYAO R, CHIN JH, PARIASCA-TANAKA J, PESARESI P, CATAUSAN S,
DALID C, SLAMET-LOEDIN I, TECSON-MENDOZA EM, WISSUWA M, and
HEUER S. 2012. The protein kinase Pstol] from traditional rice confers tolerance of
phosphorus deficiency. Nature 488:535—539

GAO LZ, GE S, and HONG D. 2000. Low levels of genetic diversity within populations
and high differentiation among populations of a wild rice, Oryza granulata Nees et
Arn. Ex watt., from China. Int. J. Plant Sci. 161(4): 691-697.

GAO LZ, S-Z ZHANG, Y ZHOU, S GE, and D-Y HONG. 1996 A survey of current status
of wild rice in China. Chin Biodivers 4:162—166.

GAO L, ZHANG C, and JIA J. 2005. Cross-species transferability of rice microsatellites
in its wild relatives and the potential for conservation genetic studies. Genetic
Resources and Crop Evolution 52: 931-940. DOI 10.1007/s10722-003-6124-3

GE S, SANG T, LU BR, and HONG DY. 2001. Rapid and reliable identification of rice
genomes by RFLP analysis of PCR-amplified Adh genes. Genome 44: 1136-1142.

GILL N, SANMIGUEL O, DHILLON BDS, ABERNATHY B, KIM HR, STEIN L,
WARE D, WING R, and JACKSON SA. 2010. Dynamic Oryza genomes: repetitive
DNA sequences as genome modelling agents. Rice 3:251-269.

GOFF SA, RICKE D, LAN TH, PRESTING G, WANG R, DUNN M, GLAZEBROOK J,
SESSIONS A, OELLER P, VARMA H, HADLEY D, HUTCHISON D, MARTIN
C, KATAGIRI F, LANGE BM, MOUGHAMER T, XIA Y, BUDWORTH P,
ZHONG J, MIGUEL T, PASZKOWSKI U, ZHANG S, COLBERT M, SUN W,
CHEN L, COOPER B, PARK S, WOOD TC, MAO L, QUAIL P, WING R, DEAN

66

R, YU Y, ZHARKIKH A, SHEN R, SAHASRABUDHE S, THOMAS A,
CANNINGS R, GUTIN A, PRUSS D, REID J, TAVTIGIAN S, MITCHELL J,
ELDREDGE G, SCHOLL T, MILLER RM, BHATNAGAR S, ADEY N, RUBANO
T, TUSNEEM N, ROBINSON R, FELDHAUS J, MACALMA T, OLIPHANT A,
and BRIGGS S. 2002. A draft sequence of the rice genome (Oryza sativa L. ssp.
Japonica). Science 296: 92-100.

GONG Y, BORROMEO T, and LU B. 2000. A biosystematics study of the Oryza
meyeriana complex (Poaceae). Plant Systematics and Evolution 224(3-4): 139-151.

GOWDAM, VENU RC, ROOPALAKSHMI K, SREEREKHA MV, and KULKARNI RS.
2003. Advances in rice breeding, genetics and genomics. Molecular Breeding 11:
337-352.

GRAMENE. 2006. Oryza Archive. Retrieved May 14, 2015 from
http://archive.gramene.org/species/oryza/rice_intro.html.

GUIMARAES EP. 2009. Rice Breeding. In: Carena MJ (ed). Cereals, the banks and the
Italian Economy. Springer Science DOI: 10.1007/978-0-387-72297-9.

HAO L, SUN G, LIU Y, WAN J, QIN M, QIAN H, LIU C, JOHN R, FAN P, and CHEN
J. 2015. Urbanization dramatically altered the water balances of a paddy field
dominated basin in Southern China. Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci. Discuss 12: 1941-1972.

HIROTSU N, MURAKAMI N, KASHIWAGI T, UJIE K, and ISHIMARU K. 2010.
Protocol: a simple gel-free method for SNP genotyping using allele-specific primers
in rice and other plant species. Plant Methods 6:12.

HODGE A, BERTA G, DOUSSAN C, MERCHAN F, and CRESPI M. 2009. Plant root
growth, architecture and function. Plant Soil 321:153-187.

HOSSAIN KG, JACKSON SA, and KIANIAN SF. 2012. Genome structure and
chromosome function. In: Bass HW and Birchler JA (eds.). Plant Cytogenetics, Plant
genetics and genomics: Crops and Models 4. Springer Science+Business Media.

Retrieved May 10, 2019 from
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/7ce3/a 1 065c39bdfl 902ac0c60d6ba864e22cb920.p
df.

HUA L, LIANG L, HE X, WANG L, ZHANG W, LIU W, LIU X, and LIN F. 2014.
Development of a marker specific for the rice blast resistance gene Pi39 in the
Chinese cultivar QIS and its use in genetic improvement. Biotechnology and
Biotechnological Equipment 29(3): 448-456.

HUGHES J, HEPWORTH C, DUTTON C, DUNN JA, HUNT L, STEPHENS J, WAUGH
R, CAMERON DD, and GRAY JE. 2017. Reducing Stomatal Density in Barley
Improves Drought Tolerance without Impacting on Yield. Plant Physiology. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.16.01844

67

IRRI. n. d.. 12 Steps for Successful Rice Prodution. Retrieved May 15, 2015 from
http://www.knowledgebank irri.org/images/docs/12-Steps-Required-for-Successful-
Rice-Production.pdf.

ISLAM MM, KAYESH £, ZAMAN E, URMI TA, and HAQUE MM. 2018. Evaluation of
Rice (Oryza sativa L.) Genotypes for Drought Tolerance at Germination and Early
Seedling Stage. The Agriculturists 16(1): 44-54.

JAFFEE S, DAWE D, SANTOS N, and MOHANTY S. 2014. Introduction and Objectives.
In: Dawe D, Jaffee S, and Santos N. Rice in the Shadow of Skyscrapers: Policy
Choices in a Dynamic East and Southeast Asian Setting. Rome: Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO). p. 1-5.

JAIN A, ROORKIWALM, KALE S, GARG V, YADALA R, and VARSHNEY RK. 2019.
InDel markers: An extended marker resource for molecular breeding in chickpea.
PLoS ONE https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0213999

JIN X, CHEN Y, LIU P, LI C, CAI X, RONG J, and LU B. 2017. Introgression from
cultivated rice alters genetic structures of wild relative populations: implications for
in situ conservation. AoB PLANTS 10(1) https://doi.org/10.1093/aobpla/plx055

JOSHI SP, GUPTA VS, AGGARWAL RK, RANJEKAR PK, and BRAR DS. 2000.
Genetic diversity and phylogenetic relationship as revealed by inter simple sequence
repeat (ISSR) polymorphism in the genus Oryza. Theor App! Genet 100: 1311-1320.

JULLIEN, N. 2004. AmplifX Version 1.7.0. Available online: http://crn2m.univ-
mrs.fr/pub/amplifx-dist

KATO Y, HIROTSU S, NEMOTO K, and YAMAGISHI J. 2008. Identification of QTLs
controlling rice drought tolerance at seedling stage in hydroponic culture. Euphytica
160: 423-430. DOI 10.1007/s1068 1 -007-9605-1

KAWAHARA Y, DE LA BASTIDE M, HAMILTON JP, KANAMORI H, MCCOMBIE
WR, OUYANG S, SCHWARTZ DC, TANAKA T, WU J, ZHOU S, CHILDS KL,
DAVIDSON RM, LIN H, QUESADA-OCAMPO L, VAILLANCOURT B, SAKAI
H, LEE SS, KIM J, NUMA H, ITOH T, BUELL CR, and MATSUMOTO T. 2013.
Improvement of the Oryza sativa Nipponbare reference genome using next
generation sequence and optical map data. Rice 6:4.

KHAKWANI AA, DENNETT MD, and MUNIR M. 2011. Drought tolerance screening of
wheat varieties by inducing water stress conditions. Songklanakarin J. Sci. Technol.
33(2): 135-142.

KHAN MH, DAR ZA, and DAR SA. 2015. Breeding Strategies for Improving Rice Yield
- A Review. Agricultural Sciences 6:467-478.
http://dx.doi.org/10.4236/as.2015.65046.

68

KIM SR, YANG J, AN G, and JENA KK. 2016. A simple DNA preparation method for
high quality polymerase chain reaction in rice. Plant Breeding Biotechnology 4(1):
99-106.

KONUMA H, MERINO G, VOEGELE J, and ZEIGLER RS. 2014. Foreword. In: Dawe
D, Jaffee S, and Santos N. Rice in the Shadow of Skyscrapers: Policy Choices in a
Dynamic East and Southeast Asian Setting. Rome: Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO). pp. v-vi.

KOTTAPALLI K.R., LAKSHMINARASU M and JENA K.K. 2010. Effective strategy for
pyramiding three bacterial blight resistance genes into fine grain rice cultivar, Samba
Mahsuri, using sequence tagged site markers. Biotechnol. Lett. 32: 989-996.

KRISHNAN V. 2011. Electron transfer in chemistry and biology- the primary events in
photosynthesis. Resonance 2(12): 77-86.

KUMAR A, BERNIER J, VERULKAR S, LAFI TTE HR.and ATLIN GN. 2008. Breeding
for drought tolerance: direct selection for yield, response to selection and use of
drought-tolerant donors in upland and lowland-adapted populations. Field Crops Res.
107 (3): 221-31.

KUMAR R., SREENU K., SINGH N., JAIN N., SINGH NK., RAI V. 2015. Effect of
drought stress on contrasting cultivars of rice. International Journal of Tropical
Agriculture 33(2): 1559-1564

LANG NT, BIHN NQC, NHA CT, and BUU BC. 2010. A candidate gene response to
drought stress condition in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Omonrice 17: 105-113.

LAUNERT. 1965. Oryza perrieri Camus changed to Leersia perrieri (Camus) Launert. In
Vaughan DA. 1989. The genus Oryza L.: Current status of taxonomy. IRRI Research
Paper Series No. 138 1-21.

LEE KS, RASABANDITH S, ANGELES ER and KHUSH GS. 2003. Inheritance of
resistance to bacterial blight in 21 cultivars of rice. Phytopathology 93: 147-152.

LEONARDIS AMD, PETRARULO M, VITA PD and MASTRANGELO AM. 2012.
Genetic and molecular aspects of plant response to drought in annual crop species.
In: Advances in Selected Plant Physiology Aspects, Giuseppe M and B Dichio (eds.).
InTech Publisher. pp. 45-74.

LI P, CHEN J, and WU P. 2011. Agronomic characteristics and grain yield of 30 spring
wheat genotypes under drought stress and nonstress conditions. Agronomy Journal
103(6): 1619-1628.

LIU B, WANG Y, ZHAI W, DENG J, WANG H, CUI Y, CHENG F, WANG X, WU
J. 2013. Development of InDel markers for Brassica rapa based on whole-genome
re-sequencing. Theor Appl Genet 126: 231-239.

69

LIU J, LI J, QU J, and YAN S. 2015. Development of genome-wide insertion and deletion
polymorphism markers from Next-Generation Sequencing data in rice. Rice 8:27.
DOI 10.1186/s12284-015-0063-4

LU Y, CUI X, LIR, HUANG P, ZONG J, YAO D, LI G, ZHANG D, and YUAN Z. 2015.
Development of genome-wide insertion/deletion markers in rice based on graphic
pipeline platform. Journal of Integrative Plant Biology 57(11).
https://doi.org/10.111 1/jipb.12354

MALES J and GRIFFITHS H. 2017. Stomatal biology of CAM Plants. Plant Physiology
Review DOI:10.1104/pp.17.00114.

MARTIN C, JULIANO A, NEWBURY HJ, LU BR, JACKSSON MT, and FORD-LLOYD
BV. 1997. The use of RAPD markers to facilitate the identification of Oryza species
within germplasm collections. Genet Res Crop Evol 44: 175-183.

MARKKANDAN K, YOOS, CHO YC, and LEE DW. 2018. Genome-Wide Identification
of Insertion and Deletion Markers in Chinese Commercial Rice Cultivars, Based on
Next-Generation Sequencing Data. Agronomy 8(4):36
https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy8040036.

MCLNTYRE CL and WINBERG BC. 1998. A rapid means of identifying wild rice species
DNA using dot. In: Miao L, Wang C, Zheng C, Che J, Gao Y and Wen Y.2010.
Molecular mapping of a new gene for resistance to rice bacterial blight. Scientia
Agricultura Sinica, 43, 3051-3058. blots and genome-specific rDNA probes.
Genome 44: 175-183.

MELLOUL M, IRAQI D, UDUPA SM, ALAOUI MAE, ALAOUI SA, IBRIZ M, and
ELFAHIME E. 2014. Development of specific primers for the detection of HVA1
from barley in transgenic durum wheat by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
technology. African Journal of Biotechnology 13(4): 581-592.

MEYER CJ and PETERSON CA. 2013. Structure and function of three suberized cell
layers: epidermis, exodermis, and endodermis. In: Eshel A and Beeckman T. Plant
roots: the hidden half. 4th ed. NW: CRC press. pp. 5-1—5-16.

MIAH G, RAFII MY, ISMAIL MR, PUTEH AB, RAHIM HA, ISLAM KN, and LATIF
MA. 2013. A Review of Microsatellite Markers and Their Applications in Rice
Breeding Programs to Improve Blast Disease Resistance. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 14: 22499-
22528; doi:10.3390/ijms 141122499.

NEELAM K, SAHI GK, KUMAR K, and SINGH H. 2018. Identification of drought stress
tolerance in wild species germplasm of rice based on leaf and root morphology. Plant
Genetic Resources 16(4): 289-295.

NIAS Genebank (https://www.gene.affrc.go.jp/index_en.php)

70

NITHAMA M, MOCHIKUZI M, KURATA N, and NONOMURA K. 2015. PCR-based
INDEL markers co-dominant between Oryza sativa, japonica cultivars and closely-
related wild Oryza species. Breed Sci Sep 65(4): 357-361. doi: 10.1270/jsbbs.65.357

OECD (ORGANISATION FOR ECONOMIC COOPERATION AND
DEVELOPMENT). 1999. Consensus Document on the Biology of Oryza sativa
(Rice). France: OECD. pp. 16-20.

OKAMOTO K, SHARIFI A, and CHIBA Y. 2014. The impact of urbanization on land use
and the changing role of forests in Vientiane. In Yokoyama et al. Integrated studies
of social and natural environmental transition in Laos. Advances in Asian-
Environmental Research. Japan: Springer. DOI 10.1007/978-4-431-54956-7_2.

OUYANG W, STRUIK PC, YIN X, and YANG J. 2017. Stomatal conductance, mesophyll
conductance, and transpiration efficiency in relation to leaf anatomy in rice and wheat
genotypes under drought. J Exp Bot. 68(18): 5191-5205. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erx3 14.

PACURAR D, PACURAR M, STREET N, BUSSELL J, POP T, GUTIERREZ L, and
BELLINI C. 2012. A collection of INDEL markers for map-based cloning in seven
Arabidopsis accessions. Journal of Experimental Botany 63(7): 2491-2501.

PANG SL, ONG SS, LEE HH, ZAMRI Z, KANDASAMY KI, CHOONG CY, and
WICKNESWARI R. 2014. Isolation and characterization of CCoAOMT in
interspecific hybrid of Acacia auriculiformis x Acacia mangium -a key gene in lignin
biosynthesis. Genetics and Molecular Research 13 (3): 7217-7238.

POLANIA J, RAO IM, CAJIAO C, GRAIALES M, RIVERA M, VELASQUEZ F,
RAATZ B, and BEEBE SE. 2017. Shoot and root traits contribute to drought
resistance in recombinant inbred lines of MD 23-24 x SEA 5 of common bean.
Frontiers in Plant Science https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2017.00296.

POLLARD M, BEISSON F, LI Y, and OHLROGGE JB. 2008. Building lipid barriers:
biosynthesis of cutin and suberin. Cell Press d. doi:10.1016/j.tplants.2008.03.003 A

QIAN W, GE S, and HONG DY. 2001. Genetic variation within and among populations
of a wild rice Oryza granulata from China detected by RAPD and ISSR markers.
Theor Appl Genet 102: 440-449.

QIAN W, Ge S, and HONG D. 2004. Genetic diversity in accessions of wild rice Oryza
granulata from South and Southeast Asia. Genetic Resources and Crop Evolution 53:
197-204.

QUAN R, WANG J, HUI J, BAI H, LYU X, ZHU Y, ZHANG H, ZHANG Z, LI S, and
HUANG R. 2017. Improvement of salt tolerance using wild rice genes. Frontiers in
Plant Science 8: 2269.

RICKERT AM, KIM J, MEYER S, NAGEL A, BALLVORA A, OEFNER PJ,
GEBHARDT C. 2003. First-generation SNP/InDel markers tagging loci for pathogen

71

resistance in the potato genome. Plant Biotechnology Journal 1(6)
https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1467-7652.2003.00036.x

RITCHIE LAB. 2012. Phenogram. http://visualization.ritchielab.org/home/index

RIZAL G, KARKI S, THAKUR V, CHATTERJEE J, COE RA, WANCHANA S, and
QUICK WP. 2012. Towards a C4 rice. Asian Journal of Cell Biology DOI:
10.3923/ajcb.2012

ROULIN A, PIEGU B, WING RA, AND PANAUD 0. 2008. Evidence of multiple
horizontal transfers of the long terminal repeat retrotransposon RIRE/ within the
genus Oryza. The Plant Journal 53: 950-959.

ROY PS, DASH AK, SUBUDHI HN, RAO RN, and RAO GJN. 2014. Molecular and
morphological characterization of Indian rice hybrids. Australian Journal of Crop
Science 8(12):1607-1614.

SACK L, GRUBB PJ, and MARANON T. 2003. The functional morphology of juvenile
plants tolerant of strong summer drought in shaded forest understories in southern
Spain. Plant Ecology 168: 139-163.

SAHOO KK, TRIPATHI AK, PAREEK A, SINGLA-PAREEK SL. 2013. Taming drought
stress in rice through genetic engineering of transcription factors and protein kinases.
Plant Stress 7(1): 60-72.

SAHU P, MONDAL S, SHARMA D, and VISHWAKARMA G. 2017. InDel marker based
genetic differentiation and genetic diversity in traditional rice (Oryza sativa L.)
landraces of Chhattisgarh, India. PLoS ONE — 12(11):e0188864.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. pone.0188864.

SAKAI H, LEE SS, TANAKA T, NUMA H, KIM J, KAWAHARA Y, WAKIMOTO H,
YANG C, IWAMOTO M, ABE T, YAMADA Y, MUTO A, INOKUCHI H,
IKEMURA T, MATSUMOTO T, SASAKI T, and ITOH T. 2013. Rice Annotation
Project Database (RAP-DB): An Integrative and Interactive Database for Rice
Genomics. Plant and Cell Physiology 54:2 https://doi.org/10.1093/pcp/pcs183

SANCHEZ PL, WING RA, and BRAR DS. 2014. The wild relative of rice: genomes and
genomics. Zhang Q and Wing RA. Genetics and genomics of rice. Plant Genetics and
Genomics: Crops and models 5. New York: Springer.

SCASCITELLI M, COGNET M, and ADAMS KL. 2010. An Interspecific Plant Hybrid
Shows Novel Changes in Parental Splice Forms of Genes for Splicing Factors.
Genetics 184: 975-983.

SHAKIBA E and EIZENGA GC. 2014. Unraveling the secrets of rice wild species. Intech.
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/58393.

SHAMSI K and KOBRAEE S. 2011. Bread wheat production under drought stress
conditions. Annals of Biological Research 2(3): 352-358.

71

resistance in the potato genome. Plant Biotechnology Journal 1(6)
https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1467-7652.2003.00036.x

RITCHIE LAB. 2012. Phenogram. http://visualization.ritchielab.org/home/index

RIZAL G, KARKI S, THAKUR V, CHATTERJEE J, COE RA, WANCHANA S§, and
QUICK WP. 2012. Towards a C4 rice. Asian Journal of Cell Biology DOI:
10.3923/ajcb.2012

ROULIN A, PIEGU B, WING RA, AND PANAUD O. 2008. Evidence of multiple
horizontal transfers of the long terminal repeat retrotransposon RIRE/ within the
genus Oryza. The Plant Journal 53: 950-959.

ROY PS, DASH AK, SUBUDHI HN, RAO RN, and RAO GIN. 2014. Molecular and
morphological characterization of Indian rice hybrids. Australian Journal of Crop
Science 8(12):1607-1614.

SACK L, GRUBB PJ, and MARANON T. 2003. The functional morphology of juvenile
plants tolerant of strong summer drought in shaded forest understories in southern
Spain. Plant Ecology 168: 139-163.

SAHOO KK, TRIPATHI AK, PAREEK A, SINGLA-PAREEK SL. 2013. Taming drought
stress in rice through genetic engineering of transcription factors and protein kinases.
Plant Stress 7(1): 60-72.

SAHU P, MONDAL S, SHARMA D, and VISHWAKARMA G. 2017. InDel marker based
genetic differentiation and genetic diversity in traditional rice (Oryza sativa L.)
landraces of Chhattisgarh, India. PLoS ONE _ 12(11):e0188864.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. pone.0188864.

SAKAI H, LEE SS, TANAKA T, NUMA H, KIM J, KAWAHARA Y, WAKIMOTO H,
YANG C, IWAMOTO M, ABE T, YAMADA Y, MUTO A, INOKUCHI H,
IKEMURA T, MATSUMOTO T, SASAKI T, and ITOH T. 2013. Rice Annotation
Project Database (RAP-DB): An Integrative and Interactive Database for Rice
Genomics. Plant and Cell Physiology 54:2 https://doi.org/10.1093/pep/pcs183

SANCHEZ PL, WING RA, and BRAR DS. 2014. The wild relative of rice: genomes and
genomics. Zhang Q and Wing RA. Genetics and genomics of rice. Plant Genetics and
Genomics: Crops and models 5. New York: Springer.

SCASCITELLI M, COGNET M, and ADAMS KL. 2010. An Interspecific Plant Hybrid
Shows Novel Changes in Parental Splice Forms of Genes for Splicing Factors.
Genetics 184: 975-983.

SHAKIBA E and EIZENGA GC. 2014. Unraveling the secrets of rice wild species. Intech.
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/58393.

SHAMSI K and KOBRAEE S. 2011. Bread wheat production under drought stress
conditions. Annals of Biological Research 2(3): 352-358.

72

SHARMA R. 2014. Outlook for Rice Demand, Supply, and Trade. In: Dawe D, Jaffee S,
and Santos N. Rice in the Shadow of Skyscrapers: Policy Choices in a Dynamic East
and Southeast Asian Setting. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO). p.8-15.

SONG X, WEI H, CHENG W, YANG §S, ZHAO Y, LI X, LUO D, ZHANG H, and FENG
X. 2015. Development of INDEL markers for genetic mapping based on whole
genome resequencing in Soybean. G2 (Bethesda) 5(12): 2793-2799.

SOREN KR, ALI K, TYAGI V, and TYAGI A. 2010. Recent advances in molecular
breeding of drought tolerance in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Indian Journal of
Biotechnology 9: 233-251.

SRIVIDHYA A, VEMIREDDY LR, SRIDHAR S, JAYAPRADA M, RAMANARAO PV,
HARIPRASAD AS, REDDY HK, ANURADHA G and SIDDIQ E. 2011. Molecular
mapping of QTLs for yield and its components under two water supply conditions in
rice (Oryza sativa L.) J. Crop Sci. Biotech 14 (1): 45-56.

STEELE KA, OGDEN R, MCEWING R, BRIGGS H, and GORHAM J. 2007. InDel
markers distinguish Basmatis from other fragrant rice varieties. Field Crops research
105: 81-87.

STEELE KA, PRICE AH, SHASHIDAR HE and WITCOMBE JR. 2006. Marker-assisted
selection to introgress rice QTLs controlling root traits into an Indian upland rice
variety. Theor App! Genet 112:1247—1260.

STEIN JC, YU Y, COPETTI D, ZWICKL DJ, ZHANG L, ZHANG C, CHOUGULE K,
GAO D, IWATA A, GOICOECHEA L, WEI S, WANG J, LIAO Y, WANG M,
JACQUEMIN J, BECKER C, KUDRNA D, ZHANG J, LONDONO CEM, SONG
X, LEE S, SANCHEZ P, ZUCCOLO A, AMMIRAJU JSS, TALAG J, DANOWITZ
A, RIVERA LF, GSCHWEND AR, NOUTSOS C, WU CC, KAO S, ZENG J, WEI
F, ZHAO Q, FENG Q, EL BAIDOURI M, CARPENTIER MC, LASERRE E,
COOKE R, FARIAS D, DA MAIA LC, DOS SANTOS RS, NYBERG KG,
MCNALLY KL, MAULEON R, ALEXANDROV N, SCHMUTZ J, FLOWERS J,
FAN C, WEIGEL D, JENA KK, WICKER T, CHEN M, HAN B, HENRY R, HSING
YC, KURATA N, DE OLIVEIRA AC, PANAUD O, JACKSON SA, MACHADO
CA, SANDERSON MJ, LONG M, WARE D, and WING RA. 2018. Genomes of 13
domesticated and wild rice relatives highlight genetic conservation, turnover and
innovation across the genus Oryza. Nature Genetics 50: 285-296

SURALTA RR, BATUNGBAKAL MYT, BELLO JCT, CAPARAS LM, LAGUNILLA
VH, LUCAS KMD, PATUNGAN LM, SIPING AJO, CRUZ JA, CABRAL MCJ,
and NIONES JM. 2018. An enhanced root system developmental responses to
drought by inoculation of Rhizobacteria (Streptomyces mutabilis) contributed to the
improvement of growth in rice. Philippine Journal of Science 147(1): 113-122.

73

SURALTA RR, LUCOB NB, and PEREZ LM. 2012. Shoot and root development in rice
(Oryza sativa L.) genotypes during progressive drying in soils with varying moisture
regimes. Philippine Journal of Crop Science 37(2): 1-12.

TATEOKA. 1964. O. perennis Moench ssp. cubensis. In: Vaughan DA. 1989. The genus
Oryza L.: Current status of taxonomy. IRRI Research Paper Series No. 138 1-21.

TODAKA D, SHINOZAKI K, and YAMAGUCHI-SHINOZAKI K. 2015. Recent
advances in the dissection of drought stress regulatory networks and strategies for
development of drought tolerant transgenic Rice Plants. Frontiers in Plant Science
6:84 doi: 10.3389/fpls.2015.00084

VALI U, BRANDSTROM M, JOHANSSON M, ELLEGREN H. 2008. Insertion-deletion
polymorphisms (InDels) as genetic markers in natural populations. BMC Genet 9:8

VAUGHAN DA. 1989. The genus Oryza L.: Current status of taxonomy. IRRI Research
Paper Series No. 138 1-21.

VAUGHAN DA. 1994. The Wild Relatives of Rice: A Genetic Resource Handbook.
Manila: International Rice Research Institute (IRRI).

VAUGHAN DA, MORISHIMA H, and KADOWAKI K. 2003. Diversity in the Oryza
genus. Current Opinion 6: 139-146.

WAMBUGU PW, FURTADO A, WATERS DLE, NYAMONGO DO, and HENRY RJ.
2013. Conservation and utilization of African Oryza genetic resources. Rice 6:29.

WANG/J, KONG L, YU K, ZHANG F, SHI X, WANG Y, NAN H, ZHAO X, LU S, CAO
D, LI X, FANG C, WANG F, SU T, LI S, YUAN X, LIU B, and KONG F. 2018.
Development and validation of InDel markers for identification of QTL underlying
flowering time in soybean. The Crop Journal 6(2): 126-135.

WANG Y, XUE Y, and LI J. 2005. Towards molecular breeding and improvement of rice
in China. Trends in Plant Science 10(12):610-614.

WARREN PL and BARNETT LA. 2014. Phenology: Using phenology as a tool for
education, research, and understanding environmental change. College of
Agricultural Sciences Cooperative Extensions. University of Arizona.
https://www.usanpn.org/files/Phenology-az1633-2014.pdf

WING RA, AMMIRAJU JSS, LUO M, KIM H, YU Y, KUDRNA D, GOICOECHEA JL,
WANG W, NELSON W, RAO K, BRAR D, MACKILL DJ, HAN B, SODERLUND
C, STEIN L, SAN MIGUEL P, and JACKSON S. 2005. The Oryza map alignment
project: The golden path to unlocking the genetic potential of wild rice species. Plant
Molecular Biology 59: 53-62.

WU CJ, CHENG ZQ, HUANG XQ, YIN SH, CAO KM, and SUN CR. 2004. Genetic
Diversity among and within populations of Oryza granulata from Yunnan of China

74

revealed by RAPD and ISSR markers: implications for conservation of the
endangered species. Plant Science 167: 35-42.

WU D H, WU HP, WANG CS, TSENG H Y, HWU K K. 2013. Genome-wide InDel
marker system for application in rice breeding and mapping studies. Euphytica
192(1): 131-143.

WU Z, FANG D, YANG R, GAO F, AN X, ZHUO X, LI Y, YI C, ZHANG T, LIANG C,
CUI P, CHENG Z, and LUO Q. 2018. De novo genome assembly of Oryza
granulata reveals rapid genome expansion and adaptive evolution. Communications
Biology 1:84

YAMAKI S, OHYANAGI H, YAMASAKI M, EIGUCHI M, MIYABAYASHI T, KUBO
T, KURATA N, and NONOMURA K. 2013. Development of InDel Markers to
disctiminate all genome types rapidly in the genus Oryza. Breed Sci Sep 63(3): 246-
254. doi: 10.1270/jsbbs.63.246

YASUI H, NONOMURA KI, and IWATA N. 1997. Detection of Alien Oryza punctata
Kotschy Chromosomes in Rice, Oryza sativa L., by Genomic in situ Hybridization.
J. Fac. Agr. 42(1-2): 63.68.

YONEMARU J, CHOI S H, SAKAI H, ANDO T, SHOMURA A, YANO M. 2015.
Genome-wide InDel markers shared by diverse Asian rice cultivars compared to
Japanese rice cultivar “Koshihikari”. Breeding Sci 65(3): 249-256.

YU J, HU SN, WANG J, WONG G KS, LI S G, LIU B, DENG Y J, DAI L, ZHOU Y,
ZHANG X Q, CAO M L, LIU J, SUN J D, TANG J B, CHEN Y J, HUANG X B,
LIN W, YE C, TONG W, CONG L J, GENG JN, HAN Y J, LIL, LI W, HU GQ,
HUANG X G, LI W J, LI J, LIU Z W, LIL, LIU J P, QI QH, LIU JS, LIL, LIT,
WANG XG, LU H, WU T T, ZHU M, NI P X, HAN H, DONG W, REN X Y, FENG
X L, CUI P, LI X R, WANG H, XU X, ZHAI W X, XU Z, ZHANG J S, HE S J,
ZHANG J G, XU J C, ZHANG K L, ZHENG X W, DONG J H, ZENG W Y, TAO
L, YE J, TAN J, REN X D, CHEN X W, HE J, LIU D F, TIAN W, TIAN CG, XIA
H G, BAO Q Y, LI G, GAO H, CAO T, WANG J, ZHAO W M, LI P, CHEN W,
WANG X D, ZHANG Y, HU J F, WANG J, LIU S, YANG J, ZHANG G Y, XIONG
Y Q, LI Z J, MAO L, ZHOU C S, ZHU Z, CHEN R S, HAO B L, ZHENG W M,
CHEN S Y, GUO W, LI GJ, LIU S Q, TAO M, WANG J, ZHU L H, YUAN L P,
YANG H M. 2002. A draft sequence of the rice genome (Oryza sativa L. ssp. indica).
Science, 296: 79-92.

YU J, WANG J, LIN W, LIS, LI H, ZHOU J, NI P, DONG W, HU S, ZENG C, ZHANG
J, ZHANG Y, LI R, XU Z, LI S, LI X, ZHENG H, CONG L, LIN L, YIN J, GENG
J, L1G, SHIJ, LIU J, LV H, LI J WANG J, DENG Y, RAN L, SHI X, WANG X, JI
Z, ZHAO W, SUN Y, ZHANG Z, BAO, HAN Y, DONG L, JI J, CHEN P, WU 8,
LIU J, XIAO Y, BU D, TAN J, YANG L, YE C, ZHANG J, XU J, ZHOU Y, YU Y,
ZHANG B, ZHUANG §, WEI B, LIU B, LEI M, YU H, LI Y, XU H, WEIS, HE X,

75

FANG L, ZHANG Z, ZHANG Y, HUANG X, SU Z, TONG W, LI J, TONG Z, LI
S, YE J, WANG L, FANG L, LEI T, CHEN C, CHEN H, XU Z, LI H, HUANG H,
ZHANG F, XU H, LI N, ZHAO C, LI 8, DONG L, HUANG Y, LIL, XI Y, QI Q,
LI W, ZHANG B, HU W, ZHANG Y, TIAN X, JIAO Y, LIANG X, JIN J, GAO L,
ZHENG W, HAO B, LIU S, WANG W, YUAN L, CAO M, MCDERMOTT J,
SAMUDRALA R, WANG J, WONGG, and YANG H. 2005. The Genomes of Oryza
sativa: A History of Duplications. PLoS Biology.
https://doi.org/10.137 1 /journal.pbio.0030038

YU H, XIE W, LI J, ZHOU F, and ZHANG Q. 2014. A Whole-genome SNP array
(RICE6K) for genomic breeding in rice. Plant Biotechnology Journal 12(1): 28-37.

ZEILANG PK and PATTANAYAK A. 2013. Wide hybridization in the genus Oryza:
Aspects and Prospects. Indian Journal of Hill Farming 16(2): 71-77.

ZENG YX, WEN ZH, MA LY, JI ZJ, LI XM, and YANG CD. 2013. Development of 1047
insertion-deletion markers for rice genetic studies and breeding. Genetics and
Molecular Research 12(4):5226-5235.

ZOU XH, YANG Z, DOYLE JJ, and GE S. 2013. Multilocus estimation of divergence
times and ancestral effective population sizes of Oryza species and implications for
the rapid diversification of the genus. New Phytologist 198: 1155-1164.

ZUCCOLO A, SEBASTIAN A, TALAG J, YU Y, KIM H, COLLURA K, KUDRNA D,
and WING RA. 2007. Transposable element distribution, abundance and role in
genome size variation in the genus Oryza. BMC Evolutionary Biology doi:
10.1186/1471-2148-7-152.

16

Appendix A. Gel images of InDel markers designed from Oryza sativa L. and O. granulata
Nees & Arn. Ex. G. Watt sequences and tested for polymorphism among O. sativa,
O. meyeriana (Zoll. & Moritzi), and O. granulata accessions. Legend: OS: — O.
sativa IR64; OS2 - O. sativa NSIC Re 222; OMi — O. meyeriana Acc. 89241; OM2 -
O. meyeriana Acc. 89243; OG; — O. granulata Acc. 102118; OG2 - O. granulata
Acc. 106474; (0) — monomorphic; (1) - polymorphic between AA and GG genomes;
(2) — polymorphic between O. meyeriana and O. granulata; (3) — polymorphic
between O. sativa accessions; (4) polymorphic between O. granulata accessions; (5)
— absent bands in either genomes; (6) no PCR products among all samples; (7) — new
bands present

TXPECTED PRESENCE (+) OR ABSENCE (.) OF BAND

MARKER IMAGE BAND SIZE AA GG SCORE
(bp) OS: OS: OM: OM2 OG: OG:
359 + + + +
GGO01_001 1
315 + +
223 + + + +
GGo1_002 1
176 + +
260 + +
GG01_003 1
223 + + + +
250 + +
GG01_004 1
225 + + + +
251 + - + +
GG01_005 1
233 + +
238 - = 5 5
GG01_006 5
215 + +
251 + +
GG01_007 1

203 + + + +


Appendix A continued...

GG01_008

GG01_009

GG02_001

GG02_002

GG02_003

GG02_005

GG02_006

GG02_007

GG02_008

GG02_009

161

241

209

189

138

301

281

195

510

727

696

439

417

380

77

1,2,3

BB

Appendix A continued...
321 + + + +
GG03_001 1
300 + +
201 - -
GG03_003 168 + + + + 1,7
+ +
201 + +
GG03_004 1
167 + + + +
+ +
+
GG03_005 236 1,2,7
411 - - -
436 + +
GG03_006 1
402 + + + +
245
GG03_007 6
222
359 - - o oS
GG03_008 333 + + 1,7
+ + + +
323 - - + + + +
GG03_009 1,7
301 + + - - = =
265 + + - - - -
GG03_010 1,7
244 oe + + + +
314 - - 5 5
GG03_011 6
288 5 Oo
335 + + + +
GG03_012 1

275 + +


Appendix A continued...

GG03_013

GG03_014

GG04_002

GG04_004

—__ a oe

269

252

182

164

399

338

160

120

332

280

320

281

332

302

270

262

233

79

Appendix A continued...

GG04_008

GG05_001

GG05_002

GG05_003

GG05_004

GG0s_00s

GG0S_006

GG05_007

203

179

422

385

477

434

231

249

659

614

354

333

253

230

1,3

Appendix A continued...

GG06_001

GG06_002

GG06_004

GG06_005

GG06_006

GG06_007

GG06_008

‘GG06_009

GG07_001

383

354

383

331

407

364

426

386

601

192

175

194

178

312

318

300

81

1,2,7

1,7

1,2

Appendix A continued...

GG07_002

GG07_003

GG07_004

GG07_005

GG07_006

GG08_001

GG08_002

GG08_003

GG08_004

325

302

408

387

270

242

449

422

278

192

171

386

413

383

592

556

82

Appendix A continued...

GG08_005

GG08_006
GG08_007

GG09_001

GG09_004

GG09_005

GG09_006

GG09_007

GG10_003

351

329

360

339

321

299

236

216

511

450
536

505

318

298

307

287

83

1,2

1,2,3

Appendix A continued...


Appendix A continued...

GG11_007

GG11_008

GG11_009

GG12_001

GG12_002

GG12_003

GG12_004

GG12_005

457

442

399

373

223

193

323

241

220

150

129

85

1,2

Appendix A continued...

GG12_006

GG12_007

GG12_008

GG12_009

GG12_010

GGI2_011


87

Appendix B. Gel images of SSR markers tested for polymorphism among Oryza sativa L.,

MARKER

RMII18

RM3336

RM6618

RM7643

RM8083

O. meyeriana (Zoll. & Moritzi), and O. granulata Nees & Arn. Ex. G. Watt
accessions. Legend: OS, — O. sativa IR64; OS: - O. sativa NSIC Re 222; OMi
— O. meyeriana Acc. 89241; OM2 - O. meyeriana Acc. 89243; OG: — O.
granulata Acc. 102118; OG: - O. granulata Acc. 106474; (0) —
monomorphic; (1) - polymorphic between AA and GG genomes; (2) —
polymorphic between O. meyeriana and O. granulata; (3) — polymorphic
between QO. sativa accessions; (4) polymorphic between O. granulata
accessions; (5) — absent bands in either genomes; (6) no PCR products among
all samples; (7) — new bands present
PRESENCE (+) OR ABSENCE (-) OF BAND

‘EXPECTED
IMAGE BAND SIZE AA GG SCORE
(bp) OS:_OS:_ OM: OM: OG: OG:

170 - - - - - 5 6
102 5 OO 5 5 - . 6
144 : - - : 6
134 - - - - - - 6
160 + + - - - - 5

154 - - - . = = 6

Appendix B continued...

RMS461

M5764

RM6733

RM8255

RM2634

RM3732

RM3294

RM5303

232

134

114

217

188

154

106

212

150

Appendix B continued...

RM7288

RM1284

RMI1352

RMI1352

RM3586

RM5928

RM6013

146

150

149

149

18

213

267

167

89

Appendix B continued...

RM8203

RM1223

RM2811

RM3735

RMS030

RMS473

M6089

RM7187

1

158

138

172

127

170

157

Appendix B continued...

RM7314

RMI182

RM2857

RM3800

RM4674

RM6517

164

160

132

112

120

178

182

91

Appendix B continued...

RM7653

RM2229

RM5753

RMS745

RMS5314

RM6395

RM6818

121

130

173

201

203

151

110

130

1,2,3

Appendix B continued...

RM7412

RM3555

RMS211

RMO6011

RM6184

RM7012

154

154

154

197

139

196

180

277

93

Appendix B continued...

RM7412

RM3555

RMS211

RM6011

RM6184

RM7012

154

154

154

197

139

196

180

277

93

Appendix B continued...

RM3262

RM2819

M3309

RM6429

RM7049

M3320

167

182

167

178

157

159

168

Appendix B continued...

RM3769

RM4692,

RM6051

RM6797

RM6816

RM7039

RMI108

RM3123

RM4455

RMS095

103

179

136

152

179

166

168

124

191

116

182

95


Appendix B continued...

RMS5373

RM6179

RM7217

RM8138

RM4069

110

108

210

149

107

126

107

136

195

164

1,7

5,7

Appendix B continued...

RM7654

RMI1103

RM2197

RM3226

RM3717

RM7448

RM8216

173

216

160

123

158

138

198

210

97

2,5

98

STRLEL —CBBLEL —GBGLET SOREL EIleel polBCl cS teel IveBEl TVeBet 056 007 Pavasjdan SE
OOEST I196E91 BLOVIT 96IS9I 9ETODI ZBL99T Z9'LL9T SR'ERDT 82041 0s6 lovly povamdan ve
ETESSI SOLSST PROIST ISEDST GL'LOST LOST So'SLST pB'BLSI T2651 0s6 7S L8E Parardon fe
TOL LOGZ9T BEET SGEDT —LOTLPOT —EO'ESIT. ITI991 €9'S991 961891 0s6 60'sor Povamdan ze
SWI COOH G9'SS9T GEOI9T wL'B991  EPHLIT 6LzEDT TL LRDL 19 vOLL 0s6 ley porardan Ie
LETBOT GL'SB9T PZHDT LBD LOWBDT © TL'I89T © LOWBT «—SBILSL © prOSDT«sTECROL «OBOE = 056 ives «= SESE MM (pe0s) ovopmums3‘Q OE
SESOST ZOGISI LLBZST 96OEST ETZPSI GOOSST LEO9ST Zz89SI REO6SI PLZZ OSE SvPOST —-Z0LBE aa payor O 6
SOECLI GLETLI LSLELT SOGZLI ZIELT STSCI EOELI LILI ~LELL  ZOLELL EEE —086 zeLect «CoS MA (eup) omynuos8 QB
BVLZ9L LYED9T § F6ORDT 919991 BOERDT 6S'6LDT S9BB9I ZHPLOL 6SZOLI — EBTOLL © EH'SPE ~—056 SLoosl = 7EvOy, Ss MAM Dauos ‘0 uw
ELST 96RSSI 99ZIST ZL99S1 SSLST I9TRSI PI'I6ST S'L6ST 696191 69TZZ OSB SBLESI —9T'St¥ aq (cup) omprues8 QO 97
RLTEST SYOEST S9'OPST OTST PLPST PETSST LEST EL 19SI Ispisl 7117 0s6 QOTPST —9B'ELE aa (peas) ompmuu3-Q ST
IS€O9T 68609T PTHIOT PI'LIST €vvZ91 EE6ZIT BPOEST IT I9L STB — GOLIZ —0S6 EGOS «LTH aa (2009) o1ynuns8 QHZ
VOGESI LIZSSI PETIST GTLSSI IT99SI LOILST 89 0RST 9E9RSI 199091 8zzzz_—0S6 veLSI 1790 aq Dao 0 &
HIB EP POLI H9'STLE LOSOLI B6SILI IGBOLI ESRILI LZTOLI SOTELI 8S ItLl BEE 086 €wLl vey AM payor ‘0 w
LTZSSL_ GORSST LLZOST ETPOST PO'BDST SOTZST SSLLSI sSe'IBSt STOO ETT0Z sé prs 160% aa (p208) oroymuos3-Q IZ
POODLE LGOILI ESILI ROGOLI YZILT HLBOLI 69PILT 99LOLL ILIZLI I OZLI ZISE —0S6 UZILT = 860Th AM (a00p9) oxyruosS ‘QO OT
LSESOL S9'T9I 769991 BRIT IL'SLOT ESOROT SLLBDT ELELI vEZSI «BOSD «LITE —0S6. Iswi9l = LLL6E MAN (p29) oroynumsQGT
SUvST BI'PBST 10109T H6'SRSL ZO'SODT TIO9I S9OIDT 958651 86791 —PLSTIL ©—«LOOHE © 056 igszol = SEE AM pauos ‘0 81
SORIOT 97'HZIT PETIT EBB GTEC B9IET ELIPOT T'HP9I S6BS9T 056 Iy0zat pe'LSP aq (p20s) oropmms3 ‘OL
{OORT STE GO'LEDT ETLAOT EE TEST G6LEDT ESI6ST PZPLII 989691 181691 Bec 056 s16s1 = 6ZOP AA (p208) ompmmu8 QT
SLES LESPST GOLSST TESST yBO9SI S9'99ST Su'sest 9L'IRSI 8y'Z091 0s6 vest —-90'S6E aa (2009) evoyruos3 QO SI
Ly6991 LOBLOT SLPBIT LS'PLOI SLOLOL SOELOT SwOLOT BS'ED91 IL'SB91_ «= LPIBSL «EWE (OSE ZerssT = L0h AM (200) evopmum3 Qt
SUSLYL BEO6PI BTOOST EL'SOSL ZHSIST BPZZST GEZEST ES'ISI T0'S9st 056 Ivzest 5°59 aa Bauoe ‘0 €l
PEEOLI SS'SOLL IEOILE IBOLT EO90LI PIOLT EZEOLI LBI6SI €L'6OLI —*LEOLLL © LOPE —0S6 8960L1 168Th AMM (ou0}) evoynuos8Q I
PUGLIL £10691 66'B69T 6L'BBDT SBE ZETEIT © HL969T SS PBDI ©—SO'SOLL © EL'EOLL © GETVE ©=— 056 zszoLl EV IIy AA (p205) rors IT
ZUOISE ZZLST_1VORST Z9'TBST I96BST 9S EST vEZODT T'809T eS-0E9I 056 161091 SE ey aa pauos ‘0 or
LB'SSSE EEEDST BEEIST GHOST IZ99SI LTOLST vEDLST LLOBSI £19651 056 6LO9S1 96.00% aq (9228) oroymmms3 “0 6
wyESSI ETISI SLORST LOTLSI Zh IBSI 99LEST CBEST TSOST SLBT9I 056 West § —-S6'StP aa (2u0p9) omjnusi8-Q 8g
CHT EPID IF6L9T 9699 EVOEST SBT 19691 LORD 6TSILI SILL SLE — OSE. erst = 198%P AM pauos ‘0 L
BOSLST GETRST (98ST ZTLBSL_LSTOSL LOST © S'66SL_—#9°Z091 £60791 056 6evIs1 BTS aa (euop) orpnuos8-Q 9
LO'OPSL STOSSI 9OLSSI Iv 09ST Gz BIS EELSI LOOBSI BL'vRST 091 056 887951 80T0F aa (p098) proprmucs3 “0 s
SO'OLIT 166R9T 96 L69T ZHRROT POOLI  CEEEIT SO66DT EO'SESI LH6OLI P9'EOLL BVOPE —0S6 SellLt = zIZe AM (2unps) onyrumi8 QO b
QPECSI PODEST SSPPST EOEPSI O6SSI SL¥9SI STZSI ZT'LLSI £9'S6SI 0s6 vrs S9bIy aa aus 0 €
ZSBP9T EGER LYOLT ELHSL BOBOLI 9SZOLI ZOTILI LSL691 vO  BhRTLL Ge OSE 056 voezel «= STLzty MM payne 0 z
BE OPIT SOOT _G8'SS9T LIAL PT PSOI PLP9l _THGPOT IESE ST6SOL _—LU'BS9L_—«LO'9EE__—0S6 ST06S1 800y AA (9205) poymuud “0 i
AEDS _ SP 0591 GS SS9N__LU'LYOL bE vspl_ _Vivel__oeval_ Tevet si'ésg1_ivaspl_t09eE_086 _§
steq hea okeq shea phe) eke ct eq NV @an “omy |7,, Manon — @) 404 *
OL Tun =«noma MO aaivunivs ALana WNTAImuL a) Loa
EDINA MGLVA
(9) LHOIIM Lod WALLY
“WeM ‘DX

“WIV puke Soon DID[NUDAs ‘C pur “] DADS DzUC UDZIM4Oq JUoUNIIAdxe ssaNs JYBNoIp BuLMp sjod Jo sjusuoINsvoUl WY3I9\ “OD XIpueddy

an
a

poreayy-1ySnoig — Gq ‘poseyem-[]oM — AAA ‘Pucde7

at) O91 T 62100 L000 v $ A PoOs\BIIZOI QUI SrnUDss 0-10 OF
seo os'€ 43 G £0£0°0 6z110 ss $s aa (Poos)poul vauos D=Q 6Z
850 991 €1z z LLS0'0 £010 u s vn (2u0}9)g11ZOL DOM On =UQ BZ
990 £95 90s £ 18500 9EIv'0 it s AM (pees)poul Pas D2 LZ
90 ra’ Ose z Siro zILTO siz s aa (2uo}9)811Z01 DOU ENMNAB Dz 9
000 000 00 0 0 0 0 s (p298)811Z01 ODUI PenuD.B v=

000 000 00 0 0 0 0 v (940}9)811Z01 DOW Monuw48 V=UIE

890 loe ole z 8z£00 Tero 6z v aa (poos)poul vauvs D240 EZ
a) ItL St € yyS0'0 98770 $9 ¢ VAN (poos)poul Pays 20
090 al s6l z 97£0'0 L£00 sol , aa (P98)811Z01 DOW PnunsB v= IZ
Lv0 wT Ose € 86900 Sse OL v AM (2u0}9)811Z01 DOU MDnusB Vz OT
000 000 00 0 0 () 0 v (P298)811Z01 DOW] BEjnuns8 DUE

£L0 879 s0s € zs0'°0 80Le°0 sol € AM (poos)p9ul Pauos D298
oso 940 su I 60200 £4700 € € aa (Pe98)811Z01 SOW PwnuDsB v= LI
1s0 6L0 Oz 1 9L00'0 6z00'°0 sy € AM (Peas)gt1Z01 DOW PNUD D=~1Q OT
950 LET ita z 74900 92010 sz € aa (2u0}9)811Z01 DDI pPnunsB =U — ST
000 000 00 0 0 0 0 € ; (eu0}9)81 1201 DOU MopnuDB D=ID

9L0 09% voe z 9LL0'°0 66L1'0 $05 £ aa (pses)pout 2auvs =i ET
vo sto Our I 90€0'0 6090'0 z z AM (2u0}9)811Z01 DOU PPjnus D=UQ ZI.
980 Ive SI€ z ty7Z0'0 £5800 sol z AM (P928)811Z01 DDUI BojnuDsd v=1Q IL
180 10 wl z 82000 1z10 sis z aa (Peas\poul ayes n= OL
1910 790 ssi 1 65100 8400°0 sy z aa (poas)gi1Z0l DOW y7nww.B v= «6
190 a4 O1z v 6690°0 9710 sv z aa (2uo}9)811Z01 ODM IInuDwB =I
sLo ZLIz O6b € 8£600 9€66'0 sos z AM (pees)poul Daups = L
£90 08" ost z 96£0'0 €s0'0 It I aa (2u0}9)811Z01 DUI Py nuows v=IQ 9
vL0 61z ov € 6y£00 20010 €l if aa (Pe28)811Z01 DDUI P7OjnuDss v=E s
6L0 OL Soe € 9990°0 £9670 61 if MM (2u0}9)811Z01 DOW PrejnuDsB D=1Q v
9L'0 zy'9 4 I 6900 69110 S98 I aa (poos)poul vauvs v=iQ
suo 60°91 Sb € 6010 zesy'o €& i AM (paos)pout rauns 0=iQ 7
980 4 0 we. - z vem ug s o = I AM (P298)811Z01 DOW BDjNuDs8 D=ED it

B m9) eqaay @) A @ ma an) qadap
5181998] % ara aq juga DEL ‘1O0" LOOHS 1004 8] doy yuomyeary YdA.LONID mod

‘sodAjoues payos ‘CE pur pods pur au0[d Dynjnunus vzA1C 10} sjuOWOINSeOUI 4123} osuodsal jySNoIg ‘q xIpueddy

100

ISLS LOZ $
SELS 907 % Pe)
sév9l 0€ 6rS SL8y Sul € 968001 Mlk
80s 161 z a4 rd syourygo ‘0
6655 loz I
S'Iss 861 s
€9Ly I ¥ 08d
z16z Ov'z9b Ley bli € Ipllol 00k
slp orl z 1 $597 pynusiu 0
vse sel I
S1ee 61 $s
LL9E zel ’ aq
Ort 00'19€ Lee 121 € 069501 99ul 9
TLBE 6El z itt 8'S7 pyjzund ‘0
ORE lel I
tov LI s
Viss 00z ¢ vw
162 z9'v9b Sh 191 £ vOpOILDOW =
6 thy 6sl z 61 ves prousumsst8uo] ‘O
OBE Let I
L79s z0z s
$'s95 £07 ’ vad
8s°SI £9'109 L979 Sv € 1490899ul ob
vio Ce z Lo Slt uoBodyfns
seo 827 I
vor 991 $s
aes 71 v vw
ou'81 weLp Leap vt € Lu96 Dur E
90% Ish z 17 6p pusaqn]3 ‘0
96Sy sol I
81069 87 $
6LE9 6% v w
8961 SL1E9 vols 807 € yu z
g1S9 EZ z vT Sve pays ‘0
6865 siz I
7895 0% s
7209 giz v w
SeOl LV 28S 7995 yz € Lisi =
66ss 10z z SLT sts pawns 0
7109 8Iz I
ad aeoH ATA PROVEN (ag HLGIM =HLONIT
paepumys AO G'TaIa/ON) ama VAT AV aI INV1d ‘ON
GAWON) INNOD TVLVAOIS INNOD TVLVWOLS

“Apnjs ay} Ul pasn saisads 301 pyim eyxooje |, 2Dj91009 ‘CE “4 YOOH idajpi ‘CE ‘We xq “Wy
32 SON DiDjnuDs3 ‘CE “IYB0Y 12 ‘ABYD “W DYJUDAYODAG ‘CE “UIWIOG SisuayHaysnD ‘CE ‘UaT[eEMg DID CE “ASA DYOfID] ‘EC WEA
x9 TEM Stppuroyfo ‘CE “|Salg "'D XJ ‘[SAd 'S'f VInuIW ‘CE “pnarg xa AYOS}O-Yy DIDJOUNd ‘CE “DOG 1q “ACYD “YW VIDUIWIDISI3ZUO]
‘O “UD uoszodyns ‘CEC “pnaig outssaqn]3 ‘EC “] vayws vzKC Ul SatyIsUap pue yUNOD [eJeUIO}s pue sjUoUIaMseoU Jeo] Se[y “q MIpueddy

101

Ost

€Lst

6S

LOST

858

6S LI

wy

7's

OL 761

BY EST

OO'LIE

TL LLE

69 8ZE

80697

L87E7

LT9Sb

6691
esl
6807
TU
6807
y90E
ECT
L087
16sz
6807
7T60E
Lee

Vee
Tle

9 €0€
T29€
BLE
SS6E
90%
SEE
9@E
Eevee
B6EE
S1E€
£567
B9ET
9997
TE

v90E
9'S%
y 827
6 Loz
10%
x4

x4

sis
eLepy
10
veer
89%

99
SL
69
SL
oll
ug

£6
SL
TL
17
oI
caus
601
EL
9EL
rol
Ist
6lL
£71
oz
raat
6IL
901
$8
$6
rau
Ol
18
4)
68
6L
+8
+8
vst
“st
8S
cst
891

HK AMTNKEAMTNKAMTHK AMINA AMIE NRKAMTHHAMI HDA AMS

so

TL

I

ray

£0

TT

97

68

Tse

€l

sol

ve

SSE

ees

Vs

ma

7OSPOl ODUI
70124009 ‘E

{fHH
178001 DOU
s@lpuO

£3/3)

648001 DDWI
pyojnup8 ‘OQ

99

811Z01 OOM
oyp\nup3 ‘0

ad
ZETIOL DOU
pyjundyo04q ‘O

aa

788001 DOU
sisuatpoassnv ‘OQ

aqd3
tvIsol DU
ND 'O

dado
16001 DUI
Dyofue] ‘O

a1

SI

v1

£1

a

I

or

***ponuljuos q xIpueddy

102

6695'0 6@ ToL

sv00°0 60°0 0z iouq

$000°0 97 II 40S0°0 vlol'o z quouyealy, :adjouen

$000°0 POLI L9L0°0 L9L0°0 I quouneal

0 76°67 9vEl‘0 £6970 z adXjouan

9991°0 18° 1800°0 97€0°0 v doy
[COR ey aN TVA d mavnds Mavnds 40 WAS ad aounos

NVaW
qsiem Aq yooys “gf

99°6b08 6@ ToL,

99'DL SLt6rl 0z tong

6881°0 18 OE'SEL ZL'0L7 z quounealy :odAouep

vsp0'0 9S‘b £0°0vE £0°0vE I quouneal |

0000°0 S89E IZ'0SLZ Z'00ss z adijouen

61b7'0 6r'l by il SLSbb v doy
Gud QNTVAd FAVNOSNVAW  Fuvnos AO WAS EG aounos

Jeonsneig Zujsn payeroued siren OOYS pur Joo1 YEA “D *Xq ‘WY 2 SOON DJDjNUDAZ ‘C— puke “] ANIDS DZAIC 10} S292) VAONV ‘A Xipueddy

yideq jooy umuxey, “vy

“CAVLS) Youeasoy JemMyNoUsy Joy [OO]

103

Lee 67 Teo
19601 €€€6 17 0z jong
vSE0 60° al vz z quouneor] :adhjousn,
4909°0 ra) £0 £0 I quouyeorL
$8S0°0 87'E of TL z adAyouan
z1€9'°0 s9°0 LOIL'0 1998°7 v doy
Gs) ud aNIVAd WaAVNOS NVAW wavnos ad aounos
4o Was
€870'0 67 TROL,
2000°0 €r10'°0 0z Jong
Svv7z'0 Is] 1100°0 7Z00'0 [4 quouneel :odXjousn
SILL'0 60°0 1000°0 1000°0 I yuouneasy,
$$00°0 8°9 6%00'0 8600°0 z adkjouan
676S°0 IL'0 $000°0 Z00°0 v doy
Gs) ad aNTVA A WUAVNOS NVA wuvnos EC aounos
40 was

JoqUMN IIL “d

qsIeM AIqyooy “OD

104

sjooy [eae] “D

Aysuaq yysueyjooy “J

el 67 Trio
85S0'0 SSII'I 0z Joug
6£66'°0 10°0 £000°0 L000°0 4 quounealy :edAjousy
L240 €1'0 400°0 400°0 I quouneall
81€0'0 tb 96770 76S¢'0 Z adijousy
7980°0 Lard L7El0 Loes‘0 v dou
Gs) ad aNTVAd WAVNOS NVAW mavnos ad aounos
ao was
1818°9S9 6% Te10L
L190°6 LEET IBT 0z Jou
£€060°0 Lz pL79'vz 8rS76r z quauneary :edAjous
7990°0 Ble 6vIZ' bE OvIZ ve I quouneas],
1000'0 16°91 PST'ESI 180S°90€ z adAyouan
6480°0 9e% L1Ov IZ 1909°S8 v doy
aud ANTVA A TAVNOS NVAW
SLY L8E9 62 ToL
66p0'11T 8660777 0z ioug
1S1Z'0 99° €9bb'p81 L268'89€ z quouneary :adhouep
£S€0'°0 I's €9€6'S9S £9£6'S9S I yuouneal |
7000°0 €7EL 696'89¢1 8E6'LE6T z adAjouey
1979°0 99°0 SLTP'EL 1L'£67 v doy
Gud anTvaAd wavNOS NVAW aavnods aq aounos
40 WAS

qsIeH weld “J

105

wBuey i00y fo] |]

€€ P7TBEEET 67 ToL,
76 1861ZE Sty 6£96E9 0z Jong
€060°0 wz 8E1E'990S28 829°ZEIOSLI Zz quouneall :odAjousy
7990'0 Sle L€9'ZELSIZ1 1€9°ZELSIZI I quouqeal],
1000°0 1691 Lov 09¢SbyS 66°02606801 z adhjousn
6L80°0 97 SLS9'6Pb09L £9°86L1POE v doy
Gi) ud QNIVAA TUVNOs NVAW wuvnos ad aounos
40 was
v9ES‘OL 6z Io
799£'0 T€ZeEL 0z jog
ZOLL'O 970 8960°0 LE61'0 z quounealy :odhousp
€8°0 $00 €L10°0 €L10°0 I quoujear],
8820'0 68°7 6S0'I 6LIVZ z adXjouan
vr99'0 90 1120 €¢88°0 v doy
Gs) ad QNTvAd wavNOs NVIW WAVAOS EC wounos
40 was

oney 1ooys 0) 3004 “H

106

Appendix G. Randomized complete block design of pots for drought stress experiment

between Oryza sativa L. and O. granulata Nees & Arn. Ex. G. Watt.

NO. GENOTYPE TREATMENT
1 O. granulata 102118 ww
2 Oryza sativa R64 (2n) ww
3 Oryza sativa IR64 (2n) DS
4 O. grarulata (clone) ww
5 O. granulata 102118 DS
6 O. granulata (clone) DS
7 Oryza sativa IR64 (2n) ww
8 O. gramulata (clone) Ds
9 O. gramulata 102118 DS
10 Oryza sativa IR64 (2n) DS
iB O. granulata 102118 ww
12 O. granulata (clone) ww
13 Oryza sativa 1R64 (2n) DS
14 O. gramulata (clone) ww
15 O. granulata (clone) DS
16 O. granulata 102118 ww
17 O. granulata 102118 DS
18 Oryza sativa IR6A (2n) ww
19 O. gramulata 102118 ww

20 O. grarmulata (clone) ww

21 O. gramulata 102118 DS

2 Oryza sativa IR64 (2n) ww

23 Oryza sativa IR6A (2n) DS

24 O. granulata (clone) DS

25 O. granulata 102118 DS

26 O. gramulata (clone) DS

27 Oryza sativa [R64 (2n) ww

28 O. grarulata (clone) ww

29 Oryza sativa TR64 (2n) DS

30 O. granulata 102118 ww

31 unplanted

32 unplanted

33 unplanted

34 unplanted

unplanted

22 | 23 | 24 | 25

| 29 | 30 31 | 32

35


107

Appendix H. Table of means of the root and shoot traits of Oryza sativa L. and O. granulata
Nees & Arn. Ex. G. Watt seedlings subjected to drought. WW — well-watered; DD
— drought-treated

A. Maximum Root Depth

TREATMENT
GENOTYPE DD ww
Oryza granulata IRGC
1021 18(clone) 13.9 9.6
Oryza granulata IRGC 102118(seed) 6.2 5.3
Oryza sativa IR64(seed) 44.5 29.5
B. Root Dry Weight
TREATMENT
GENOTYPE DD ww
Oryza granulata IRGC
102118(clone) 0.05774 0.04494
Oryza granulata IRGC 102118(seed) 0.02086 0.01582
Oryza sativa IR64(seed) 0.04708 0.07354
C.. Tiller Number
TREATMENT
GENOTYPE DD Www
Oryza granulata IRGC 102118(clone) 2 1.8
Oryza granulata IRGC 102118(seed) 1.4 1.2
Oryza sativa IR64(seed) 2 3
D. Plant Height
TREATMENT
GENOTYPE DD ww
Oryza granulata IRGC 102118(clone) 19.1 22.56
Oryza granulata IRGC 102118(seed) 14.5 18.5

Oryza sativa IR64(seed 30.02 48.62

108

E. Root Length Density

TREATMENT
GENOTYPE DD ww
Oryza granulata IRGC 102118(clone) 1.976452 2.228439
Oryza granulata IRGC 102118(seed) 1.001395 1.397961
Oryza sativa IR64(seed 5.506869 11.265958
F. Lateral Roots
TREATMENT
GENOTYPE DD ww
Oryza granulata IRGC 102118(clone) 0.49505 0.4513287
Oryza granulata IRGC 102118(seed) 0.490397 0.4691086
Oryza sativa IR64(seed) 0.752124 0.725576
G. Root to Shoot Ratio
TREATMENT
GENOTYPE DD ww
Oryza granulata IRGC 102118(clone) 0.515688 0.3566658
Oryza granulata IRGC 102118(seed) 0.806337 0.9855178
Oryza sativa IR64(seed) 0.34927 0.1849276
H. Total Root Length
TREATMENT
GENOTYPE DD ww
Oryza granulata IRGC 102118(clone) 372.5611 420.0608
Oryza granulata IRGC 102118(seed) 188.7629 263.5156

Oryza sativa IR64(seed) 1038.045 2123.6331

109

Appendix I. Least significant difference (LSD) tests and pairwise mean comparisons of drought
response traits that have significant differences.

A. Maximum Root Depth

1. Genotype
LSD test
Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 20
Error Mean Square 74.6375
Critical Value 2.0860
Test Statistics 8.0594
Summary of the Result:
GENOTYPE MEANS N
Oryza granulata 102118(clone) 11.756 10
Oryza granulata 102118(seed) 5.75 b 10
Oryza sativa IR64(seed 37.00 a 10
2. Treatment
LSD test
Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 20
Error Mean Square 74.6375
Critical Value 2.0860
Test Statistics 6.5804
Summary of the Result:
TREATMENT MEANS N
DD 21.53 a 15
Www 14.80 b 15

B. Shoot Dry Weight

1. Comparison of Genotype at each level of Treatment

LSD test
Alpha
Error Degrees of Freedom
Error Mean Square
Critical Value
Test Statistics

0.05
20
0.0045
2.0860
0.0885

11

o

Summary:
GENOTYPE N DD ww
Oryza granulata 102118(clone) 5 0.0910 ab 0.1201 b
Oryza granulata 102118(seed) 5 0.0346 b 0.0437 b
Oryza sativa IR64(seed) 5 0.1323 a 0.3974 a
2. Comparison of Treatment at each level of Genotype
LSD test
Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 20
Error Mean Square 0.0045
Critical Value 2.0860
Test Statistics 0.0885
Summary:

TREATMENT N_ Onza granulata Oryza granulata Oryza sativa
102118(clone) 102118(seed) IR64

DD 5 0.0910 a 0.0346 a 0.1323 b

Www 5 0.1201 a 0.0437 a 0.3974 a

C. Root Dry Weight

1. Genotype
LSD test
Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 20
Error Mean Square 0.0007
Critical Value 2.0860
Test Statistics 0.0249
Summary:
GENOTYPE MEANS N
Oryza granulata 102118(clone) 0.0513 a 10
Oryza granulata 102118(seed) 0.0183 b 10
Oryza sativa IR64(seed) 0.0603 a 10
D. Plant Height
1. Genotype
LSD test
Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 20
Error Mean Square 111.0499
Critical Value 2.0860

Test Statistics 9.8306

Summary:

111

GENOTYPE MEANS N
Oryza granulata 102118(clone) 20.83 b 10
Oryza granulata 102118(seed) 16.50 b 10
Oryza sativa IR64(seed) 39.32 a 10
2. Treatment
LSD test
Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 20
Error Mean Square 111.0499
Critical Value 2.0860
Test Statistics 8.0267
Summary of the Result:
TREATMENT MEANS N
DD 21.21b 15
WwW 29.89 a 15
E. Root Length Density
1. Genotype
LSD test
Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 20
Error Mean Square 9.0617
Critical Value 2.0860
Test Statistics 2.8082
Summary:
GENOTYPE MEANS N
Oryza granulata 102118(clone) 2.10 b 10
Oryza granulata 102118(seed) 1.20b 10
Oryza sativa IR64(seed. 8.39 a 10
F. Lateral Roots
1. Genotype
LSD test
Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 20
Error Mean Square 0.0558
Critical Value 2.0860
Test Statistics 0.2203

112

Summary:
GENOTYPE MEANS N
Oryza granulata 102118(clone) 0.4732 b 10
Oryza granulata 102118(seed) 0.4798 b 10
Oryza sativa IR64(seed 0.7388 a 10
G. Total Root Length
1. Genotype
LSD test
Alpha 0.05
Error Degrees of Freedom 20
Error Mean Square 321981.9722
Critical Value 2.0860
Test Statistics 529.3434
Summary:
GENOTYPE MEANS N
Oryza granulata 102118(clone) 396.31 b 10
Oryza granulata 102118(seed) 226.14 b 10

Oryza sativa IR64(seed) 1580.84 a 10

113

Appendix J. Scanned root images of Oryza sativa L., O. granulata Nees & Arn. Ex. G.
Watt (seed), and O. granulata (clone) used in the drought stress experiment.

A. O. sativa — Well-watered

B. O. sativa — Drought stressed

114

C. O. granulata (seed) - Well-watered

115

D. O. granulata (seed) - Drought stressed

116

E. O. granulata (clone) - Well-watered

117

F. O. granulata (clone) - Drought stressed

118

119

Appendix K. Boxplots generated for the traits analyzed in the drought stress set-up comparison
between Oryza sativa L. and O. granulata Nees & Arn. Ex. G. Watt.

Total Root Length (cm) Maximum Root Depth (cm)

4 : 1 r x EEE
Q a ee a
Plant Height (cm) Root length Density

° a a ee ee) 3 ? a M Mi
Root Dry Weight (g) Root to Shoot Ratio

000 © 002 00k 008 0080 os oe v0 © ae oS

120
Shoot Dry Weight (g) Tiller Number

Percent laterals

00 02 oe 06 08

