DEA MNAN TOF COMPEIAN

ART SAHA LFA!


1908

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS

Master of Science in Environmental Science

NOLAN FEDERICO T, MONSERA’

DETERMINANTS OF COMPLIANCE TO FORMAL CHOICE RULES AMONG
ARTISANAL FISHERS IN CALAMBA CITY, PHILIPPINES.

RICO C. ANCOG, Ph.D.

Adviser
Date: G-l@- 14 an
This thesis can be made available to the general public [ YES }r NO

t

This thesis can be accessed only after consultation with the author and (| YES or NO
thesis adviser

This thesis can be accessed only by those bound by confidentiality YES or NO

agreement
Qa

NOLAN FEDERICO T. MONSERATE

wn
RICO C. ANCOG, Ph.D.

AN A
STI-18-0140


DETERMINANTS OF COMPLIANCE TO FORMAL CHOICE RULES AMONG
ARTISANAL FISHERS IN CALAMBA CITY, PHILIPPINES

NOLAN FEDERICO TAN MONSERATE

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF THE GRADUATE SCHOOL
UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE
REQUIREMENT FOR THE
DEGREE OF

MASTERS OF SCIENCE
(Environmental Science)

JUNE 2017

The dis tation attached hereto, entitled DETERMINANTS OF COMPLIANCE TO.
FORMAL CHOICE RULES AMONG ARTISANAL FISHERS IN CALAMBA

CITY, PHILIPPINES, prepared and submitted by NOLAN FEDERICO TAN
MONSERATE, in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of MASTER
OF SCIENCE (ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE) is hereby accepted,

CARMELITA M. REBANCOS ROG!
Member. Guidance Committee Member>

nd
_xico C. ANCOG

Chair, Guidance Committee

©
Date Signed

Accepted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of MASTER OF
SCIENCE (ENVIRONMENTAL Me E)

DECIBEL V. FAUSTINO-ESLAVA
Dean, School of Environmental Science and Management

JOSE V. CAMACHO JR.
Dean, Graduate School
University of the Philippines Los Bafios


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

The author was born in 1986 in Baybay City to Nolan and Elizabeth Monserate.

He is the second in their children of three.

He graduated his primary, high school and college education in the said city and
as of the present, is employed in the Visyas State University (VSU) as an instructor in its
Isabel campus. Currently residing in Isabel, Leyte, he is married to Jocelyn Enghug

Monserate, and has a five-year old boy, Orson Gervais.

The author who first enrolled in UPLB in 2012 plans to pursue his Doctorate
degree in the same university. While pursuing his master’s degree in the universty’s
Schoo! of Environmental Science and Management (SESAM), he has become greatly

fascinated with the concepts of institutions and in:

ional arrangements and believes
that their potential in the management and conservation of ecological resources is

presently overlooked.

NOLAN FEDERICO T. MONSERATE

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

1 would like to express my sincerest gratitude to my thesis adviser, Dr. Rico
‘Ancog for the guidance, understanding, and tremendous trust and liberty he has shown
me throughout this study. I believe that more than the realization of this research, his
advice and challenges have been important in shaping and motivating further my
ambition of becoming an effective researcher one day. Similarly, I also acknowledge the
important contributions of the other members of my thesis panel, Dr. Rogelio
Concepcion and Dr. Carmelita Rebancos, whom without their expertise and material
assistance, this research study would have been more difficult to realize.

My warmest thanks and appreciation are also extended to VSU and VSU-Isabel
for giving me the time and space to professionally grow. Specifically, | would like to
acknowledge: former VSU-Isabel dean, Dr. Edwin Balbarino; current VSU-Isabel dean,
Prof. Luzviminda Tajos; Ms. Myrna Rojas; Prof. Esperanza Sumalinog; Mrs.
Daphny Ramos; former VSU president, Dr. Jose Bacusmo; former VSU vice-president,
Dr. Edgardo Posas; former VSU president, Dr. Pacienca Milan; Dr. Victor Asio; and
lastly Dr. Aurora Oracion, who have made my study-leave from the university possible.
Furthermore, I am also extremely grateful to DOST for awarding me the DOST-
ASTHRDP scholarship through which I was able to enrol in UPLB and pursue my MS
degree.

A very special gratitude also goes to Ms. Cynthia Buen and Mr. Romeo
Tappalla for lending me their time, knowledge, and documents just when I needed them
the most.

My graduate study would have also been more difficult without the support and
assistance of the Gabriel family of Antipolo City. I heartily acknowledge Kuya Romy,
Ate Ada, Romielyn and Rustom for accommodating me and my family when were in
Luzon and for keeping and nurturing us in the three years that we have been with them.

Finally, 1 offer my MS degree to Mama Lisa, Kuya Bazile, Maville, and to my
wife and son, Jocelyn and Orson. Words cannot express the very profound gratitude I
have for the love and the sacrifices they have made throughout the years of my study and
through the process of researching and writing this thesis. My deepest apologies are also
endeared to them as I was not able to realize and complete my graduate study on time.
Nevertheless, in all of those years that I have been working on this, it has always been
their happiness that has inspired me to keep striving on.

In closing, 1 would like to dedicate my MS thesis in the loving memory of Ate
Karen and Liam who were taken from us so young and without a warning on that fateful
day of Novemeber 8, 2013.

NOLAN FEDERICO T. MONSERATE.

CHAPTER

TABLE OF CONTENTS

IPR

TITLE PAGE

APPROVAL PAGE

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

TABLE OF CONTENTS

LIST OF FIGURES

LIST OF TABLES

LIST OF APPENDIX A TABLES

LIST OF APPENDIX B TABLES:

LIST OF APPENDIX C FIGURES.

LIST OF APPENDIX D PLATES

ABSTRACT

INTRODUCTION

Background of the study

‘Statement of the Problem

Significance of the Study

General objectives

Specific objectives

Research hypothesis

Conceptual Framework

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

Contextual Variables and Collective Action of Users

Effects of Exogenous Attributes on Collective Action
Resource Scarcity and Survival Constraints

Group Si:
Leadership

Group Communication, Moral Norms, and

User Heterogeneity

Educational Attainment

vi

12
13
13
15

21
23

CHAPTER

Age, Values and Cooperative Behavior
Rule Legitimacy, Monitoring and Sanctioning, and Rule
Clarity
‘Type of Societies in CPR Management
METHODOLOGY
Description of the Study Area
Research Design
Research Instrument
Definition of Terms
Socioeconomic Factors
Exogenous Factors
Resource-Related Factors
Resource User-Related Factors
Institutional Arrangement-Related Factors
Mode of Compliance to the Formal Choice Rules
Methods of Analysis
RESULT AND DISCUSSION

Characteristics of Socioeconomic and Exogenous Factors used in
the Study

Socioeconomic Characteristics of the Artisanal fisher
‘Community

Characteristics of the Exogenous Factors
Characteristics of the Resource-Related factors
Characteristics of the Resource User-Related Factors

Characteristics of the Institutional Arrangement-Related
Factors

Compliance to Choice Rules among Artisanal Fishers

Relationship of the Characteristics of Socioeconomic and
Exogenous Factors and the Modes of Compliance to Formal
Choice Rules

Relationship of Socioeconomic Factors and Mode of
‘Compliance to Formal Choice Rules

Relationship of Exogenous Factors and Mode of Compliance
to Formal Choice Rules

Vil

30

36
39
4
42

&

48
55
59

67
67
73
82

85
92

92

CHAPTER

Relationship of Resource-Related Factors and Mode of

Compliance to Formal Choice Rules

Relationship of Resource User-Related Factors and
Mode of Compliance to Formal Choice Rules

Relationship of Institutional Arrangement-Related
Factors and Mode of Compliance to Formal Choice
Rules

SUMMARY, CONCLUSION AND POLICY IMPLICATION
Summary

Conclusion

Policy Implication

LITERATURE CITED

APPENDICES

viii

101

104
104
106
109
113

FIGURE
1

LIST OF FIGURES.

Schematic diagram showing the process of the formation of
the artisanal fishers’ behavior within the coastal fishery in
Calamba City

Terrain map showing Barangay Bucal, Calamba City, Laguna,
Philippines
Probability distribution of the Compliance Indices of the

artisanal fishers of Barangay Bucal with respect to their
compliance of the informal choice rules

Distribution of Cl for the informal choice rules in the
artisanal fisher population of Barangay Bucal

Probability distribution of the Compliance Indices of the
artisanal fishers of Barangay Bucal with respect to their
compliance to the formal choice rules

Distribution of CI for the formal choice rules in the artisanal
fisher population of Barangay Bucal

PAGE

37

87

87

89

89

TABLE

LIST OF TABLES.

Primary socioeconomic characteristics of artisanal fishers in
Barangay Bucal (N=42)

Primary characteristics of resource-related factors included in
the study according to the population of artisanal fishers in
Barangay Bucal (N=42)

Primary characteristics of the resource user-related factors
included in the study according to the artisanal fishers in
Barangay Bucal (N=42)

Primary characteristics of the institutional arrangement-related
factors included in the study according to the artisanal fishers
in Barangay Bucal (N=42)

Forms of incompliance to the informal choice rules as
exhibited by the five identified rule breakers from Barangay
Bucal

Forms of incompliance to the formal operational rules as
exhibited by the 19 identified rule breakers from Barangay
Bucal

Measure of association between socioeconomic factors and the
mode of compliance to the formal choice rules

Measure of association between resource-related factors and
the mode of compliance to the formal choice rules

Measure of association between resource user-related factors
and the mode of compliance to the formal choice rules

Measure of association between institutional arrangement-
related factors and the mode of compliance to the formal
choice rules

Summary of simple regression coefficients and odds ratios of
socioeconomic and exogenous factors exhibiting strong
association with mode of compliance to the formal choice rules

PAGE
66

72

80

88

a1

92

102

102

APPENDIX
TABLE
1

2

LIST OF APPENDIX A TABLES

Complete data on the socio-economic characteristics of the
open-lake fishers in Barangay Bucal, 2015 (N=42)

Complete data on the characteristics of the coastal fishery
as collected from the artisanal fishers of Barangay Bucal,
2015 (N=42)

Complete data on the characteristics of the resource users
of the coastal fishery as collected from the artisanal fishers
of Barangay Bucal, 2015 (N=42)

Complete data on the characteristics of the institutional
arrangements affecting artisanal fishing in the coastal
fishery as collected from the artisanal fishers of Barangay
Bucal, 2015 (N=42)

PAGE

114

15

118

APPENDIX
TABLE
1

2
3

LIST OF APPENDIX B TABLES.

Critical Enabling Conditions for Sustainability on the
‘Commons

Categorization of ecological goods and services

Prices per kilogram (P/Kg) of the different fish types.
sold by the open-lake fishers of Barangay Bucal

The different types of rules and other institutional
statements existing relative to the management of the
fishery used by the open-lake fishers of Barangay Bucal.

FARMC elated project implemented in the City of
Calamba (2010-2013)

Summary of the coefficients (with standard errors of
estimates and significance levels) and odd ratio (with
confidence interval) in the predictive formula derived
from the logistic regression of the probability of the
open-lake fishers complete compliance of the formal
choice rules as a function of their being >50 yrs. old (i.e.
1=>50 yrs. old)

Summary of the coefficients (with standard errors of
estimates and significance levels) and odd ratio (with
confidence interval) in the predictive formula derived
from the logistic regression of the probability of the
open-lake fishers complete compliance of the formal
choice rules as a function of their being able to finish
high school (i.e. I= able to finish high school)

Summary of the coefficients (with standard errors of
estimates and significance levels) and odd ratio (with
confidence interval) in the predictive formula derived
from the logistic regression of the probability of the
open-lake fishers complete compliance of the formal
choice rules as a function of their having medium to high
type of household fixtures (i.e. I= have medium to high
type of household fixtures)

Summary of the coefficients (with standard errors of
estimates and significance levels) and odd ratio (with
confidence interval) in the predictive formula derived
from the logistic regression of the probability of the

124

126
126

127

132

133

134

134

135

APPENDIX
TABLE

open-lake fishers complete compliance of the formal choice
tules as a function of their tendency to sell their caught
Laguna de Bay catfish (i.e. I= sell their caught Laguna de
Bay catfish)

Summary of the coefficients (with standard errors of
estimates and significance levels) and odd ratio (with
confidence interval) in the predictive formula derived from
the logistic regression of the probability of the open-lake
fishers complete compliance of the formal choice rules as a
function of their being a member of a fishermen’s
association (i.e. I= member of a fishermen’s association)

Pairwise association of attributes identified previously as
having strong association with compliance to the formal
choice rules in the municipal water of Calamba City

Summary of the coefficients (with standard errors of
estimates and significance levels) and odd ratio (with
confidence interval) in the predictive formula derived from
the logistic regression of the probability of the open-lake
fishers in Barangay Bucal having medium to high type of
household fixture as a function of their being >50 yrs. old
(ie. 1=>50 yrs. old)

Summary of the coefficients (with standard errors of
estimates and significance levels) and odd ratio (with
confidence interval) in the predictive formula derived from
the logistic regression of the probability of the open-lake
fishers in Barangay Bucal selling their caught Laguna de
Bay catfish as a function of their having medium to high
type of household fixtures (i.e. 1= have medium to high type
of household fixtures)

Summary of the coefficients (with standard errors of
estimates and significance levels) and odd ratio (with
confidence interval) in the predictive formula derived from
the logistic regression of the probability of the open-lake
fishers being a member of BFARMC/SAMBBU as a
function of their being able to finish high school (i.e. I= able
to finish high schoo!)

PAGE

135,

136

136

137

137

APPENDIX
FIGURE

2

LIST OF APPENDIX C FIGURES

Two components of the Calamba City Fish Garden and
Sanctuary (Adapted from CASD, 2012)

Extent of the fishery (“A”) frequently used by the
Barangay Bucal open-lake fishers as mapped by key
informants during a scheduled workshop.

Seasonality of the different fish types harvested by
Barangay Bucal fishers

Proportion of respondents that are catching, frequently
catching and selling the different species in the fishery used
by the open-lake fishers of Barangay Bucal

Trends of observability across the different banned fishing
methods occurring in the fishery used by the open-lake
fishers of Barangay Bucal

Flow diagram of fish catch sold by the open-lake fishers in
Barangay Bucal

Flow diagram showing the legislation of City Ordinances
pertaining to the management of the municipal water of
Calamba City

Flow diagram showing the creation of informal rules
pertaining to the management of the municipal water of
Calamba City

Flow diagram of how disputes are adjudicated within the
management regime of the municipal water of Calamba
City

xiv

PAGE

138

138

139

140

141

141

142

142

APPENDIX
PLATES

1

Sa
Sb

10
i

LIST OF APPENDIX D PLATES.

Digman (Hydrilla verticillata) collected from the
protected area in Barangay Bucal (Adapted from
Concepcion, 2014)

Sintas (Vallisnaria gigantia) collected from the protected
area in Barangay Bucal (Adapted from Concepcion, 2014)

‘A yankaw about to be placed in the fish sanctuary
(Adapted from CASD, 2012)

Bamboo poles set every 1.5 meters along the perimeter of
the fish sanctuary in Barangay Bucal

Clear stream water before an episode of heavy rain
‘The same stream after an episode of heavy rain

Household trash disposed in one of the tributaries running
through Barangay Bucal

Kitchen waste-water disposed directly into one of the
tributaries running within Barangay Bucal

Official fisherfolk identification card issued to registered
I fisherfolks of Calamba City

Calamba City Task Force Bantay Lawa Headquarter within
the Fish Sanctuary

Task Force Bantay Lawa patrol boat

Patrol equipment used by the Task Force Bantay Lawa

Sample schedule of patrolling duties of the Bantay Lawa
fishwardens

144

145
145

146

147

147
148
148

ABSTRACT

MONSERATE, NOLAN FEDERICO. University of the Philippines Los Bajios, June
2017. Determinants of Compliance to Formal Choice Rules among Artisanal Fishers

in Calamba City, Philippines.

Major Professor: DR. RICO C. ANCOG

The behavior of resource users within common pool resources (CPRs), such as
coastal fisheries, is directly influenced by the characteristics of the resource, the resource
users themselves, and the rules that gover the use of the resource. The primary aim of
this study is to identify the determinant factors influencing the cooperative behavior of
Barangay Bucal artisanal fishers, measured as consistent compliance to the formal choice
rules, within the coastal fishery of Calamba City. In this study, formal choice rules refer
to the enacted prescriptions of actions the fishers must, must not, or may take in the city’s

coastal fishery.

A questionaire survey was conducted last August 2015 using items previously
proposed by Agrawal as recurrent factors associated with cooperative behavior in CPRs.
The mode of the fishers’ compliance to the formal choice rules was also evaluated in the

survey.

Based on the skewness of their Compliance Index (CD), it was discovered that the
consistent compliance to the formal choice rules among the artisanal fishers is moderate
despite the existence of an alternative set of informal choice rules. Using phi, the fishers”

level of wealth, age, educational attainment, mode of utilizing Laguna de Bay catfish, and

avi

membership status in the local fishermen’s association were found to be strongly
associated with the consistency of their compliance to the formal choice rules.
Specifically, through simple logistic regression it was revealed that the odds for
consistent compliance is higher if a fisher a) has medium to high number of household
fixtures, b) is more than 50 years old in age, c) has finished highschool, d) markets his
Laguna de Bay catfish catch, and e) is a member of the organisation Barangay Bucal
Fisheries and Aquatic Resources Management Council/Sagisag ng Mangingisda ng

Barangay Bucal (BFARMC/SAMBBU).

As such, these results show that increasing cooperation among the artisanal
fishers in using the formal choice rules, which can potentially improve the conservation
of the Calamba City-coastal fishery, is possible. Specifically, this can happen a) if the
fishers are not experiencing survival constraints; b) if they have the necessary set of
cognitive skills, interest, and knowledge of the political and ecological issues surrounding
the management of the coastal fishery; and, c) if they have developed strong moral norms

in favour of following the formal choice rules.

xvii

CHAPTERI

INTRODUCTION

The concept of institutions suggests rules in the form of “in case of X do Y” that
are customary or shared, normative and have the eventual effect of influencing human
interactions (Hodgson, 2006; Ostrom, 2005; Basurto ef al., 2010). As it is, institutions
include norms, conventions, and legal rules (Vatn, 2006). Institutional arrangements,
which are set of related institutions or rules that establishes “the relationships between
individuals in relation to things” (Schlagger, 1990; Polski & Ostrom, 1999), act as
mechanisms for adjusting and ordering behavior, and eventually individual interactions.
As such, institutional arrangements are necessary in situations that require coordination
of two or more individuals, or groups of individuals (Polski & Ostrom, 1999). Such
situation is prevalent when it comes to the management of natural resources primarily in
the management of common pool resources (CPR) where the constant threat of “free
rider problem” can act as a major disincentive for their users to invest in their

management (Thomson & Freudenberger, 1997; Thomson, 1992; McGinnis, 2010).

Management of CPRs is important since their exploitation is always a “commons
situation” (Gardner, Ostrom & Walker, 1994 as cited in ICLARM and NSC, 1996;
Schlager, 1990; Wade, 1994) that can become a “commons dilemma” when their non-
excludability and subtractable benefit-characteristics are joined with scarcity. This results

in joint users interfering with each other’s use producing rent dissipation (Baland &

Platteau, 1996) that if left unchecked could realize what Hardin called “Tragedy of the
Commons” (Ostrom, 1990). In coastal fisheries, commons dilemma takes the form of
provision problems and allocation problems, such as stock externality, technological

externality and assignment problems (Schlager, Blomquist, & Tang, 1994).

Indeed, institutional arrangements are vital in the management of CPRs including

coastal fisheries. It must be emphasized that compliance to in:

tional arrangements by
the resource users or technically their cooperation in terms of allowing the said set of
rules to coordinate their actions is structured by the attributes of the resource being
exploited, the resource users themselves, and the local resource management institutional
arrangements which are collectively called the contextual variables or exogenous factors
(ICLARM & NSC, 1996). It must also be emphasized based on the comparative work of
Agrawal (2002) on the book-length studies of Wade (1988), Ostrom (1990), and Baland
and Plateu (1996), that there is no single widely accepted list of conditions of the above-
mentioned attributes that automatically makes institutional arrangements designed for
CPR management sustainable. Rather, it was shown that under some frequently occurring
combinations of conditions, members of small groups can design and comply with
institutional arrangements that help in the sustainable management of their CPRs. These
recurrent conditions are later summarized by Agrawal into a list of 32 critical enabling

conditions (Appendix B).

Agrawal (2002), despite conceding to the impossibility of creating a universal list
of critical enabling conditions, nevertheless subscribed to the notion that a list of them,

such as the one in his study, can rather serve as starting point in the search for a

compelling explanation for the sustainability of a given CPR. Overall, Agrawal
concluded that instead of focusing on lists of factors or conditions that can be applied to
all sustainably-managed commons, it is more productive to focus instead on

configurations of local conditions that are responsible for such sustainability.

Statement of the Problem

Resource management is occurring in the municipal waters of Calamba City. This
is evident in the involvement of its fisherfolks, the City Government of Calamba, and
other government and non-government agencies in the integrated process of information

gathering, analysis, planning, consultation, decision-making, allocation of resources, and

formulation and implementation with enforcement mechanism built-in) of rules

which coordinate fishing acti s inside the coastal fishery (FAO, 1997). As such, it
must then be emphasized that the said management is in effect a case of CPR

management since all coastal fisheries are essentially CPRs (Gardner et al., 1990).

This classification of Calamba City’s coastal fishery as CPR is also evident on the
nature of the physical characteristics - excludability and subtractability - of the
appropriated fishes and other lake species which are the primary interest of the artisanal
fishers in their ulitzation of the fishery and whose increased productivity and sustainable
exploitation are the objectives of the fishery management taking place (McGinnis, 2010;
Ostrom, E & Ostrom, V, 1977 as cited in Thomson & Freudenberger, 1997; Appendix

B). In relation to this, it is pointed out that the said resource units are non-excludable, as

any open-lake fishers in Laguna de Bay can potentially harvest the fishes, and that they
are subtractable, for once the fishes are appropriated they will no longer be available to

other fishers.

In light of the classification of the management of Calamba City’s coastal fishery
as a case of CPR management, its common users must therefore coordinate their
behavior, or cooperate with each other within the existing management regime.
Otherwise, freerider problems will set in or be aggravated to the point of fostering the
adoption of shutdown practices among themselves. This can lead to the collapse of the
management regime and the persistence of the commons dilemma as they likely exist in

the fishery already.

Thus, with respect to the need of fostering cooperation among the artisanal fishers
in the form of their consistent compliance to the formal choice mules, it becomes
imperative that the factors or “configuration of local conditions” positively influencing
such compliance be elucidated. Emphasis is given to formal choice rules since 83.33% of
the rules formally instituted in the said fishery are choice rules in type. Aside from this,
formal choice rules can also have the most direct effect on the fishery’s sustainability as
they are the written prescriptions of actions the artisanal fishers must, must not, or may

take in various circumstances of their open-lake fishing activities (Cole, n.d.).

Since the consistent compliance to the formal choice rules does not have a
universal blueprint (Agrawal, 2002), Agrawal’s list of critical enabling conditions
provided the scope of the socioeconomic and exogenous factors used in the study.

Furthermore, as the study requires at least a population of artisanal fishers of moderate

size from the coastal area of Calamba City, the population of artisanal fishers in

Barangay Bucal is selected.

Significance of the Study

The conduct of institutional analysis on the cooperative behavior of Brgy Bucal’s
artisanal fishers has reaffirmed that as an approach, institutitonal analysis can be a useful
critical first step in evaluating community-level fishery management systems for the

purpose of providing information on their essential features, operations and impacts.

‘As this study used the institutional analysis approach, the set of socio-economic
and exogenous factors and cooperation indicators that were used can be transferred and
employed in the analysis of the cooperative behaviors of other fishery groups, such as the
artisanal fishers in the other nine coastal barangays of Calamba City. The data collected
for Barangay Bucal can therefore serve as a first entry in the systematic and comparative
analysis of the cooperative behavior of the different fisher groups within the context of

the existing fishery management in Calamba City.

More importantly, the study can provide directions for the formulation of actions
to further improve the conservation of the fishery, specifically the part appropriated by
the artisanal fishers of Barangay Bucal. Particularly, the results of this study can indicate
what conditions can bring about successful, long-enduring, and locally sustainable
implementation of the formal choice rules which can be used by the barangay’s fishery

users and stakeholders through the Fisheries and Aquatic Resources Management

Council (FARMC) as well as the City Government of Calamba as basis in their

policymaking and planning.

Objectives of the Study

Generally, this research aims to asses the determinants influencing the compliance

to the formal choice rules within the fishery management of Calamba City.

Specifically, this study intends to:

a. assess the socioeconomic characteristics of the artisanal fishers affected by the
management of the open-lake fishery in Calamba City, Laguna;

b. assess the charateristics of the exogenous factors in the management of the open-
lake fishery in Calamba City, Laguna;

c. evaluate the compliance to the formal choice rules among the artisanal fishers of
Calamba City, Laguna; and,

d. examine the relationship of the artisanal fishers’ socio-economic characteristics
and their perceptions of the exogenous factors with their compliance to the formal

choice rules.

Research Hypothesis

Based on the conceptual framework and related studies reviewed, the following

hypotheses are formulated in this study:

1. The configuration of socio-economic characteristics determining the compliance
to the formal choice fules among the open-lake fishers is not consistent to the
configuration formulated by Agrawal.

2. The configuration of the exogenous factors determining the compliance to the
formal choice rules among the open-lake fishers is not comparable to the
configuration formulated by Agrawal.

3. Majority of the open-lake fishers are in complete compliance to the formal choice
tules.

4. The compliance to the formal choice rules among the open-lake fishers is
determined by the following socio-economic characteristics and exogenous
factors: size of fish catch, fishing gears used, age, educational attainment, family
size, level of relative wealth, level of dependence on the resource, moral norms,
characteristics of leaders, price level of the harvested species, involvement of the
state in the management, monitoring, adjudication, and sanctioning mechanisms,

and simplicity of the rules.

Conceptual Framework

As emphasized above, institutional arrangements influence individual interactions
in CPR managements. However, its presence does not immediately lead to coordination
and collective action of CPR users. Alternatively, in order to achieve desired outcomes in

CPR managements, other factors, specifically the resource and resource users, should be

considered.

As it is, these factors do not act independently of each other. Instead, causal
relationships exist among them aside from the one that exists between them and the
resulting cooperation situations within CPR management systems. In this scheme, local
institutional arrangements, structured by the characteristics of the other factors including
those from its own, affect the actions of resource users by shaping the incentives and
disincentives they face in the different cooperation situations. In other words, individual
user’s choice of behavior in cooperation situations will depend on how he or she weighs
the benefits and costs of cooperation and non-cooperation. This is in turn based on how

he or she percieves the characteristics of the different exogenous factors.

Figure 1 below summarizes the exogenous factors and their hypothesized
relationships under the study. In the said figure, modes of fishing refer to the decisions
made by the artisanal fishers of Barangay Bucal on whether or not to consistently observe
the formal choice rules when they harvest from the fishery once granted access. As such,

these situations include whether they should:

EXOGENOUS FACTORS
RESOURCE FACTORS RESOURCE USER FACTORS INSTITUTIONAL
© Physical factors © Demographic factors [ARRANGEMENT FACTORS
© Biological factors © Social factors "ol Compatioahty factor
© Technological factors, © Economic factors I>) enforcement factor
© Cultural factors
mM iaenatiscer ‘© Compliance factor
© Exeternal assistance
factor

© CONSISTENT COMPLIANCE TO THE

CHARACTERISTICS

Ge FORMAL CHOICE RULES
SOCIOECONOMIC

EXOGENOUS FACTORS ‘© INCONSISTENT COMPLIANCE TO

‘THE FORMAL CHOICE RULES

BARANGAY BUCAL ARTISANAL

Fig 1. Schematic diagram showing the process of the formation of the artisanal fishers’
behavior within the coastal fishery in Calamba City

L
2.

3.

Inhibit from fishing inside the sanctuary;
Inhibit from using electrofishing gears;
Inhibit from using dredge;

10

4, Inhibit from using motorized push-net;
5. Inhibit from using tibog; and,

6. Inhibit from using fine mesh net.

For the resource-related factors, physical factors refer to the size and general
condition of the fishery as well as the observability of its boundaries. Biological factors,
on the other hand, pertain to the size and composition of the fishers’ catch as well as the
visibility and predictability of conditions of the fish stocks in the fishery. Meanwhile
technological factors cover the composition of fishing vessels and gears used in the
fishery, number of vessels and gears owned by the fishers, and monitorability of banned

gears in the fishery.

For the resource user-related factors, demographic attributes pertain to the
population size of fishers inside the fishery as well as their age, gender, educational
attainment, family size, ethnicity, religion, length of residence in the barangay, length of
fishing experience and past-experience in non-fishing occupation. Social attributes on
the other hand pertain to the presence of communication avenues among fishers, the
frequency of such communication, boundaries and interdependencies between fishers,
characteristics of their leaders, any successful past experience in cooperation, and
membership in fishermen’s associations. Meanwhile, economic attributes encompass the
relative wealth of fishers, their level of dependence on the fishery, orientation of their
fishing activities, and fairness in the allocation of benefits from the fishery. Lastly,
cultural attributes refer to the fishers’ moral norms, while market attributes pertain to the

stability of market as well as the value of resource units.

nu

For the institutional arrangement-related factors, complexity attribute pertains to
the knowledge of fishers about fishing rules. On the other hand, compatibility attributes
pertain to the kind of decision-making process available as well as the general
compatibility of rules to local conditions. Meanwhile, enforcement attributes pertain to
the level of rule violation, the sanctioning and adjudication mechanisms available, and
accountability of monitors and other officials. Lastly, the external assistance attributes
pertain to the level of involvement of the government in the fishery management as well

as the amount of external aid given to support it.

CHAPTER I

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

Contextual Variables and Collective
Action of Users

Although the experience of commons dilemma or rent dissipation is necessary for
institutional arrangements to be subscribed, it is nevertheless insufficient. In theory, the
action arena for the collective actions of the resource users is structured by exogenous
factors or contextual variables that characterize key attributes of the resource, the
resource users and the local resource management institutional arrangements.
Specifically, these contextual variables are a) the community institutional and
organizational arrangements variable, b) the biological, physical and technological
variable, c) the market variable, d) the resource user, stakeholder and community
variable, e) the external institutional and organizational arrangements variable, and f) the

exogenous variable (ICLARM & NSC, 1996).

In this case, the institutional arrangements, structured by the contextual variables,
affect the actions of the resource users by shaping the incentives and disincentives they
face to coordinate and cooperate in resource governance, management and use. The

incentives in turn, shape the patterns of interaction that result when resource users select

13

and implement resource use strategies. These interactions result in outcomes which may,

in tum, affect other outcomes (ICLARM & NSC, 1996).

Effects of Exogenous Attributes
‘on Collective Action

Resource Scarcity and Survival Constraints

The success of institutional arrangements governing CPRs such as fisheries are
more likely if there is great demand (i.e. up to a limit) for it and the more vital its role in
the survival of the users (Wade, 1994). If appropriators do not obtain a major part of their
income from the resource or value it highly for some other purposes (i.e. source of
insurance or credit) (Baland & Platteau, 1996), the high costs of organizing and
maintaining a self-governing system may not be worth their effort (Lawry, 1990; Gibson,

2001).

In societies where resources are abundant, people who are dependent on the latter
typically do not see their finite nature. In such resource systems, the presence of flexible
rules and the absence of conservation rules are usually observed. However, as
productivity lowers due to enhanced competition between the users or from enhanced
competition and the erosion of the environmental capital stock, strict access rules come
about, and if conditions warrant, strict conservation rules too (Baland & Platteau, 1996).

Ostrom (2005), in relation to this kind of observation, posits that appropriators find little

reason to invest costly time and effort in organizing if the resources are abundant; instead
self-organization is likely to occur only after they observe substantial scarcity. Wade
(1994) in addressing the possibility if whether the Kottapalle type of irrigation
organization can be adopted elsewhere in India concluded the same that it is not likely
since such organization is only found where the net collective benefit is relatively high as

exhibited in villages with increased water stress.

However, too much resource scarcity is also detrimental for collective action.

During times when individual incomes extracted from the resource fall below the
subsistence level without compensation from alternative sources of income, the
temptation to violate conservation rules becomes irresistible. This is since, owing to the
survival constraint, the discount rate of future incomes becomes infinite and free riding

behavior appears as a natural weapon in the struggle for sheer subsistence (Baland &

Platteau, 1996).

In general, subsistence-constrained users have much greater incentives than more
well-off users to seek to conserve their resource base, since they have limited alternative
income resources. Nevertheless, if the resource base is initially degraded, they may be
unable, owing to the low level of their wealth and to severe credit imperfections, to build
it up to the level where it can be optimally maintained (Baland & Platteau, 1996). Thus,
just like during periods of severe scarcity, segments of the population cannot be forced to
contribute to the conservation of a resource if they are desperately poor since their
concern for sheer survival in the short run may lead them to heavily discount the future

benefits of conservation strategy and to overweigh the present costs. Such is not the case,

15

however, with the richer resource-dependent users who can safely adopt a more
conservative use of the resource as they believe that with their level of wealth, the total
gain from following conservationist strategies would outweigh its total cost (Baland &

Platteau, 1996).

Group Size, Group Communication,
Moral Norms, and Leadership

According to Schlagger (1990) aside from the expected collective benefit
suggested by Wade (1994) as the main factor explaining the presence or absence of
collective organization in the villages he studied, other factors - noticeability and
measurability of the problem; number of involved users; and the possibility to devise
enforceable rules - are also critical. Incidentally, Baland and Plateau (1996), in their
review of important literatures on cooperation in CPRs, came up with a similar list of

factors.

The size of the user group is preferable to be small (Wade, 1994; Baland &
Plateau, 1996; Schlager, 1990). If individuals know one another, can observe one
another’s behaviors, and are in continuous interaction with one another such as in small-
group settings, any pattem of collective behavior, including cooperation, can be
sustained, which will make each individual better off than under universal defection. The
ability to observe directly or indirectly the actions of others is advantageous for

cooperative actions since it increases assurance from being cheated as the users can base

16

their actions on the past actions of others; which means they can immediately defect
during repeated interactions if the possibility of being suckered arises. This assurance is
furthered if the appropriators” interrelationships is continuous or intertwined in which
their interaction with respect to resource management could not be isolated from other
interests thus giving them incentive, just like with easy observability, to consider the
more indirect and long-term consequences of their choices instead of paying exclusive
attention to immediate costs and benefits (Baland & Platteau, 1996). Furthermore, with
respect to the profusion of equilibria that may exist in repeated collective interactions,
small groups may be at an advantage since they allow the possibility for pre-play
communication wherein individuals, the users, can reveal and signal their intended plans

of actions thus enabling them to choose good equilibria (Baland & Plateau, 1996).

Small group size is important in sustaining the trust or assurance needed in the
cooperation between individuals, it is also critical in the development of moral norms.
Moral norms are internalized behavior patterns that are maintained even in the absence of
external monitoring and sanctioning since the conformity of the act becomes a motive of
its own as it is intrinsically rewarding or because deviation is intrinsically costly (Weber,
1971; Opp, 1979; Jones, 1984; Taylor, 1987 as cited in Baland & Plateau, 1996). As

such the main function of moral norms vis-a-

is availability of resource units, which are
borne during times of scarcity or low productivity as brought by critical pressure (i.e.
depletion, degradation) on natural resources, is to ensure that the latter remains viable for
the group. As it is, well established moral norms sustained by primary and secondary
socialization can make collective actions successful since users tend a) to adopt others’

viewpoint when making decisions that may harm others’ interests and to feel internally

7

rewarded when behaving in other-regarding, ways; b) to be confident that others will
abide by the same code of good behaviors as themselves; c) to cling to this code even
when they had unpleasant experiences in which they were stickers; d) to feel guilty after
they have (perhaps mistakenly) deviated from the moral rule; and e) to feel vengeful and
willing to punish detectable free-riders including those who refuse to do so and continue

to entertain good relations with free-riders (Baland & Platteau, 1996).

According to Goette, Huffman, and Meier (2006), another way in which moral
norms for cooperation are also developed is through membership in an organization. An
important feature of organizations is that they constitute a social boundary, or group
determining with which people an individual interacts on a daily basis. For Goette, et. al.
(2006) this social aspect of organizations has an important benefit of transforming
individuals, leading to internalized roles, norms and values that affect behavior. In their
study involving Swiss Army trainee-officers assigned to different platoons, Goette, ef. al.
(2006) found that group membership has a strong impact on underlying preferences for
cooperation, so that subjects prefer to cooperate with their own group as opposed to the
out-group. This, according to them, is due to the direct impact of group membership on
the beliefs of individuals that members of their own group are more likely to be
cooperative. This is vital since cooperation, as pointed above, is conditional and increases
with the belief that others will also cooperate. Furthermore, Goette, ef. al. (2006) also
found that group membership increases willingness to enforce a norm of cooperative
behavior towards fellow group members as they observed that punishment by a selected
subject was much stronger when defection affects an in-group member as opposed to an

‘out-group member.

18

‘As mentioned above, communication between users is important in establishing
assurance, and as such its frequency should be increased since its impact is rather short-
lived. Moral norms also improve through communication especially when promise-
making is involved. According to Ostrom (2005) the advantage of communication is that
not only does it transform players from mere strangers into real people, thus shifting the
bases for decision making for cooperation from reason to emotion (Frank, 1988 as cited
in Baland & Plateau, 1996), it also provides an opportunity for individuals to offer and
extract promises of cooperation for non-enforceable contracts. This is salient since, aside
from clearly signaling one’s intention which raises assurance, “promise-keeping” is a
moral norm in itself that is more fundamental than “cooperation per se” and which would
lead to people, when violations are observable, to make violent reproaches when
someone is breaking a promise, is being uncooperative or is taking advantage of others
who are keeping a promise (Ostrom, ef. al., 1994 as cited by Baland & Plateau, 1996).
These possible outcomes would provide additional disincentive to cheating when the

group size is small and therefore more reason to trust the other users.

But even if communication as well as promise-making is not explicit, provided
relevant moral norms are established and strong, group members can make their
decisions to cooperate straightaway since their mutual expectations are sufficiently
structured. This is why in large groups where relationships are largely anonymous and
where private sanctioning activities are certain to bring no future reward to the punishing
agent, the self-policing mechanisms provided by moral norms becomes relevant as a

practical way of solving collective action problems, even besting options of using a

19

central agency to act as an external norm enforcer and the users themselves inflicting

sanctions upon one another in a decentralized manner (Baland & Platteau, 1996).

The same commitment to cooperation, when normative considerations (moral
norms) such as fairness are present, is also obtained even if individuals who are
anonymous to each other play an equivalent of a one-shot game. Although cooperation is
more likely to happen when interactions will be repeated infinitely or indefinitely,
interactions occurring in finite number of periods including those that are rather short can
still produce cooperation since a) people probably do not use such a sophisticated device
as the backwards-induction argument when they reason about their strategic choice, and
b) people may well cooperate until near the end of finitely repeated games or in short
they follow a tit-for-tat strategy if they entertain some slight doubts about the type of

strategy followed by their opponents (Baland & Plateau, 1996).

Another advantage of small group size when it comes to producing cooperation
among its members is its lesser vulnerability to the problems of incentive dilution (Olson,
1982 as cited by Baland & Platteau, 1996) and diffusion-of-responsibility (Frank, 1988 as
cited by Baland & Platteau, 1996). In incentive dilution, cooperation is discouraged since
as more idividuals make up the group the incentive that an individual gets from
cooperating is reduced while its cost remains constant. On the other hand, when there is
diffusion-of-responsibility, the problem of fostering cooperation comes from lessened
pressure to cooperate since it is not focused on anyone and the responsibility is shared
among all of the users. Hence, the incentive to free-ride decreases as the group size

becomes smaller since the collective income is less and less shared and the responsi


20

to cooperate becomes more and more focused. But aside from these, and as implied also
by the relative ease in which small groups can conduct pre-play communication, the
smallness of the group size also allows for agreements among the members to be reached
at low negotiation costs. This would include the costs of communication and bargaining,
as well as, possibly, those of creating and maintaining a formal organization (Olson, 1982

as cited in Baland & Platteau, 1996).

Role models also have important function in peoples’ decision to exhibit other-
regarding behavior which is necessary to foster cooperation. In this, role models are
viewed as privileged agents who reactivate emotional capacities associated with primary
socialization processes. That means that political leaders as well as other forms of role
models reactivate cooperation-fostering moral norms when they publicly behave in

cooperative ways (Baland & Platteau, 1996).

Aside from this, leaders are important in fostering cooperation since they can
lower the cost of sustaining the institutional arrangement by creating the necessary
consensus or, at least, to drive enough resource users to adopt cooperative behavior. For
effective leadership, traditional ones seems to be particularly welcome in so far as it

entails no set-up costs since it is already in existence (Baland & Platteau, 1996).

2

User Heterogeneity

Users exhibiting heterogeneity in ability and yield may have difficulty in
willingly organizing themselves for specific regulations. That is, regulations that pose
disproportionate constraints on some users will be opposed by those that will be
adversely affected. Indeed, if users have equal abilities and yields, the net gains from
effort controls would be evenly spread, and given large estimates of rent dissipation, rules
governing effort would be quickly adopted (Johnson & Libecap, 1982 as cited in Baland
& Platteau, 1996). For example, total effort in a coastal fishery could be restricted
through uniform quotas for eligible fishermen. But if the fishermen are heterogeneous,
uniform quota will be costly to assign and enforce because of opposition from more
productive fishermen. Thus, without side payments to those who will be
disproportionately constrained, uniform quotas could leave more productive fishermen
worse off, hence the opposition (Johnson & Libecap, 1982 as cited in Baland & Platteau,
1996). Thus, the main implication one can draw from the analysis, is that where agents
are heterogencous, regulating the commons efficiently may cause conflicts of interests to

erupt (Baland & Platteau, 1996).

In many instances, regulation through the individual reduction of each agent’s
level of effort alone is not possible. In those cases, regulation must take place through the
exclusion of some users, the remaining ones being then in a position to reap and share
amongst themselves the benefits of such a measure through the increased productivity of
their resource appropriations; in fact, exclusion may well be a necessary step before any

other efficiency-improving measure is contemplated. However, on this it must be

2

emphasized that if the uscrs are risk-averse, such method of regulation will not be
acceptable. That is, if the selection of the members to be excluded will be uniformly
random, meaning all of them are candidates for exclusion, and that no side payments or
alternative source of the benefit in question is offered, exclusion will not be opted by the
group. Therefore, one may expect that, when regulation through exclusion must take
place, exclusion will not be random but will be invariably directed towards a definite
subgroup of members of the community. One may also expect that, when the group is
homogeneous, exclusion will not always be resorted to and, as a result, overpopulation of

productive units is likely (Baland & Platteau, 1996).

Regulation in the CPR can also be done via designing a tax schedule. However,
such an instrument can be difficult to obtain if everything relevant to the problem is not
known to everybody. For starters, in order for a taxation scheme to work the proceeds of
the taxes should not be siphoned off by the central state, since every productive member
of the community will be worse off then; instead, the proceeds should be redistributed to
the members of the taxed community. Second, the members should receive a share of the
tax proceed proportional to the amount of variable factor they were applying in the initial
situation, which is one characterized by overexploitation (Baland & Platteau, 1996).
However, in many instances, the community or the traditional authority is not in a
position to have all the information relevant to the problem. Here, the phenomena of
“private information” may be encountered. Typically, preferences and private
endowments are likely to be private information; that is, only the agent concerned knows
exactly his preferences, skills and endowment. It is important that these information are

known by a central authority, which must be neutral and credible, so that they can be

23

processed and an allocation for the proceeds be proposed. The critical question in this
case however, is if whether or not there exists some way of passing from the announced
preference and endowments to an allocation that provides the proper incentives for agents
to tell the truth. Hence, in the presence of private information, if an efficient allocation
has to be achieved, then some agents will be hurt, and were they allowed to do so, they
would veto the regulation scheme. However in the case that the users are identical in their
endowments, skills and preferences, the private information problem disappears (Baland

& Plateau, 1996).

Educational Attainment

High educational attainment has been widely argued to positively affect civic
engagement. In here civic engagement takes various forms including but not limited to
voting, interest group membership and activity, volunteering, and being involved in local
groups, such as committees and commissions, churches or citizen’s coalition and
movements (Young, 2011). As such, it can also be argued that resource-user cooperation
in the management or conservation of a resource (i.e. specifically public and CPR) is also
Positively affected by higher educational attainment as it is another form of civic
engagement in the form of volunteering in the activites of an interest group or local
groups. According Young (2011), cooperation among resource users with higher
educational attainment is increased as they have greater understanding of not only

political but also ecological happenings, history and how these events could impact them

24

Specifically, Milligan, Moretti and Oreopoulos (2003), pointed out that such
enhancement and broadening of civic participation could be due to education equipping
the resource users with cognitive skills that enable them to select able leaders, understand
the issues upon which they will vote, act as a check on the potential excesses of the
government, and recognize corruption in leaders. At the same time, education can also
improve citizen’s interest and knowledge of political and ecological issues, their

involvement in the political process, and ultimately, the effectiveness of their political

participation.

Age, Values and Cooperative Behavior

Values are defined as desirable, trans-situational goals, varying in importance,
that serve as guiding principles in people’s lives (Schwartz, n.d.). They differ from moral
norms as they can be ordered by importance relative to one another. Values affect
behavior only if they are activated (Verplanken & Holland, 2002 as cited in Schwartz,
n.d.). As such, the more important values are, the more they become accessible or easily
come to mind, and the more they relate to behavior (Shwartz, n.d). Based on the
motivational goal they express, ten basic values are derived: self-direction, stimulation,
hedonism, achievement, power, security, conformity, tradition, benevolence, and

universalism.

Life circumstances make the pursuit or expression of different values more or less

rewarding or costly. Typically, people adapt their values to their life circumstances. They

25

upgrade the importance they attribute to values they can readily attain and downgrade the
importance of values whose pursuit is blocked (Schawrtz, & Bardi, 1997 as cited in
‘Schawrtz, n.d.). Upgrading attainable values and downgrading thwarted values applies to
most, but not to all values. The reverse occurs with values that concern material well-
being (power) and security. When such values are blocked, their importance increases;
when they are easily attained their importance drops. People’s age is one of the
characteristics that largely determine the life circumstances to which they are exposed

(Schawrtz, n.d.).

With age, strength, energy, cognitive speed, memory, and sharpness of the senses
decline. As such, security values maybe more important because a safe and predictable
environment is more critical as capacities to cope with change wane. Conformity and
tradition values may also be more important with age because accepted ways of doing

thing are less demanding and threatening (Shwartz, n.d.).

Rule Legitimacy, Monitoring and
Sanctioning, and Rule Clarity

In deciding how to behave in the CPR, users do not only take cues coming from
the size of the group or the existing relevant moral norms, the importance of which are
pegged in their capacity to provide the user-players assurance from becoming suckers, or
from role models and leaders, to influence them into cooperating, they also assess the

degree of legitimacy of rules and institutions. It must be emphasized that the users”

26

compliance with a rule is indeed strongly influenced by the extent to which they think
that the rule and the enforcing agency are legitimate. By legitimate, the rule and the
enforcing authority must be appropriate and consistent with the users’ internalized norms
of faimess. But more than this, the rule and enforcing authority must be able to provide
favorable or positive outcomes for the users to perceive that latter as legitimate, that is for
the users to willingly comply to them (Baland & Plateau, 1996).

Another comerstone in sustaining institutional arrangements in CPRs would be
the monitoring and sanctioning mechanism that is put in place to see to it that they arc
complied with. Basically, this component is another tool that provides assurance to the
interacting users that they will not be suckers if they will follow the rules. Monitoring and
sanctioning are able to do this by breaking the logic of the backward-induction argument
underlying the non-cooperative outcome of the finitely repeated game which is the result
when penalties are meted to defectors thus making defection less beneficial than
cooperation in whatever period of the game (Baland & Plateau, 1996). As such,
monitoring and sanctioning is especially important in the context of large groups since in
the absence of the advantages of a small group, such as easy observability of actions,
continuity of interactions, and easy communication of the members, or the strong
influence of moral norms, coercion (i.e. in the form of monitoring and sanctioning) is the
only device that can make rational, self-interested individuals act in their common

interest (Olson, 1965 as cited by Baland & Platteau, 1996).

On sanctioning, to foster cooperation, penalties must be meted gradually,
especially in cases involving imperfect information. This is done especially for first time

offenses in consideration of the possibility that the supposed offender might not have

27

committed the offense; thus avoiding raising resentment from those who are indeed
unfairly punished and their subsequent unwillingness to follow rules in the future.
However, as repetition of the same offense is attributed to the same individual,

application of harsher and harsher penalties becomes justified. But even if information is

perfect, graduated sanctioning is still ideal since more than punishing offenders, the
purpose of sanctions is to remind or warn individuals of the importance of compliance.
Again, just like with imperfect information, graduated sanctioning in this case avoids
raising resentment and unwillingness to conform to rules in the future resulting from
meting large fine or harsh punishment on a person facing an unusual problem (Ostrom,
1990). Thus, according to Ostrom (1990) graduated punishments ranging from
insignificant fines all the way to banishment, applied in settings in which sanctioners
know a great deal about the personal circumstances of the other appropriators and the
potential harm that could be created by excessive sanctions, may be far more effective

than a major fine imposed on a first offender.

Apparently, detection of free-riding in many field settings is difficult and costs
have to be incurred to make it possible. As such, the task of monitoring and imposing
sanctions could be entrusted to an external authority. But as already pointed above, when
there is imperfect information or imperfect monitorability, the sanctioners, which in this
case is the external authority, cannot avoid making errors in imposing punishments. If
this is what is happening, the dominant strategy of the users can revert back to defection
or violation of the imposed rules especially if there is a high chance that the external
authority will impose sanctions incorrectly, meaning there is a high probability for

violators to escape punishments. To make monitoring effective in this case or when there

28

is imperfect monitorability, high amounts of penalties or severe punishments should be
meted out to violators; that is, the more costly the monitoring, the higher the penalty must
be to induce rule compliance. But considering that high or harsh penalties can produce
resentment and non-compliance of rules, not to mention the weakening of social pressure
against violators when they are perceived to be unfair or unjustified, lessening the
imperfectability of the monitoring process is more advisable. This is since it can lower
the cost of monitoring when it is conducted and therefore decrease the degree of penalty
needed to sanction violators. To do this, it is advisable whenever viable that the group
size be taken advantage of for monitoring. Which means that if applicable, the
monitoring this function be delegated to the community itself or to its local authorities.
Monitoring costs can also be reduced by shifting to methods of resource conservation that
are relatively easy to check out (Baland & Platteau, 1996). An example of this would be
using the less costly to monitor “gear restriction method” over the highly contestable and
therefore more costly “control of individual vessel quotas method” or “minimum-

size/weight restrictions” (Sutinen, ef. al., 1990 as cited in Baland & Platteau, 1996).

But even if monitoring will be delegated to the community, imperfect
monitorability is still expected to happen resulting in what is pointed out above as a
resurgence of cheating as a viable strategy. This is so since monitoring by the users is a
positive function of the relative cost of monitoring with respect to the expected benefits,
while cheating is a positive function of its benefit relative to its expected cost. Thus, the
striking result is that, at equilibrium, cheating always occurs with positive probability,
and yet the cheaters themselves are not monitored. This happens as monitoring is only

profitable if there is a positive chance to prevent a cheating event; if no cheating occurs,

29

the costs of monitoring outweighs its benefit thus producing the imperfect monitorability
in this case. On the other hand, cheating is always profitable if no monitoring occurs

(Weissing & Ostrom, 1991 as cited by Baland & Platteau, 1996).

If the users will employ the service of specialized guards, the resource system
might become efficient, although this is not always the case, due to the rates of cheating
and monitoring being decreased. However, due to the presence of the specialized agents,
the incentive of the users to monitor each others’ behavior may also be reduced thus
changing the monitoring game being played by the users from being an assurance game

into a chicken game (Weissing & Ostrom, 1991 as cited by Baland & Platteau, 1996).

If monitoring is solely tasked to the users, cheating rate may increase as a result of
an increase in the number of group members. Basically produced by incentive dilution
problem, this happens since the total benefit of detection of a cheating event is evenly
spread among all users, whether they monitor or not. As a result, the individual benefit
from monitoring and detection decreases with the number of users thus creating the
incentive, when the group size is big, to shirk or free-ride (Weissing & Ostrom, 1991 as
cited by Baland & Platteau, 1996). However, large group size is not the only condition
that triggers cheating rate movement; in fact it can be decreased if a) the detection
probability of monitoring is increased such as when conservation methods that are easy to
monitor are used; b) the cost of monitoring, which is a function of the first condition, is
decreased; c) the size of penalty, which is a function of the second condition, is also
decreased; and d) when the loss of benefit due to undetected cheating is reduced (Baland

& Plateau, 1996).

30

Users who willingly follow rules are assumed to do so because they perceive that
the latter enhance their benefits from the CPR. Thus, it is necessary that the rules need
not be unclear and ambiguous since these creates misunderstanding about the policy and
distrust on its implementors which can account for non-cooperative behavior among
individuals even in the contexts where they could apparently benefit from the resource
policy (Baland & Platteau, 1996). However, it must be emphasized that this realization of
the benefits of a policy can happen ex ante; which means, that the users could be against
the regulation and actively oppose it ex ante due to perceived uncertainty on how it will
affect them, even though such rules are really beneficial and in fact will be supported by
majority of the users ex post. It can also happen that the users may perceive that a
regulation is beneficial ex ante only to find out ex post that it is not resulting in the retum

of the original situation (Baland & Platteau, 1996).

Type of Societies in CPR Management

As had already been pointed above, some communities are characterized
simultaneously by the presence of flexible access rules and the absence of conservation
mechanisms. These are those communities which live amidst abundant natural resources
defined as resources for which there is no competition and which cannot be threatened
with the risk of degradation even when they are openly accessible. A state of resource
abundance may be related to three main kinds of circumstances which are a) population

size is restricted compared to the amount of available resources, b) technology is

31

primitive with the result is quite low and or the cost of exploiting a certain range of the
available resources tends to infinity, and c) the users are not profit-maximizers because
they produce mainly for subsistence purposes and have a marked preference for leisure or

leisurely activities (Baland & Plateau, 1996).

In this type of community, conservation rules would not flourish considering that
the resource at stake is not under strain thus defeating any conservation effort by its
unnecessary cost. On the part of the access rules, which are flexible, they are devised
irrespective of the degree of pressure on those resources; instead their presence largely
depends on whether control of access to localized resources is feasible at a reasonable
cost. Nonetheless, the degree of flexibility of such rules is very much a function of the
extent of resource availability. That is, they tend to be highly flexible and to be applied in
a liberal way when pressure on the resource is low while they tend to be more narrowly
interpreted and more strictly applied when pressure on the resource heightens. In fact, the
purpose of access rules in this case is to manifest and symbolize the social identity of the
group which first colonized the area where these resources are located as well as
articulate its corporate ownership structure as well as to establish political intergroup

boundaries (Baland & Platteau, 1996).

When low productivity is experienced by the users, a change in the characteristic
of the community will manifest. In some communities this change will be that the access

tules will become strict but still no rules pertaining to conservation are devised.

As mentioned above, the decline in the average product or the increase in the

average cost resulting from the pressure of a growing number of resource harvesters,

32

assuming constant technology, may be due a) only to the enhanced competition for the
resource that this growing pressure entails, or b) both of this enhanced competition and to
the erosion of the environmental capital stock. The first situation points to a purely
distributive problem caused by the very scarcity: since the resources are increasingly
difficult or costly to harvest, there arises the question as to how the cost of extracting it is
to be shared among the various claimants. Such a situation therefore requires well-
defined sharing rules which are obviously tantamount to access rules. The second
situation involves both a distribution problem and a genuine resource management
problem. Consequently, it calls not only for sharing rules but also for conservation
mechanisms in case the pressure on the resource, other things being equals, should
become stronger in the future than in the present (Baland & Platteau, 1996). But because
societies, especially those hunter-gatherer type, are prone to misunderstand or not
correctly perceive the nature of the problem at stake, not to mention the collective action
problem that can arise when the members interact, they may not optimally adjust to the
evolving challenges that they face (McNicoll, 1990 & Lane, 1991 as cited in Baland &
Plateau, 1996). What this means is that, in some societies it is a natural inclination for
the members to think that, when their income derived from the exploitation of CPRs
happens to fall, this must be entirely caused by the encroachments of new producers,
especially so, of course, if the latter are strangers endowed with superior techniques,
whose activities have the effect of diminishing the share of the current resource flows
available to the existing users. In this context, the idea that decreasing incomes can also
follow from reduced stock of the resource as a result of over exploitation and

mismanagement by all producers involved does not readily come to people’s mind. When

33

this condition happens, the community therefore tends to adopt strict access rules while

neglecting to evolve conservation devices (Baland & Platteau, 1996).

Therefore, in this type of society, where the understanding and perception of the
problem only reaches the level wherein low productivity is caused by enhanced
competition for the resource, and not caused by the lowering of the stock due the users
action, the spontaneous reaction of the local community is a) to tighten the rules of access
so as to make it more and more difficult for outsiders to use the CPR, and b) to design
more precise rules for the sharing of access and the avoidance of conflicts among the
growing number of insider users; the latter process may involve de facto privatization of

use rights or some sort of rotation (Baland & Platteau, 1996).

However, it is not always the case that a user community’s level of understanding
of scarcity or low productivity is pigeonholed to that level as described above. In fact,
some kinds of communities lean better or more quickly than others on how to adjust to a
changing environment. Agricultural communities, in which members can have
perceptions of their relationships with the surrounding environment that are more
conducive to resource management practices, represent such. And because such
communities have CPR resources that are not anymore abundant and at the same time
have members that perceive themselves as important determinants of ecological change
when resources are liable to degradation, strict access rules and conservation rules are

characteristically adopted (Baland & Platteau, 1996).

But in order for these conservation rules to be devised and adopted, the users

themselves must first become aware of the ecological problems created by their actions.

34

However, even the latter is not enough since if the users become aware of the problem
too late, that is, only when the appropriate incentives to conservation measures have
already disappeared, effective resource management responses are unlikely to succeed
(although still possible with the help of special incentives provided by an external
agency). Thus it is important that the awareness of the users must not be too slow, which
is unfortunately its usual pace. To remedy this, what is required is for the users to have a)
concrete, visible experiences of depletion or degradation in order to be stimulated, b) an
understanding of the situation wherein the connection between their behavior and the
level of the stock is made evident, and c) a “sense of limits” in their minds coming from
previous experiences of scarcity. In other words, the problem effects must be highly
visible in order for the people to realize what is happening; words, abstract reasoning and
explanations do not have much impact here. This is the reason why the emergence of
such awareness depends on the physical and geographical nature of the resource. It will
thus more easily emerge with respect to localized, visible, and predictable resources than
in the case of a resource that stretches over vast and seasonally changing geographic

areas, is largely unpredictable, and hardly visible (Baland & Platteau, 1996).

In the case of coastal fisheries what needs to be stressed, however, is that if
communities of inshore fishermen are frequently found to have regulation regarding
fishing gear, fishing season and the rotation or assignment of a favored fishing location,
they typically fail to regulate the total pressure on the stock of fish by restricting
harvesting efforts itself. This failure can be ascribed to both informational problems,
being that it is easier to monitor a vessel’s gear and location or whether a closed-season

regulation is violated than to monitor the individual catches of many vessels, and to the

35

heterogencity of fishermen communities regarding endowments (Schlager, 1990 as cited

in Baland & Platteau, 1996).

CHAPTER III

METHODOLOGY

Description of the Study Area

Laguna de Bay is the largest and most important lake in the Philippines. It is
located in the southern part of the island of Luzon entrenched in the most populous
region of the country, which includes the provinces of Rizal, Laguna, most parts of Metro
Manila, and parts of Cavite, Batangas and Quezon (Barril & Tumlos, 2010; Quintos,
2007). It has a total surface area of 900 km? and a watershed of 2,920 km?, There are 29
municipalities and cities that are surrounding the lake (Quintos, 2007) and the total

population in its watershed is estimated to be close to 20 million (LLDA, n.d.).

Calamba City, which is located in the southem side of Laguna de Bay, is a first
class city in the Second District of the province of Laguna. It is located 54 km south of
Manila (City profile, 2015) and has a land area of around 144 km? making it the second
largest city in the province next to San Pablo City. It has 54 barangays with a total

population of 389, 377 as of 2010.

The current study was conducted in Barangay Bucal of Calamba City (Figure 2).

The barangay, which is one of the ten coastal barangays of the city and has an artisanal

37

fisher-population of moderate size, was chosen primarily because of its accessibility, the
availability of secondary data on its artisanal fishing, industry, and the presence of the

city’s fish sanctuary in its offshore area.

Barangay Bucal (14°11'8"N, 121°10'13"E) has a total land area of 2.65 km? and is
divided into six puroks. It is classified as urban and is bounded by Barangay La Mesa in
the West, Laguna de Bay in the East, Barangay Pansol in the South and Barangay Halang,
in the North. It is 57 km south of Manila and is reachable using chartered bus via the

South Luzon Expressway. As of 2010, Barangay Bucal has a total population of 11, 346.

Figure 2. Terrain map showing Barangay Bucal, Calamba City, Laguna,
Philippines

38

Based on a fishing industry study, Barangay Bucal has 22 inland fish-pond
farmers occupying a total area of 1.041 ha, four fish farmers engaged in fish-caging using
a total area of 1.03 ha, and 73 fishers engaged in artisanal fishing (CASD, 2012).
However, as of 2014, the number of artisanal fishers has decreased to 56 fishers (CASD,

2014)

The fish sanctuary situated in the barangay’s water is a 5 ha-offshore area within
the 300 m-protected zone of Barangay Bucal (Appendix D). The said protected area had
already been inspected by LLDA and is considered as “strategic” as small fishes are

observed to retreat it

it. There is also an abundance of submerged aquatic plants like
digman (Hydrilla verticillata) and sintas (Vallisnaria gigantia) in the said area which
could indicate that it still enjoys relatively clean waters (Appendix D). At the same time,
the sanctuary is also supplied with fresh water coming from onshore natural springs
(CASD, 2014). Bamboo poles had been put up every 1.5 m along its perimeter (Appendix
D) to delineate the area it covers in the fishery. This provides a well-defined boundary
that is easy to observe by both artisanal fishers and Bantay Lawa fishwardens. At the
same time, the bamboo pole-fence also serves as physical barrier against errant fishers
who wishes to harvest within the protected area. This, however, is not the case for the
perimeter of the 300 m-protected zone extending the entire coastline of Calamba City, on

which no physical markers are put in place.

Aside from the fish sanctuary, the offshore area in Barangay Bucal also holds the
Calamba City Fish Garden and Sanctuary. This installation has two components

(Appendix D). The first is the sanctuary described above that is classified as an

39

“exclusive protected area”. The second component is the Yankaw Fish Garden which is
the livelihood component of the project. In the latter, yankaws, which are forms of bubo
or fish shelters composed of cut branches of Camachile tree (Pithecellobium dulce), are
strategically placed inside the “garden”. The fish garden, similar to the fish sanctuary, has
a total area of 5 ha. Thus, the total area covered by the Calamba City Fish Garden and

Sanctuary add up to 10 hectares (CASD, 2014).

For its political boundary, the fishery used by the artisanal fishers of Barangay
Bucal falls under the jurisdiction of the LLDA being the lead government agency that has
an unequivocal mandate to manage the Laguna de Bay watershed (Santos-Borja, n.d.)
However, equally comprehensive in its ability to affect the general welfare of the fishery,
but limited in its territorial reach, are the Provincial Government of Laguna, the City
Government of Calamba, and the Barangay Government of Barangay Bucal each of
which has vested power to oversee and decide on environmental concems under Republic

Act 7160 or the 1991 Local Government Code of the Philippines (Gomez, 2014).

Research Design

The study is divided into two phases. The first phase is the preliminary
investigation phase wherein background data pertaining to the artisanal fishing industry
of Barangay Bucal was taken. Following this is the formal survey phase where data on

the socioeconomic characteristics of the fishers, their perceptions of the different

exogenous factors, and perceptions of their consistency in complying with the formal

choice rules were collected.

In the preliminary investigation phase, semi-structured interview method was
used to get valuable information from key informants. This was used in producing,
together with the information coming from the analysis of collected secondary data and
reconnaissance survey, a quick but preliminary profile of the artisanal fishing activity in
the study area. Key informants from the community and local government were identified
and interviewed pertaining the spatial (e.g. fishing grounds and protected area locations),
temporal (e.g. species and gear seasonality), flow (e.g. policy making, adjudication and
marketing of fish catch) and decision (e.g. organization of the fishers, formal and

informal rules, overall compliance to the rules) patterns involved in the said activity.

However, in the formal survey phase, the collection of data was done primarily
through structured interviews of all the artisanal fishers in Barangay Bucal which were
identified using a master list from CASD. Interviews on both phases were conducted in
Tagalog and responses were recorded in the same language. The unit of analysis for this

study is the artisanal fishers of Barangay Bucal.

41

Research Instrument

Semi-structured interview schedules were used in gathering data during the
preliminary investigation phase. In the formal survey phase, structured interview
schedules were used to collect data on all three primary topics: the fishers’ socio-
economic characteristics, their perceptions regarding the exogenous factors, and their
perceptions regarding their compliance to the formal as well as to the informal choice

rules. The aforementioned interview schedules were developed in Tagalog.

In the interview schedule for the formal survey, questionnaire items that were
designed to elicit socioeconomic characteristics of the fishers were followed by prepared
sets of possible objective responses from which the respondents can choose options that
best suggest their socio-economic characteristics. The rest of the questionnaire items
however were Likert items that used Likert-type scales having an ordered continuum of
response categories. As these items primarily focus on perceptions rather than attitudes,
the Likert-type scales in this case did not use the traditional strongly disagree to strongly
agree response continuum; instead frequency, intensity and quantity response categories

were used.

Furthermore, aside from using an ordered continuum of response categories, the
study’s Likert-type scales also presented a balanced number of positive and negative
options. At the same time, descriptive labels were assigned to each category in the scale.

However, the numeric values of the response categories for the mode of compliance to

42

each of the formal and informal choice rules, which were used during the analysis part,

did not appear in the research instruments.

Definition of Terms

Socioeconomic Factors

Age refers to the age of the artisanal fishers as of their last birthday. Respondents
(artisanal fishers) are categorized as follows, “young” (30 years and below), “middle” (31
to 50 years), “old” (51 years and above).

Ethnicity refers to the place from which the respondents originated. The places of
origin are: Barangay Bucal, other towns in Laguna, Quezon, Batangas, Albay, other

places outside of Laguna but within Luzon, Visayas Island.

Duration of residency in the barangay refers to the number of years the respondents
have been living permanently in the barangay. The different periods are categorized into:
“minimal” (15 to 30 years), “short” (31 to 45 years), “long” (46 to 60 years), “very long”

(61 years and above).

Household size refers to the number of persons in the houschold operating jointly
for the welfare of the unit, whether the household has less than 3 persons, has 3 persons,

has 4 persons, has 5 persons, has 6 persons, or has 7 and above persons.

43

Brood size, refers to the number of children the respondents have. This is
categorized into: “small” (1 to 3 children), “medium” (4 to 6 children), and “large” (7 to

9 children).

Educational attainment is the level of education the respondents reached. This is
categorized into: “elementary drop-outs” (have not finished the | to 6 grades of the
elementary level), “elementary graduates” (have finished the 1 to 6 grades of the
elementary level but have not continued into high school), “high school drop-outs” (have
not finished the | to 4-year levels of high school), “high school graduates” (have finished
the 1 to 4-year levels of high school but have not enrolled into college), “college drop-

outs” (have enrolled in college but have not finished any degree).

Duration of engagement in artisanal fishing refers to the number of years the
respondents have been engaged in artisanal fishing as an occupation. The variable is
categorized into: “minimal” (14 years and below), “short” (15 to 30 years),
“intermediate” (31 to 45 years), “long” (46 to 60 years), “very long” (61 years and

above).

House structure type refers to the level of wealth the respondents have as indicated
by the types of materials that make up their houses. The house structures are categorized
into: “minimal” (a house made up entirely of light materials, such as bamboo, cogon and
nipa, including the frames), “low” (a house that consists of light materials for the walls
and roofs but the frames are made of wood or lumber), “medium” (a house structure that
combines lumber and concrete for the walls and frames but uses nipa or cogon for the

roof), “high” (a house structure that has either a roughly or completely finished external

surface and painted or cemented inner walls, along with galvanized iron sheets for the

roof).

Number of household fixtures refers to the level of wealth the respondents have as
indicated by the quantity of house fixtures/facilities they have in their households. This
variable is categorized into: “minimal” (there are | to 3 furnishings in the households),
“low” (there are 4 to 6 furnishings or facilities in the household), “medium” (there are 7
to 9 furnishings in the household), “high” (there are 10 and above furnishings in the
household). Included in the list of furnishing or facilities are such assets as indoor-CR,
indoor-bathroom, television, refrigerator, landline telephone, cell phone, vehicles,

washing machine, microwave, oven, and computer.

Land ownership refers to the level of wealth the respondents have as indicated by
the size of land they own, whether his owned land is 0 sqr.m, | to 100 sqr.m, 101 to 200

sqr.m, 201 to 300 sqr.m or 301 sqr.m and above.

Motorboat ownership refers to the level of wealth the respondents have as indicated

by the number of motorized banca they own, whether it is 0 or | motorized banca.

Exogenous Factors

Resource-related factors. Open-lake fishery condition refers to the satisfaction the
respondents perceived about the physicochemical condition of the fishery. This is

categorized int

“very bad” (the derioration of the open-lake fishery is significant and
could no longer be reversed), “bad” (the deterioration of the open-lake fishery is

significant but could still be reversed), “good” (the deterioration of the open-lake fishery

45

is not significant), and “very good (there is no deterioration affecting the open-lake
fishery).

Size of the open-lake fishery refers to the extent of the open-lake fishery that can be
seen by the respondents. The respondents’ perception is categorized into: “small” (all
parts of the fishery can be seen easily), “intermediate” (all parts of the fishery can be seen

but with difficulty), “large” (not all parts of the fishery is observable).

Observability of the artisanal fishers refers to the ease with which the respondents
can see all of the artisanal fishers using the fishery at any one time. This is categorized
into: “difficult” (most of the fishers using the fishery at any one time cannot be

observed), “easy” (most of the fishers using the fishery at any one time can be observed).

Observability of the fish sanctuary’s boundary refers to the ease with which the
respondents observe the boundary of the fish sanctuary. The respondents’ perception is
categorized into: “difficult” (the boundary cannot be easily distinguished), “easy” (the

boundary can be easily determined).

Species catchers refers to fishers that had been able to harvest a given species (i.e.
tilapia, Laguna de Bay catfish, milkfish, gourami, catfish, bighead carp, snakehead,
silverperch, white goby, shrimp) from the fishery at least once whether intentionally or
not. This is categorized into: “yes” (the fisher has caught the given species), “no” (the

fisher has not caught the given species).

Frequent species catchers refers to fishers that are able to harvest a given species

(ie. tilapia, Laguna de Bay catfish, milkfish, gourami, catfish, bighead carp, snakehead,

46

silverperch, white goby, shrimp) every time they engage in artisanal fishing in the
fishery. This is categorized into: “yes” (the fisher is able to frequently catch the given

fishes), “no” (the fisher is not able to frequently catch the given species).

Species sellers refers to fishers that catch and, more often than not, sell a given
species (i.e. tilapia, Laguna de Bay catfish, milkfish, gourami, catfish, bighead carp,
snakehead, silverperch, white goby, shrimp) from the fishery. This is categorized into:
“yes” (the fisher catch and sell the species), “no” (the fisher does not catch and sell the

species).

Gear users refers to fishers that had used a particular gear (i.e. gill net, screen, tibog,
pole and line, fish pot, harpoon, manual seine, electrofishing gear, yankaw, drift long line,

fish corral, air rifle, dredge, motorized push net) at least once in his artisanal fishing in

the fishery. This is categorized into: “yes” (the fisher had used the particular gear), “no”

(the fisher had not used the particular gear).

Vessel users refers to fishers that had used a particular type of fishing vessel (i.e.
motorized banca, /unday) at least once in his artisanal fishing in the fishery. This is
categorized into: “yes” (the fisher had used the particular fishing vessel), “no” (the fisher

had not used the fishing vessel).

Frequent gear users refers to fishers that uses a particular fishing gear (i.e. gill net,
screen, tibog, pole and line, fish pot, harpoon, manual seine, electrofishing gear, yankaw,

drift long line, fish corral, air rifle, dredge, motorized push net) every time he engages in

a7

artisanal fishing in the fishery. This is categorized into: “yes” (the fisher frequently uses

the particular gear), “no” (the fisher does not frequently uses the particular gear),

Frequent vessel users refers to fishers that uses a particular type of fishing vessel
(ie. motorized banca, lunday) every time he engages in artisanal fishing in the fishery.
This is categorized into: “yes” (the fisher frequently uses the particular fishing vessel),

“no” (the fisher does not frequently uses the particular fishing vessel).

Gear owners refers to fishers that own one or more units of a particular type of
fishing gear (i.e. gill net, screen, tibog, pole and line, fish pot, harpoon, manual seine,
electrofishing gear, yankaw, drift long line, fish corral, air rifle, dredge, motorized push
net). This is categorized into: “yes” (the fisher owns the particular gear), “no” (the fisher

does not own the particular gear).

Vessel owners refers to fishers that own one or more units of a particular type of
fishing vessel (i.e. motorized banca, lunday). This is categorized into: “yes” (the fisher

‘owns the particular vessel), “no” (the fisher does not own the particular vessel).

Observability of the banned fishing methods refers to the relative number of types
of illegal fishing methods under the present fishery management regime, as perceived by
the respondents, which can be easily observed by the artisanal fishers. This is categorized
into whether the fishers find: “none of the banned methods are observable”, “some of the

banned methods are observable”, or “all of the banned methods are observable”.

Sufficiency of fish catch refers to the capacity, as perceived by the respondents, of

the size of their fish catch (from the fishery) meeting their purpose for it, whether it is for

selling or for household consumption. This is categorized into: “not enough” (the fisher
finds that on average the size of his fish catch from the fishery does not meet his need for
it), “just enough” (the fisher finds that on average the size of his fish catch meets his need
for it), “more than enough” (the fisher finds that on average the size of his fish catch from

the fishery more than meets his need for

Resource user-related factors. Level of ecological knowledge refers to the

respondents’ perception of their capability to come up with educated explanations on the

variation in the productivity of the species harvested from the fishery. This is categorized

int

: “low” (the respondent cannot come up or has difficulty in coming up with his own
explanations for the various conditions of the harvested species), “high” (the fisher can
readily come up with his own explanations for the various conditions of the harvested

species).

Diversity of interest in the management of the fishery refers to degree, as perceived
by the respondents, to which the artisanal fishers share similar views in the way the
fishery is to be managed. This is categorized into: “homogeneous” (the fishers in general
have similar views on the way the fishery is to be managed), and “heterogeneous” (the

fishers in general have differing views on the way the fishery is to be managed).

Number of artisanal fishers using the fishery refers to the relative number of
artisanal fishers, as perceived by the respondents, who are using the same fishery used by

the artisanal fishers of Barangay Bucal. This is categorized into: “small” (the fisher finds

the fishery to be not crowded by artisanal fishers), “intermediate” (the fisher finds the

49

fishery to be appropriated by just enough number of artisanal fishers), and “large” (the

fisher finds the fishery to be overcrowded by artisanal fishers).

Availability of communication mechanism among the artisanal fishers refers to the
availability, as perceived by the respondents, of activity/s through which the artisanal
fishers can share with each other their concems related to the management of the fishery.
This is categorized into: “none” (the fisher finds that such avenue is non-existent), and

“present” (the fisher finds that such mechanism is existent).

Level of ease in gathering the artisanal fishers refers to average turnout of artisanal
fishers estimated by the respondents to be attending the fishery management-related
gatherings whenever they are called. This is categorized into: “difficult” (less than one
half of the fishers attend these gatherings whenever they are called), and “easy” (half or

more than half of the fishers attend these gatherings whenever they are called).

Frequency of fishery management-related gatherings refers to the regularity, as
perceived by the respondents, of the holding of the gatherings of the fishers. This is
categorized into: “infrequent” (the gatheimgs rarely happen), and “frequent” (the

gatherings are commonly held).

Attendance of the respondent in gatherings refers to the rate, as perceived by the
respondent, that he has been attending the gatherings of the fishers. This is categorized
into: “always absent” (have never attended or have sought to not attend the gatherings),

“occasionally present” (have intermittently attended the gatherings), and “commonly

present” (have always attended the gatherings or have proportionately more appearances

than absences during the called gatherings).

Acceptability of the open-access status of the fishery refers to the respondent’s

perception of whether the open-access characteristic of the fishery is satisfactory for his
own artisanal fishing or not. This is categorized into whether the respondents find such

characteristic “acceptable” or “not acceptable”.

Degree of other-regarding behaviour of fellow artisanal fishers refers to the degree,
as perceived by the respondents, of consideration for their personal wellbeing shown to
them by other fishers using the fishery. This is categorized into: “1” (care from other
fishers is not felt), “2” (care from other fishers is mildly felt), “3” (care from other fishers
is moderately felt), “4” (care from other fishers is strongly felt), “5” (care from other

fishers is very strongly felt)

Degree of other regarding behaviour of the respondent refers to the degree, as
perceived by the respondents, of consideration they have shown for the wellbeing of
other fishers using the fishery. This is categorized into: “I” (does not show care for other
fishers), “2” (mildly shows care for other fishers), “3” (moderately shows care for other
fishers), “4” (strongly shows care for other fishers), and “S” (very strongly shows care for

other fishers).

Level of adhesion to rules during severe free riding episodes refers to the potential
behaviour of the respondents as perceived by them during a hypothetical scenario in

which rule violation in the fishery has become rampant. This is categorized into: “Will

51

also completely ignore rules”, “Will adhere to rules sometimes”, and “Will continue to

completely adhere to rules”.

Leader respectability refers to degree in which the respondents perceive the
chairman of the BFARMC/SAMBBU to be respectable. This is categorized into: “Not
respectable” (the leader is not a decent person) and “Respectable” (the leader is a decent

person).

Leader efficiency refers to degree in which the respondents perceive the chairman
of the BEARMC/SAMBBU to be effecient. This is categorized into: “Not effecient” (the
leader is not able to perform mosvall of his duties) and “Effecient” (the leader is able to

perform mosvall of his duties).

Leader legitimacy refers to degree in which the respondents perceive the chairman
of the BFARMC/SAMBBU to be legitimate. This is categorized into: “Not legitimate”
(the leader has not assumed his position through the proper process) and “Legitimate” ”

(the leader has assumed his position through the proper process).

Equality of harvesting in the fishery refers to the degree, as perceived by the
respondents, that harvesting by open-lake fishers in the fishery is proportionately or

disproportionately distributed among them. This is categorized into:

“Fair” (harvesting is
deemed to be not monopolized by a few fishers) and “Unfair” (harvesting is deemed to be

monopolized by a few fishers).

Future artisanal fishing plan refers to the foresight of the respondents as to whether

or not they will still be engaged in artisanal fishing in the same fishery five years from

52

the present. This is categorized into: “Will still be in the same fishery in five year’s time”,

and “Will leave the fishery in five year’s time”.

Job satisfaction refers to the inclination of the respondents of retaining artisanal
fishing as an occupation within the context of two conditions; first, if they are given the
chance to live their lives all over again, in which case the categories are: “Will take up
artisanal fishing again” and “Will not take up artisanal fishing again”; and second, if
whether at the present they are highly favourable of taking another occupation in
exchange of artisanal fishing where the categories are: “Open to replacing, artisanal

fishing” and “Not open to replacing artisanal fishing”.

Proportion of household income from artisanal fishing refers to the proportion of
the respondents’ household income that is derived from artisanal fishing regardless of the
contributor, whether it is none of the total income, less than ¥4, exactly %, more than
but less than %, exactly ‘4, more than ¥2 but less %, exactly %, more than % but less than

the whole income, or all of the household income.

Non-artisanal fishing occupation of the respondent refers to whether the
respondents are taking up other occupation/s besides artisanal fishing as a source of
household income. This is categorized into: “yes” (the respondent has other source/s of
income besides artisanal fishing), and “no” (artisanal fishing is the only source of income

of the respondent).

Non-artisanal fishing occupation of other household members refers to whether

other members of the respondents’ household are the taking up other occupation/s besides

53

artisanal fishing as a source of the household’s income. This is categorized into: “yes”
(other members’ have other source/s of income besides artisanal fishing), and “no”

(artisanal fishing is the only source of income of the other members).

Proportion of household income from non-artisanal fishing occupation refers to the
proportion of the respondents’ household income that is derived from non-artisanal
fishing occupations (i.e. excluding remittances) regardless of the contributor, whether it is
none of the total income, less than %, exactly %, more than % but less than %, exactly %,
more than % but less %4, exactly %, more than % but less than the whole income, or all of

the household income.

Availability of remittances refers to whether the respondents’ households receive
income from remittances sent to them. This is categorized into: “yes” (the respondent’s
household get income from remittances), and “no” (the household do not get income

from remittances).

Proportion of household income from remittances refers to the proportion of the
respondents’ household income that is derived from remittances, whether it is none of the
total income, less than %, exactly 4, more than % but less than 4, exactly /, more than
% but less %, exactly %, more than % but less than the whole income, or all of the

household income.

Number of membership in fishermen’s association refers to the number of
fishermen’s association the respondents are officially affiliated with. This is categorized

into: “O” (no membership in any fishermen’s organization), “1” (membership in only one

fishermen’s organization), and >2 (membership in more than one fishermen’s

organization).

Degree of involvement in fishermen’s organization refers to the state, as perceived
by the respondents, of their active involvement in the operation of the fishermen’s
organization/s they belong to. This is categorized into: “not active” (the respondents have
no significant inclination of responding to the needs of any organization), and “active”
(the respondents have significant inclination of responding to the needs of the

organization in which they are a member of).

Proportion of fish catch marketed refers to the proportion of the respondents” fish
catch reserved to be sold, whether it is none of the total fish catch, less than %, exactly %,
more than % but less than ¥%, exactly ¥, more than ¥ but less %, exactly %, more than %

but less than the whole fish catch, or all of the fish catch.

Destination of marketed fish catch refers to the market area in which the proportion
of the respondents’ fishcatch reserved for marketing is brought to be sold. This is
categoized into: “none” (all of the respondent’s fishcatch is consumed fresh by the

household), “Barangay Bucal”, “Calamba City”, and “Manila”.

Predictability of the price of the fish catch refers to the degree, as perceived by the
respondents, which the prices of the fish species marketed by them could be determined
prior to their being sold. This is categorized into: “difficult” (the prices are hard to

determine) and “easy” (the prices are immediately determined).

5S

Stability of the price of the fish catch refers to the degree, as perceived by the
respondents, of the regularity in the fluctuations of the prices for the fish species he sells.
This is categorized into whether “the prices do not change at all”, “the prices change
regularly” (the prices have a regular high-low cycle), and “the prices change erratically

(there is no pattern in the fluctuation of the prices).

Level of price of fish catch refers to the degree, as perceived, by the respondents of
the economic competitiveness of the prices of fish species that are being marketed. This
is categorized into: “low” (the prices are not competitive), “moderate” (the prices are

adequately competitive), and “high” (the prices are exorbitant).

Level of demand for fish catch refers to the degree, as perceived by the respondents,
of the market demand for the species of fishes they are selling. This is categorized into:
“low” (the market demand is not economically viable), “moderate” (the market demand

is adequately viable), and “high” (the market demand is steep).

Institutional arrangement-related factors. Level of rule knowledge refers to the
respondents’ perception of their capability to enumerate the rules pertaining to the
management of the fishery. This is categorized into: “low” (the respondent scan only
enumerate less than half of all the rules), “intermediate” (the respondents can enumerate
around half of all the rules), and “high” (the respondents can readily enumerate more than

half of all the rules).

56

Rule complexity refers to the degree, as perceived by the respondents, of the
understandability of the rule statements. This is categorized into whether “the rules are

difficult to understand” and the “the rules are easy to understand”.

Participatoriness of decision-making process refers to the degree, as perceived by
the respondents, to which all relevant stakeholders are included in the decision-making
process in the management of the fishery. This is categorized into: “non-participatory”
(only the officers of the fishermen’s association are involved in the decision-making
process), and “participatory” (the officers and members of the fishermen’s association are

involved in the decision-making process).

Rule violation tolerance refers to the degree that the respondents find violation to
the fishery management rules as acceptable. This is categorized into whether “it is
unacceptable to violate the rules in all situations” and “it is acceptable to violate the rules

in some situations”.

Scope of rule change needed refers to the degree, as perceived by the respondents,
by which rules in the management of the fishery need changing. This is categorized into
whether “all of the rules need to be changed”, “only some of the rules need to be

changed”, and “all of the rules need not be changed”.

Level of rule violation refers to the degree, as perceived by the respondents, by
which violations of the fishery management rules are exhibited by the artisanal fishers
using the fishery. This is categorized into: “low” (only a few or less than half of the

artisanal fishers are involved in violating the rules), “intermediate” (around half of the

s7

artisanal fishers are involved in the violation of the rules) and “high” (more than half or

almost all of the artisanal fishers are involved in the violation of the rules).

Level of rule enforcement refers to the size of fishery management rules, as
perceived by the respondents, which are actively enforced by the fishwardens. This is
categorized into whether “none of the rules are enforced”, “some of the rules are

enforced”, and “all of the rules are enforced”.

Level of rule monitoring refers to the consistency, as perceived by the respondents,
that monitoring for rule violations is conducted by the fishwardens in the fishery. This is
categorized into whether “no monitoring is done”, “monitoring is done irregularly”

(monitoring is not done all the time), and “monitoring is done regularly” (monitoring is

done all the time).

Mode of sanctioning refers to the manner, as perceived by the respondents, that rule
violators are sanctioned under the fishery management regime. This is categorized into:
“harsh” (steep sanctions are doled out regardless of the severity of the violation) and

“graduated” (sanctions are doled out based on the severity of the violation).

Ease in dispute adjudication refers to the accessibility, as perceived by the
respondents, of the mechanism in resolving conflicts between stakeholders in the
management of the fishery. This is categorized into: “difficult” (in general disputes take a

long time to be resolved) and “easy” (in general disputes are immediately settled).

Accountability of officers refers to the answerability, as perceived by the

respondents, of the officers of the fishermen’s association in the performance or non-

58

performance of their functions in the management of the fishery. This is categorized into
whether “the fishwardens and other officers are not held accountable for their actions”

and “the fishwardens and other officers are held accountable for their actions”.

Performance of officers refers to the degree, as perceived by the respondents, by
which the officers of the fishermen’s association are performing their functions in the
management of the fishery. This is categorized into whether “the fishwardens and other
officers are not performing their functions”, “the fishwardens and other officers are only

performing some of their functions”, and “the fishwardens and other officers are

performing all of their functions”.

State intervention refers to the mode, as perceived by the respondents, of the
government's intervention in the management of the fishery. This is categorized into
whether “the goverment is not participating in the management of the fishery”, “the
government is participating in the management of the fishery”, and “the government is

just needlessly nterfering in the management of the fishery”.

Level of aid received refers to the sufficiency, as perceived by the respondents, of
the aid received by the artisanal fishers of Barangay Bucal in support of the management
of the fishery. This is categorized into whether “no aid is received”, “the aid received was

not sufficient”, and “the aid received was sufficient”.

59

Mode of Compliance to the Formal Choice Rules

Artisanal fishing inside the fish sanctuary refers to the frequency by which the
respondents are fishing inside the fish sanctuary. This is categorized into: “never”,
“occasionally” (the respondents do this in less than half of their total fishing trips in a
year), and “frequently” (the respondents do this in more than half of their total fishing

trips in a year).

Use of electrofishing gears refers to the frequency by which the respondents use
electrofishing gears in their artisanal fishing anywhere in the fishery. This is categorized
into: “never”, “occasionally” (the respondents do this in less than half of their total

fishing trips in a year), and “frequently” (the respondents do this in more than half of

their total fishing trips in a year).

Use of dredge refers to the frequency by which the respondents use dredge in their
artisanal fishing anywhere in the fishery. This is categorized into: “never”, “occasionally”
(the respondents do this in less than half of their total fishing trips in a year), and
“frequently” (the respondents do this in more than half of their total fishing trips in a

year).

Use of motorized push net refers to the frequency by which respondents use
motorized push net in their artisanal fishing anywhere in the fishery. This is categorized
imto: “never”, “occasionally” (the respondents do this in less than half of their total
fishing trips in a year), and “frequently” (the respondents do this in more than half of

their total fishing trips in a year).

Use of tibog refers to the frequency by which respondents use tibog in their
artisanal fishing anywhere in the fishery. This is categorized into: “never”, “occasionally”
(the respondents do this in less than half of their total fishing trips in a year), and
“frequently” (the respondents do this in more than half of their total fishing trips in a

year).

Use of fine-mesh net refers to the frequency by which respondents use fine-mesh
net in their artisanal fishing anywhere in the fishery. This is categorized into: “never”,
“occasionally” (the respondents do this in less than half of their total fishing trips in a
year), and “frequently” (the respondents do this in more than half of their total fishing

trips in a year).

Catching of fingerlings refers to the frequency by which respondents catch

fingerlings in their artisanal fishing anywhere in the fishery. This is categorized into:

“never

‘occasionally” (the respondents do this in less than half of their total fishing
tips in a year), and “frequently” (the respondents do this in more than half of their total

fishing trips in a year).

Methods of Analysis

‘After the survey was conducted, frequency counts and percentages were used to
summarize the socio-economic characteristics of the fishers, the characteristics of the

different exogenous factors, the fishers’ compliance to the formal and informal choice

61

tules, and the different forms of incompliance to these. In quantitatively describing the
prevailing characteristics of the socioeconomic and exogenous factors, primary
characteristics were identified for each of the factors. In this case, primary characteristics
are understood as the response category in a given factor with majority corresponding

respondents or the configuration of response categories that can first reach majority.

Bar graphs were used to compare the number of catchers, frequent catchers, and
sellers of the different species harvested, as well as the number of users, frequent users
and owners of the different fishing gears and vessels used in the fishery. Line graphs on
the other hand were used to compare the observability of the different banned methods of

artisanal fishing.

The equivalent numerical values of the respodents” mode of compliance to each
of the six formal choice rules covered in the study were summed to determine their
respective Compliance Index (Cl) to the formal choice rules. As such the following

formula was used:

Cl= Livi

Where:

Cl = Compliance Index

V = Numerical value of the respondents mode of compliance to a
given formal/informal choice rule

62

Considering that never breaking a formal choice rule has a numerical value of
three, occasionally breaking a formal choice rule gets a numerical value of two, and
frequently breaking a formal choice rule gets a numerical value of one, a CI of 18
therefore signifies that a respondent has never broken any of the formal choice rules,
while an index below this indicates some configuration of incompliance. Consequently, a

Cl of six indicates frequent incompliance to all of the formal choice rules.

The population Cl mean, median and skewness were then used to describe the
asymmetry of the CI data for the population of Barangay Bucal artisanal fishers. To
graphically represent the said asymmetry, the distribution of probability functions of the
Cl was used. For comparison of the different types of choice rules, the respondent’s Cl
for the informal choice rules were also derived using the same procedure. Similarly,
skewness along with the population Cl mean and median was also used to describe the

asymmetry in the distribution of the latter.

Phi (g) was used in determining the socio-economic and exogenous factors that
were strongly associated with the fishers’ consistent compliance to the formal choice
rules. In proceeding with the correlation analysis, some of the nominal and ordinal data
for the socioeconomic and exogenous factors have to be collapsed and dichotomized to
fit 2x2 contingency tables. The fishers’ modes of compliance to the formal choice rules
were also dichotomized wherein those having a Cl of 18 were classified as consistenly
complying with the said rules while those having less than 18 were classified as being
inconsistenly complying. Furthermore, simple logistic regression was utilized to

determine how the strongly associated factors (i.e. those with g > 0.3) identified were

63

associated with the fishers’ consistent compliance to the formal choice rules as well as

their odds ratios of doing so.

Pairwise association using phi was then used to determine the degree of
associations between the identified factors. After which, simple logistic regression was
again used to determine how the strongly associated factors were associated with cach

other.

CHAPTER IV

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Characteristics of the Socioeconomic and
Exogenous Factors used in the Study

Socioeconomic Characteristics of the
Artisanal Fisher Community

The number of artisanal fisher population in Barangay Bucal appears to be on a
state of decline. In 2012, the population totaled 73 fishers (CASD, 2013). This dropped to
56 in 2014 (CASD, 2014) and 42 in 2015. The lack of interest of the younger generation
in artisanal fishing as suggested by a low number of young fishermen (< 30 years old)
fishing with older artisanal fishers could be causing such a decline. Table | shows that
majority of the artisanal fishers (52.38%) are old (2 51 years old) while in Appendix A
middle-aged artisanal fishers (31 to 50 years old) are shown to comprise 42.86% of the
population; this leaves only 4.76% of the population that is composed of young
fishermen. Consistent with this, only very few artisanal fishers (11.91%) were also found
to be engaging in artisanal fishing for minimal number of years (< 14 years) as compared

to those who have been in the industry for a short (15 to 30 years) and intermediate (31 to

65

45 years) number of years which comprise 38.10% and 28.60% of the population

respectively.

Low immigration of artisanal fishers into Barangay Bucal could also be
contributing to the said decline. This is underscored by the results showing that majority
of the fishers (76.19%) are native to the barangay and a total of 80.96% of the fishers
have resided there for an extended (31 to 45 years), long (46 to 60 years) and very long
(© 60 years) periods of time as compared to only 19.05% that have lived there for

minimal number of years (15 to 30 years).

In terms of their wealth, most of the fishers (66.67%) exhibit minimal (1 to 3
household furnishings) to low (4 to 6 household furnishings) wealth levels as indicated
by the number of household furnishings they have. This is consistent with the results of
the other wealth indicators used in the study except for house structure type. As such,
most of the fishers also do not own a parcel of land (83.33%) or motorized banca

(73.81%).

Table 1. Primary socioeconomic characteristics of artisanal fishers in Barangay

Bucal (N=42)'
PRIMARY CHARACTERISTIC FREQUENCY %
Age*
Old aged (>50) 2 52.38
Ethni
Originated from Barangay Bucal 32 76.19
Duration of residency in the barangay*
Minimal-time residents (15-30) 8 ee)
Long-time residents (46-60) 21 50.00
Household size
Household has 3 persons 8 19.02
Household has 4 persons 10 2381
Household has > 6 persons 10 23.81
Brood size”
‘Small brood size (1-3) 26 62.00
Educational attainment
Elementary graduate 9 21.43
High school drop-out 9 21.43
High school graduate 1s 35.71
Duration of engagement in artisanal fishing*
Short period (15-30) 16 38.10
Intermediate period (31-45) 2 28.60
House structure type
Medium to High 32 76.20
Number of household fixtures
Minimal to Low 28 66.67
Land ownership
‘Owns 0 sq. m of land 35 83.33
Motor-boat ownership
Owns 0 motorized banca 31
Tapecat anno oye

‘SE xpressed as nos. of children
"See Appendix A for complete data

67

Characteristics of the Exogenous Factors

Characteristics of the resource-related factors. Table 2 shows that most of the
artisanal fishers (61.91%) perceived the physicochemical condition of the open-lake
fishery as bad. As such, these fishers regarded the physicochemical deterioration of the
open-lake fishery as serious but considered its rehabilitation possible. Many of the fishers
blamed this condition to the pollution occurring in the lake while some attributed it to the
reduction and shallowing of the open-lake fishing area. In general, the fishers’ open-
ended responses on the factors underlying such bad condition are consistent with
previous literatures and observations indirectly showing deterioration of the
physicochemical condition of the water in Barangay Bucal.

In relation to pollution, the LLDA has classified the lake water of the barangay as
Class C based on DAO 1990-34 (Herrera, ef. al., 2011; LLDA, n.d.). This makes it
inviable for primary contact recreational activities and as a source of water supply.
Barangay Bucal though is not highly exposed to pollution loading being in the South Bay
of Laguna de Bay unlike the heavily industrialized North-West sub-basins (PEMSEA, et.
al., 2013). Still, domestic wastes find their way into the fishery through the tributaries
which are used as receptacles by the residents for their kitchen and other household
wastes (Appendix D). As indicated by the fishers and reflected in their community-based
risk maps (Concepcion, ef. al., 2014), the loading of pollutants into the fishery is most
pronounced at the outset of the dry season, around the month of April, continuing into the

wet season, particularly after episodes of heavy rain, until the month of August. The

fishers call the rain-induced flush of dirty black water that characterize pollution loading

during this time as burak (Appendix D).

In terms of congestion of the fishing area, CASD (2012) recorded 153.88 ha of
fishpens and fishcages within the municipal waters of Calamba City, aside from the 10-ha

Fish Sanctuary/Fish Garden withii

it. However, most of these structures including the
sanctuary are located in the barangay waters of Barangay Sucol, Pansol, Bucal, Lecheria,
Paglingon and Linga which covers the fishing grounds comprising the open-lake fishery

of the artisanal fishers of Barangay Bucal. These structures are hampering the harvesting

of artisanal fishers. In the study of Concepcion, et. al. (n.d.), it is shown that fish catches
of artisanal fishers in the unoccupied fishing grounds of Calamba City are almost double

to those in occupied ones.

In terms of shallowing of the fishing area, LLDA and the University of the
Philippines (1999) as cited by Ynares (2006) had shown that in the past 45 years, 65.00%
of the Laguna de Bay area have already underwent shoaling, especially the west and
central lobes. Romeo Tappalla (personal communication, July 18, 2015), a long-time
artisanal fisher and the chairman of the Barangay Fisheries and Aquatic Resources
Management Council (BFARMC) in Barangay Bucal, estimated that the water in their
area could have already shoaled from around 9 m in the 1970's to around 3 m at the
present. Accordingly, a water and sediment sampling of the fish sanctuary and its nearby
fishing grounds by the City Fisheries and Aquatic Resources Management Council
(CFARMC) has found that the mean depth of the fishery is at 2.25 m with the maximum

and minimum depths at 3.3 m and 1.3 m respectively (Concepcion, ef. al., 2014).

69

A strong general trend of declining fish catch in all types of fisheries in Laguna de
Bay has occurred in the last 20 years (Santos-Borja & Nepomuceno, 2006). Although,
there is no previous study specifically analyzing the decline of fish catch in Barangay
Bucal, its artisanal fishers have indicated of experiencing such in the past. According to
them, their fish catch had decreased so severely by the year 2008 to 2010 that they only
had enough volume of fish catch immediately after typhoon occurrences which usually
happen in the months of June to November (Lacanilao, 1987; Concepcion, ef. al., 2014).
Accordingly, CASD (2012), has estimated that the catch of the city’s artisanal fishers had
sunk to I kg per fishing trip in the past before it had improved in the recent years. In the
study, 50.00% of the fishers perceived that they are still able to harvest sufficient fish
catch from the fishery, with a few (11.91%) even indicating that their catch is more than
enough. The fishers had reported that at the present, the volume of their fish catch per

fishing trip ranges from | to 10 kg.

As described above, the open-lake fishery of the artisanal fishers in Barangay
Bucal is composed of the contiguous fishing grounds of Barangay Linga, Paglingon,
Lecheria, Bucal, Pansol, and Sucol, aside from the fishing ground around Pulo ng
Calamba (i.e.”Wonder Island”) which is only accessible by those with motorized banca
(Appendix D). As such, 50.00% of the artisanal fishers has found the total size of the
open-lake fishery to be large while more than a quarter (31.00%) indicate it to be
imermediate. Such result could therefore explain why for most of the artisanal fishers
(69.10%), observing the activities of all the fishers using the fishery at any one time is
difficult. This is because according to Schlager (1990) and Wade (1988), as cited in

Baland and Platteau (2006), large ecological resources with its greater dimension

70

constrains the senses of its users from directly detecting the actions of the other resource
users. However, almost all of the artisanal fishers (95.24%) find it relatively quick and
easy to observe the perimeter of the Fish Sanctuary. This is expected since the 5-ha
sanctuary within the 300-m protected zone of Barangay Bucal is demarcated by bamboo

poles set at 1.5 m from each other.

Currently, five methods of artisanal fishing are considered to be prohibited in the
fishery. These are: the use of tibog in catching fish; the use of dredge in catching snails;
the use of motorized push net; and, the use of fine mesh net and electrofishing gears.
About 57.24% of the respondents indicated that all of these banned methods are
observable, while almost two-thirds indicated that only some are. Further analysis
indicates that most of the 15 respondents that perceived incomplete observability
suggested the use of electrofishing gears as the most difficult to observe while the use of
tibog as the easiest. This result is consistent with reports of the Bantay Lawa Task Force.
‘A quick scan of their log records from September 10, 2014 to September 15, 2015
revealed that tibog-use was the most frequently reported violation. In the said period, the
use of tibog had been reported not less than 26 times whereas the use of electrofishing

gears had only been reported once. Many fishers indicated that the use of ribog is easiest

to observe because it involves striking the water with bamboo rods creating loud noises
that can be heard from a distance. Electrofishing gears on the other hand are difficult to
monitor since they are largely used in the peripheral, marshy littoral parts of the lake and
other inland inundated areas, including creeks, which are far removed from other fishers

and Bantay Lawa fishwardens. The fact that electrofishing can also be done at night also

adds to the difficulty of it being observed.

n

Artisanal fishing in Barangay Bucal is largely focused on catching tilapia
(Oreochromis sp.). All of the species included in the survey were found to have catchers
among the artisanal fishers (Appendix A); however, only tilapia (73.81%), Laguna de
Bay catfish (Arius manilensis; 57.14%) and to some extent, white shrimp
(Macrobrachium sp.; 26.19%) have significant number of frequent catchers. As it is,
these three species are all perennial, considered abundant in the fishery and, except for
Laguna de bay catfish, have high market values (Appendix C). Laguna de bay catfish’s
high number of frequent catchers could be due to its susceptibility of being
unintentionally caught along with tilapia as the two species are found in the same area in
the fishery, exist during the same time of the year, and are caught using the same type of
fishing gears (Appendix C). Incidentally, however, there is a comparatively low fishing
demand for Laguna de Bay catfish as shown by the fact that despite of it being one of the
species with the most number of frequent catchers, it is also one of those with the least
number of sellers (28.57%). Many of the artisanal fishers attribute this to the strong.
ramish taste of Laguna de Bay catfish that they usually just give it away or return it to the
lake when it happens to be included in their catch. On the other hand, the result also
shows that only a quarter of the fishers (26.19%) are frequently catching white shrimps
despite its availability in the fishery throughout the year and high market price due to its

capital and labour intensiveness.

Among the different fishing gears used, gillnet, which is the primary gear for
catching tilapia, has the most number of frequent users (83.33%) along with non-
motorized banca (64.29%). Gillnet is followed by tibog with a little over one-fifth of the

respondents (21.43%) indicated of frequently using it (Appendix A). This underscores the

2

close relationship between the two gears. According to the fishers, all ribog users are also
gillnet users, since the former is used to scare fishes into gillncts; however, not all gillnet
users are tibog users. According to the respondents, the most important utilization of
tibog happens in the months of May and June when catching fish using gillnet becomes
very difficult as the level of water in the fishery is at its lowest. However, frequent tibog
users, or those that use the said gear in more than half of their total fishing trips in a year,

represent a slight majority of the entire tibog users in Barangay Bucal (Table 6).

Table 2. Primary characteristics of resource-related factors included in the study
according to the population of artisanal fishers in Barangay Bucal (N=42)'

PRIMARY CHARACTERISTIC FREQUENCY %

Open-lake fishery condition

Bad 26 61.91
Sufficiency of fish catch

Just enough 21 50.00
Size of the open-lake fishery

Intermediate iG 3100

Large 21 50.00
Observability of the artisanal fishers

Difficult 29 69.10
Observability of the fish sanctuary’s boundary

Easy 40 95.24
Observability of the banned fishing methods

All of the banned methods are observable 24 57.14
Number of species catchers

Tilapia (Oreochromis sp.) 4l 97.62

Laguna de Bay catfish (Arius manilensis) 40 95.24

wee Appendix A Tor complete data

Table 2. Continued .....

73

PRIMARY CHARACTERISTIC FREQUENCY

Milkfish (Chanos chanos) 36

Gourami (Osphronemus sp.) 36

Catfish (Clarias macrocephalus) 32

Bighead carp (Hypothalmichthys nobilis) 28

Snakehead/Mudfish (Ophicephalus striatus) 27
Number of frequent species catchers

Tilapia 31

Laguna de Bay catfish 24

White shrimp ih
Number of species sellers

Tilapia 33

Milkfish 28

Gourami 23
Number of gear users

Gill net 38
Number of vessel users

‘Non-motorized banca 35
Number of frequent gear users

Gillnet 35
Number of frequent vessel users

Non-motorized banca 27
Number of gear owners

Gillnet 37
Number of vessel owners

Non-motorized banca 31

%
85.71
85.71
76.19

66.67
65.85

73.81
S714
26.19

78.57
66.67
54.76

90.48

83.33

83.33

88.10

73.81

ee
‘see Appendix A Tor complete data

Characteristics of the resource user-related factors. Table 3 shows that majority of

the fishers (59.52%) perceived their ecological knowledge of the open-lake fishery as low

despite that most of them have been fishers in the area for about 15 years to more than 60

74

years (Appendix A). In the context of the deterioration that has happened in Laguna de
Bay over the years (Santos-Borja & Nepomuceno, 2006), such result is consistent with
previous literature showing that in resources that have changed rapidly during recent
decades, their users are likely to be imperfectly informed about its ongoing processes of
depletion and degradation (Baland & Plateau, 1996). In terms of the similarity of their
interests in the management of the fishery, most of the artisanal fishers (54.76%)
indicated heterogeneity of views. In relation to this, the most commonly noted polarizing,
issues included the need to follow management rules and the establishment of the fish
sanctuary in the barangay’s water. Such heterogeneity is to be expected since previous
literature has shown that low levels of understanding and perception of ecological
problems could make it difficult for the acceptance and adoption of conservation rules
(Baland & Platteau, 1996). Nevertheless, most of the artisanal fishers claimed sufficient
other-regarding behavior among themselves as shown in the results where most of them
felt sufficient care from other fishers (85.71%) and most of them sufficiently care for the
well-being of other fishers (76.19%). Moreover, most of them have also indicated of
continued complete adhesion to the present rules even if there is rampant violation of it
(90.48%). This could indicate the existence of a sufficient set of moral norms among the
fishers. This is consistent with previous literature showing that when moral norms are
well-established and sustained by primary and secondary socialization, resource users
tend to a) to adopt others’ viewpoint when making decisions that may harm others’
interests and to feel internally rewarded when behaving in other-regarding ways; b) to be

confident that others will abide by the same code of good behaviors as themselves; and c)

75

to cling to this code even when they had unpleasant experiences in which they had been

suckered (Baland & Platteau, 1996).

In terms of the size of the fishery-users, majority (66.67%) of the respondents
perceived a large number of fishers is using “their” fishery. ‘These fishers related such
perception to the intrusions of “outsiders”. These outsiders include artisanal fishers from
Barangays Masili, Sucol, Pansol, Lecheria, and Sampiruhan as well as Sitio Rongot and
Aplaya, Barangay Lingga and from as far as Binangonan, Rizal. With the absence of any
working physical boundary that specifically delineates an exclusive fishery for the
artisanal fishers of Barangay Bucal, they will have to share their fishing grounds with
other fishers. However, almost all of the fishers (97.62%) find such arrangement
acceptable with 39.02% in this group indicated that all of the fishers should be allowed
entry into the fishery since they are just trying to earn a living while 26.83% cited that
access should be given to all since inevitably every artisanal fisher has to move around
the fishery due to the fact that the fishes themselves are not stationary to a single fishing
ground. In light of the previous result whereby majority of the fishers are still able to
harvest sufficient fish catch from the fishery, and that majority (73.81%) also perceived
no unfair harvesting happening in the fishery, the observed general favorability to the
open-access condition of the fishery could therefore imply that most of the fishers find
the fishes within the said resource as still abundant. Baland and Platteau (1996), defined
abundant natural resources as resources for which there is no competition and which

cannot be threatened with the risk of degradation even when they are openly accessible.

76

In terms of the availability of a communication mechanism among the artisanal
fishers, almost all of the respondents (92.86%) indicated that such mechanism is present
with 74.16% citing the meetings of Barangay Fisheries and Aquatic Resources
Management Council/Sagisag ng mga Mangingisda ng Barangay Bucal
(BFARMC/SAMBBU) as a form of this mechanism. These meetings of the
BFARMC/SAMBBU are conducted on a monthly basis. The first of these is the meeting
between the officers of the association scheduled every first Sunday of the month. The
second meeting is a general assembly to be attended by all bonafide members of
BFARMC/SAMBBU scheduled every last Sunday of the month. This is the avenue
where the fisherfolks in the barangay, including the artisanal fishers, are given the chance
to voice their concems and opinions regarding the fishery. It is also in these meetings
where suggestions are given and plans are formed for programs and projects that could be
pursued by the fisherfolks through FARMC in conjunction with the City Government of
Calamba. Aside from these, any member of the fisherfolk association can call an
emergency meeting when there is a project that needs to be done or an issue that needs
immediate attention (CASD, 2014). Notices of meetings are disseminated to the member
fisherfolks through official invitation from the PIO of the association or through text

messages (Romeo Tapalla, personal communication, July 18, 2015).

However, despite the perceived access to a communication mechanism, majority
of the respondents (73.81%) still find that gathering the fishers into these fishery-related
meetings as difficult. Since most of the respondents perceived a large number of fishers
using the fishery, this result is consistent with previous literature showing that pre-play

communication among actors in large groups tend to be relatively difficult, hence the

7

higher communication and bargaining costs in such groups (Olson, 1982 as cited in
Baland & Platteau, 1996). In terms of the frequency of meetings, the study found that
majority of the artisanal fishers (66.67%) perceived the meetings to be infrequent despite
the regularly scheduled BFARMC/SAMBBU general assembly. As for their personal
attendance during these scheduled meetings, 45.24% of the artisnal fishers have only
occasional presence while around one-fifth (21.43%) are always absent or have never
attended any of the meetings. This result therefore supports the above observation that

gathering the fishers into their meetings is indeed difficult.

An analysis of the data on the proportion of the respondents’ household income
coming from artisanal fishing shows that majority (57.14%) have low dependence (i.e.
less than one-half of total household income) on artisanal fishing as an income source.
The high level of occupational multiplicity among the open-lake fishers and their other
household members is indicative of this. As it is, majority of the respondents (73.81%)
are shown to have non-artisanal fishing occupations. The most commonly noted of which
are farming and working in construction sites. The same is also true for the other
household members of most of the respondents (78.57%) of which the most commonly
noted occupation is working in factories. The analysis of the proportion of the
respondents’ household income derived from non-artisanal fishing also shows that
majority of the households (52.38%) are more highly dependent on non-artisanal fishing
occupations as source of income. This result supports the above-observation of the
majority of the respondents indicating that their household incomes have low dependence
on artisanal fishing and are therefore more dependent on their non-artisanal fishing

occupations excluding remittances. Remittances are not a major source of income for the

78

artisanal fishers as almost all (85.71%) indicated of not having access to it. Of those that

do, most indicated low dependence only.

Almost all of the respondents (92.86%) perceived that they would still be engaged
in artisanal fishing within the same fishery five years from the present. Majority of them
(66.67%) also express desire to retain artisanal fishing if given the chance to live their
lives all over again. The most commonly noted reasons for this include: the ability of
artisanal fishing to guarantee food for the family; its ability to improve the well-being of
the fishers; it is the livelihood they are used to; and that artisanal fishers serve no
employer. As for an inclination of changing at the present their artisanal fishing
‘occupation to something else, a much lower number of the respondents (52.38%)
indicated that they will not. In the case of those that are open to scrapping artisanal
fishing, most would opt to because they perceived that it cannot guarantee them a stable
income. However, the willingness of some is conditional. That is, they will only abandon
artisanal fishing if any of the following conditions are met: the new job provides a bigger
income; if they are still capable of performing the new job; and if the new job does not
make them part from their families. These responses to the two questions - one
hypothetical (future) and the other current — indicate some slight ambivalence on the part
of the respondents pertaining to their satisfaction derived from artisanal fishing as an
occupation (Katon, ef. al., 1997). As seen in the results, more than three-fifth of the open-
lake fishers indicated they would still choose artisanal fishing if they were to live their
lives all over again. Yet only half of the respondents would like to stay in artisanal
fishing at the present. An examination of the underlying reasons indicates that although

the artisanal fishers of Barangay Bucal are satisfied with the economic and psychological

benefits of fishing as an occupation, they are open to other possibilities that can improve
their economic condition at the present. This could have been the result of their exposure

to other options over time and their willingness to try other options (Katon, et. al., 1997).

At the present, artisanal fishing in Barangay Bucal is largely done for income
generation with most of the fishers (66.67%) selling their fish catch directly in the
barangay. However, white-shrimp catchers sell their catch in Calamba City as a viable
market for white shrimp is not yet established in the barangay. Selling of fish catch in the
barangay is largely done through peddling either by other household members of the
fishers or by local wholesalers. White shrimp on the other hand is largely sold to
wholesalers in the city. Overall, the current price situation for the fish catch is satisfactory
with most of the fishers finding the prices to be easy to predict (92.86%), regularly
changing (80.95%), and intermediate (59.52%). As it is, pricing is standardized for the
different species based on size. Regular fluctuation of the prices is linked to the annual
occurrence of algal blooms and typhoons. Meanwhile, intrusions of outsider fish peddlers
coming from Barangays Sucol, Masili and Bay, Laguna into Barangay Bucal are largely
blamed for low prices of fishes according to those few who indicated it. As for the level
of demand for their fish catch, almost all of the artisanal fishers in Barangay Bucal

(92.86%) find that it is high as their supply of fish are almost always sold out.

80

Table 3. Primary characteristics of the resource user-related factors included in the

study according to the artisanal fishers in Barangay Bucal (N=42)'

PRIMARY CHARACTERISTIC FREQUENCY %

Level of ecological knowledge

Low 25 59.52
Diversity of interest in the management of the fishery

Heterogeneous 2B 54.76
Number of artisanal fishers using the fishery

Large 28 66.67
Availability of communication mechanism among the
artisanal fishers

Present 39 92.86
Level of ease in gathering artisanal fishers

Difficult 31 B81
Frequency of fishery management related gatherings

Infrequent 28 66.67
Attendance of the respondent in gatherings

Occasionally present 19 45.24

Commonly present 14 33.33
Acceptability of the open-access status of the fishery

Acceptable 4 97.62
Degree of other-regarding behavior of fellow
artisanal fishers

Moderately to very strongly felt 36 85.71
Degree of other regarding behavior of the respondent

Moderately to very strongly shows 32 76.19
Level of adhesion to rules during severe free
episodes

Will continue to completely adhere to rules 38 90.48
Leader respectability

Respectable 33 78.57
Leader efficiency

Efficient 28 66.67

‘ee Appendix A Tor complete data

Table 3. Continued .

81

PRIMARY CHARACTERISTIC FREQUENCY %
Leader legitimacy
Legitimate 38 90.48
Equality of harvesting in the fishery
Fair 31 B81
Future artisanal fishing plan
Will still be in the fishery in 5 years time 39 92.86
Job satisfaction: Inclination of respondent to choose
fishing again as an occupation if given the chance to
live one’s life all over
Will not take up artisanal fishing again 28 66.67
Job satisfaction: Inclination of respondent to
changing fishing with another occupation at the
present
Not open to replacing artisanal fishing 2 52.38
Proportion of household income from artisanal
fishing
Less than one-half of total household income 24 $7.14
Proportion of household income from non-artisanal
fishing occupation/s
More than one-half of total household income 22 52.38
Proportion of household income from remittances
None of the total household income 36 85.71
Number of membership in fishermen’s association
Membership in one association 32 76.19
Degree of involvement in fishermen’s organization
Not active 2 50.00
Active 2 50.00
Proportion of fish catch marketed
Markets more than one-half of total fish catch 31 73.81
volume
Destination of fish catch
Barangay Bucal 28 66.67

Gee Appendix A for complete data

82

Table 3. Continued .....

PRIMARY CHARACTERISTIC FREQUENCY %
Predictability of the price of the fish catch

Easy 39 92.86
Stability of the price of the fish catch

Prices change regularly 34 80.95
Level of the price of the fish catch

Intermediate 25 59.52
Level of the demand for the fish catch

High 39 92.86

—————————————
‘see Appendix A for complete data

Characteristics of the institutional arrangement-related factors. Rule dissemination
among the artisanal fishers of Barangay Bucal could be difficult. While majority of the
fishers (90.48%) find the rules easy to understand, most of them (61.90%) however have
only intermediate knowledge of the fishery management rules (Table 4). As regards the
policy choice level, majority of the fishers (78.57%) perceived the decision-making
process as inclusive with many of them citing the meetings of BEARMC/SAMBBU as
the venue where they can participate in policy-making (Appendix C). However, despite
this perceived inclusivity of the decision-making process, a slight majority of the fishers
(52.38%) still feel that violation of the rules should be allowed in some cases particularly
during difficult periods of the year. Consistent with this, a slight majority of the fishers
(52.38%) also perceived that there is a need to change the rules. These last two results
support the previous findings that while the fishers have a channel through which they

can all participate in matching the rules to the local condition of the fishery in the form of

83

BFARMC/SAMBBU meetings, such channel is however not optimally used since
gathering the fishers into these meetings appears to be difficult. As such, this could have
resulted in the observed intermediate rule knowledge of most of the fishers as well as the
potentially mismatched operational rules which most of the fishers want to rectify by

allowing some forms of violations and changes to it.

Rule violation was perceived by majority of the fishers (73.81%) to be low. As
such, these respondents perceived that only less than half of the total artisanal fishers
using the fishery are involved in any form of rule violation. This is supported by the
results shown in Figure 3 and Figure 4 indicating that majority of the respondents are
consistently complying with the informal and formal choice rules. On the different forms
of rule violations observed, the use of tibog and the use of electrofishing gears are the
most known to the fishers although the use of fine mesh nets, dredging within the
protected zone, and fishing inside the sanctuary were also cited. Enforcement of the rules
was also seen by almost all of the fishers (97.62%; Appendix A) to be happening

although most (66.67%) perceived selective enforcement. Consistent with the forms of

violations observed, the rules on the use of electrofishing gears, dredge, fine-mesh nets

and tibog were cited as the most unenforced.

Table 4. Primary characteristics of the institutional arrangement-related factors
included in the study according to the artisanal fishers in Barangay Bucal

(N=42)'
PRIMARY CHARACTERISTIC FREQUENCY
Level of rule knowledge
Intermediate 26
Rule complexity
The rules are easy to understand 38
Participatoriness of decision-making process
Participatory 33
Rule violation tolerance
It is acceptable to violate the rules in some situations 22
Scope of rule change needed
The rules need to be changed 2
Level of rule violation
Low 31
Level of rule enforcement
Intermediate 28
Level of rule monitoring
Monitoring is done regularly 25
Mode of sanctioning
Graduated 34
Ease in dispute adjudication
Easy 26
Accountability of officers
The fishwardens and other officers are not held
accountable for their actions 29
Performance of officers
The fishwardens and other officers are only
; 25
performing some of their functions
State intervention
The government is participating in the management
38
of the fishery
Level of aid received
The aid received is not sufficient 26

%

61.90

90.48

78.57

52.38

52.38

73.81

66.67

59.52

80.95

61.90

69.05

59.52

61.90

see Appendix A for complete data

85

‘Compliance to Choice Rules
among Artisanal Fishers

In this study, compliance to the formal choice rules represents cooperative
behavior of the artisanal fishers in the context of their CPR, the coastal fishery. To
indicate the varying degrees of the fishers’ compliance, each were given a CI which is the
sum of the numerical values of their mode of compliance to each of the six formal choice
rules. Considering that never breaking a formal choice rule has a numerical value of
three, occasionally breaking a formal choice rule gets a numerical value of two, and
frequently breaking a formal choice rule gets a numerical value of one, a Cl of 18
signifies that a respondent has never broken any of the formal choice rules and is
therefore consistently compliant. On the other hand, an index below 18 indicates some
configuration of incompliance, while a CI of six would indicate frequent incompliance to
all of the formal choice rules. As it is, those with Cls below 18 are deemed to be

inconsistently complying to the formal choice rules.

With a population CI mean of 17.857, a median of 18 and a skewness of -3.105, it
was found that the distribution of the CI for the informal choice rules, as listed in
‘Appendix B, is highly skewed (Figure 3). This is to be expected as most (88.09%) of the
artisanal fishers of Barangay Bucal are consistent compliers to the informal choice rules,
whereas only very few (i.e. Cl 17, 9.52%; Cl 16, 2.38%) had shown some forms of
incompliance to them (Figure 4). Specifically, of the five identified to have committed
inconsistent compliance to the informal choice rules, three violated the informal choice

rule on the use of electrofishing gears, one on fishing inside the Fish Sanctuary, and

86

another one on the use of fine mesh net. Specifically, of those that violated the rule on the
use of electrofishing gears, two out of the three have committed the violation only

occasionally while the remaining one admitted of frequently doing it.

Based on follow up interviews conducted, those that occasionally use
electrofishing gears revealed that they only do so when it becomes difficult for them to
fish in the open-lake. This, according to them, usually happens during the transition of
the dry and wet seasons when the water level in the lake drops to its lowest. Difficult
periods are known to be critical for rule compliance as shown by previous literature since
severe scarcity or low productivity of resource units during these times lowers discount
rates of the CPR users which can result in a rapid exploitation of the resource (Baland &
Platteau, 1996). On the other hand, the sole violator of the rule against fishing inside the
Fish Sanctuary revealed that his incompliance happened after a strong typhoon washed
off the bamboo poles marking the boundary of the sanctuary. This violation of the rule
due to undefinable sanctuary boundary is consistent with previous literature showing that
cooperation could unlikely be fostered if rules are unclear and ambiguous as users could

not directly appreciate its legitimacy (Baland & Platteau, 1996).

Probability Density
eofRERERSES.

155 16 165 7 7s 8 185
Compliance index
Figure 3. Probability distribution of the Compliance Indices of

the artisanal fishers of Barangay Bucal with respect to
their compliance to the informal choice rules

18

Figure 4. Distribution of CI for the informal choice rules in the
artisanal fisher population of Barangay Bucal

Table 5. Forms of incompliance to the informal choi
identified rule breakers from Barangay Bucal.

rules as exhibited by the five

FORM FREQUENCY %
Occasional use of electrofishing 2 40.00
gears

Frequent use of electro fishing, 1 20.00
gears

Occasional fishing inside the 1 20.00
Fish Sanctuary

Occasional use of fine mesh net 1 20.00

Despite the existence of the informal choice rules in the managemet of the coastal
fishery of Calamba City, it is interesting to note that the artisanal fishers’ rate of
compliance to the formal choice rules remains relatively high. Figure 6 shows that in
terms of the formal choice rules, 54.76% of the respondents have the Cl of 18 while only
23.81% got an index of 16, 19.05% got an index of 17, and only 2.38% got an index of
15. With these indices, the population CI mean of the artisnal fishers is a slightly lower
17.261 while the median is still 18. Although the skewness of the Cl is lower, at - 0.761,
compared to that in the informal choice rules, its asymmetry is still skewed moderately
(Figure 5) which supports the aforementioned observation on the rate of the fishers’

compliance to the formal choice rules.

Probability Density
ehebekebebe

>.
&
s
S
S
&

Figure 5. Probability distribution of the Compliance Indices of the
artisanal fishers of Barangay Bucal with respect to their
compliance to the formal choice rules

Figure 6. Distribution of CI for the formal choice rules in the
artisanal fisher population of Barangay Bucal

Pertaining to the formal choice rules, it was found in the same survey that the
most prevalent form of incompliance is the use of tibog which is in violation of DAO
No.3 Series of 1998 (Sec.90) (Appendix B). Of the 19 identified violators of the formal
choice rules, nine or 47.36% are engaged in the frequent use of tibog while seven or
36.84% use it occasionally. Aside from this, the use of electrofishing gears in violation of
DAO No.3 Series of 1998 (Sec.88) also exists as already discussed above. However,
compared to the former, this form of violation of the formal choice rules has much lower
prevalence as only 10.52% and 5.26% of the 19 are occasionally and frequently engaged
in the use of electrofishing gears respectively. Similarly, occasional fishing inside the
Fish Sanctuary which is a violation of City Ordinance 495 Series of 2011 and the use of
fine mesh net which is a violation of DAO No.3 Series of 1998 (Sec.89) also has lower
frequency among the identified violators with only 5.26% being engaged in these

activities respectively.

The prevalence of violation of the formal choice rule through the use of tibog
could be indicative of the heterogeneity of the fishers in terms of their endowments and
the subsequent unwillingness of the tibog users to accept the said regulation as they are
unequally constrained by it (Johnson & Libecap, 1982 as cited in Baland & Platteau,
1996). This possible explanation is supported by the observations of CASD officers
assigned to the open-lake fishery, that in general the artisanal fishers in Calamba City
would agree with introduced conservation rules just as long as they are not the ones being
inhibited by them (Cynthia Buen, personal communication, August 4, 2015).
Furthermore, as there is high number of tibog users in Barangay Bucal, their non-

cooperation could have been agravated by the problem of “diffusion-of-responsibility”,

91

This means that the relatively widespread use of tibog happens as there is lessend
pressure to follow the rule against tibog-use as it does not focus on anyone and the
responsibility is shared among all of the users (Frank, 1988 as cited by Baland &

Plateau, 1996).

Table 6. Forms of incompliance to the formal operational rules as exhibited by the
19 identified rule breakers from Barangay Bucal

FORM FREQUENCY

Frequent use of tibog 9 4736
Occasional use of tibog 7 36.84
Occasional use of electrofishing 2 10.52
gears

Frequent use of electro fishing 1 5.26
gears

Occasional fishing inside the 1 5.26
Fish Sanctuary

Occasional use of fine mesh net 1 5.26

‘Among the violators of the formal choice rules, only two committed multiple
forms of incompliance. Specifically, these violations are the occasional fishing inside the
Fish Sanctuary coupled with the frequent use of ribog for one of the violators and the
‘occasional use of tibog coupled with the occasional use of fine mesh net for the other. As

for the rest, only one form of rule incompliance is committed.

92

Relationships of Socioeconomic and Exogenous
Factors and Mode of Compliance to
Formal Choice Rules

Relationship of Socioeconomic Factors and Mode of
Compliance to Formal Choice Rules

Table 7 shows that a strong association exists between the artisanal fishers’ mode
of compliance to the formal choice rules and their age, educational attainment, and
number of household fixtures. These three critical factors are here respectively
dichotomized as: a) whether the fishers are < 50 years of age or older; b) whether they
have finished high school or not; and c) whether the number of their household fixtures
are classified as minimal to low or medium to high. Meanwhile, mode of compliance to
formal choice rules is dichotomized as whether the artisanal fishers are consistenly

complying, in which case their Cl = 18, or inconsistenly complying, with Cl < 18.

Table 7. Measure of association between socioeconomic factors and the mode of
compliance to the formal choice rules

FACTORS PHI-COEFFICIENT
Age - 0.3786" _
Household size 0.2390
Educational attainment 0.4175"

Exhibits sirong association to mode of compliance to formal choice rules

93

Table 7. Continued.

FACTORS PHI-COEFFICIENT
Duration of residency in the Barangay 0.1212
Duration of engagement in artisanal fishing 0.1435
Houses structure type 0.2781
Size of houschold fixtures 0.4397*
Motorboat ownership 0.0026

"*Exhibits strong association to mode of compliance to formal choice rules

Considering that these factors, as explanatory variables in the simple logistic
regression, have positive regression coefficients (Table 11), their associations with the
fishers’ mode of compliance are therefore all “positively” oriented. As such, holding
other factors constant, the odds for a consistent compliance to the formal choice rules (i.¢.
having a CI of 18) was found to be 4.9524 times higher when an artisanal fisher is > 50
yrs. old than when he is < 50 yrs. of age; 6.9333 times higher when he has finished high
school than when he has not; and 9.2727 times higher when he has medium to high
number of household fixtures than when he possesses minimal to low number of

household fixtures.

The result above showing a strong “positive” association between relative wealth
(ie. as represented by the fishers’ number of household fixtures) and mode of compliance
to the formal choice rules lend support to the notion that more economically well-off

resource users are more free to follow resource management rules compared to those who

are very poor. This could be because resource users that are hard-pressed by survival
constraints tend to heavily discount the future benefits of conservationist strategies and
overweigh its present costs due to concerns about sheer survival in the short run. As such,
they are highly likely to credibly precommit to non-cooperation when asked to contribute
in the conservation of the resource they are using. In contrast, richer resource users can
safely adopt a more conservative use of the resource since they believe that with their

level of wealth, the total gain from following the management rules would outwei

total cost (Baland & Platicu, 1996).

Based on the result of the pairwise association showing strong association
between the artisanal fishers’ age and number of household fixtures, as well as the result
of the subsequent simple logistic regression showing higher odds for the acquisition of
medium to high number of household fixtures when the artisanal fishers are > 50 yrs. old
than when they are not (Appendix B), it is conjectured that the strong “positive”
association between consistent compliance to the formal choice rules and the fishers
being > 50 years old could be due to the said group being much wealthier compared to
those that are younger. If this is the case and consistent with what is discussed above,
being more privileged has therefore allowed the > 50 years old artisanal fishers to adopt
more conservative use of the coastal fishery. However, aside from this possible
explanation, old age can also be positively linked to cooperative behaviour as it
influences security values (Shwartz, n.d.). According to Schwartz (n.d.), strength, energy,
cognitive speed, memory and sharpness of the senses decline with age. As such, security
values become more important since capacities to cope with change wane. Therefore, it is

further conjectured that the > 50 years old artisanal fishers in Barangay Bucal have higher

95

odds of complying with the formal choice rules since their heightened security values
underlined by their slowed-down capacities to respond to any shut-down practices
necessitate the safe and predictable environment of a formal rule-dominated coastal

fishery.

The strong “positive” associations between the respondents” status of having been

able to finish high school and their membership in BFARMC/SAMBBU (Appendix B) as

well as their consistent compliance to the formal choice rules indicate that education
could be having a positive effect on their civic participation (Milligan, et. al., 2003) or
civic engagement (Young, ef. al., 2011). According to Young, ef. al. (2011), civic
engagement takes various forms including, but not limited to voting, interest group
membership and activity, volunteering, and being involved in local groups, such as
committees and commissions, churches, or citizens’ coalition and movements. As such,
the social benefits of education which in here take the forms of the fishers’ membership
in BFARMC/SAMBBU and their consistent compliance to the formal choice rules may
have accrued as a result of either their education equipping them with cognitive skills that
enhanced their ability to understand the salient fishery management issues in the
municipal water of Calamba City, or their education increasing their interest and

knowledge of environmental and political issues, their involvement in the political

process, and the effectiveness of their political participation (Milligan, ef. a/., 2003).

96

Relationship of Exogenous Factors and
Mode of Compliance to Formal Choice Rules

Relationship of Resource-related Factors and
Mode of Compliance to Formal Choice Rules

Mode of compliance to the formal choice rules has also been found to be strongly
associated with the fishers’ mode of utilizing their Laguna de Bay catfish catch (Table 8).
Specifically, the odds for an artisanal fisher consistently complying to the formal choice
rules is 6.5385 higher when he is into marketing or selling his caught Laguna de Bay
catfish than his odds for the same when he does not sell the said species (Table 11).
Interestingly, it was also found during the pairwise correlation analysis and its subsequent
simple regression analysis that marketing Laguna de Bay catfish has a strong and

“positive” association with medium to high number of household fixtures (Appendix B).

Table 8. Measure of association between resource-related factors and the mode of
compliance to the formal choice rules

FACTOR PHI-COEFFICIE!
Open-lake fishery condition 0.2706
Size of the open-lake fishery 0.0912
Sufficiency of fish catch 0.2205
Able to catch silverperch from the fishery 0.0389

“Exhibits strong association to mode of compliance to formal choice rules

7

FACTOR PHI-COEFFICIENT
Able to catch snakehead from the fishery 0.0338
Able to catch white goby from the fishery 0.1647
Able to catch catfish from the fishery 0.0535
Able to catch white shrimp from the fishery 0.2981
Able to catch bighead carp from the fishery 0.1353
Able to catch milkfish from the fishery 0.0391
Able to frequently catch tilapia from the fishery ona
Able to frequently catch Laguna de Bay from 0.2071
the fishery

Able to frequently catch white shrimp from the 0.2150
fishery

Sells Laguna de Bay catfish caught from the 0.3630*
fishery

Sells snakehead caught from the fishery 0.1664
Sells white shrimp caught from the fishery 0.0454
Sells bighcad carp caught from the fishery 0.1212
Sells milkfish caught from the fishery 0.1353
Sells gourami caught from the fishery 0.2494
Uses screen in the fishery 0.1276
Uses pole and line in the fishery ond
Uses motorized boat in the fishery 0.2202
Frequently uses non-motorized boat in the 0.1212
fishery

Owns a screen ond

“Exhibits strong association to mode of compliance to formal choice rules

98

Table 8. Continued.

FACTOR PHI-COEFFICIENT
Owns a pole and line 0.1664
Owns a motorized boat 0.0588
‘Owns a non-motorized boat 0.2202

‘Observability of banned fishing methods 0.0302

“*Exhibits strong association to mode of compliance to formal choice rules

In this case, artisanal fishers who are compliant are deduced as able to do so for
the additional income from selling Laguna de Bay catfish augments their income from
artisanal fishing. Specifically, their decision to shun the use of tibog, even though it is
allowed by the informal rules, could have been costly in the short term as it can further
decrease the size of their fish catch especially during the months of May to June when the
water level in the fishery is at its lowest. But while Laguna de Bay catfish is one of the
least marketed species and one with the lowest market price owing to its strong ramish
taste, the fact that it is also one of the easiest to catch in the fishery, just next to tilapia,
could mean that the income derived from its marketing could be high enough to support

the conservationist strategy of some of the artisanal fishers.

Relationship of Resource User-related Factors and
Mode of Compliance to Formal Choice Rules

For resource user-related factors, it was found that the number of fishermen’s
association joined by the artisanal fishers is strongly associated with their mode of
compliance to the formal choice rules (Table 9). However, since BFARMC/SAMBBU is
the only fishermen’s association in Barangay Bucal, the above factor has become a
representation on how the artisanal fishers’ perceived their state of membership in the
said association. As such, the odds of an artisanal fisher consistently complying to the
formal choice rules is 9.4500 higher when he considers himself a member of the
BFARMC/SAMBBU as compared to his odds for the same when he no longer sees or

does not see himself to be a part of the association (Table 11).

Table 9. Measure of association between resource user-related factors and the mode

of compliance to the formal choice rules
FACTOR PHI-COEFFICIENT

Level of ecological knowledge 0.1276
Diversity of interest in the management of the 0.0572

fishery

Number of artisanal fishers using the fishery 0.0338

Level of ease in gathering the artisanal fishers 0.2150
Frequency of fishery management related 0.0338
gatherings

Attendance of the respondent in gatherings 0.2367

"Exhibits strong association to mode of compliance to formal choice rules

Table 9. Continued ...

100

PHI-COEFFICIENT

FACTOR

Degree of other-regrading behaviour of the 0.0389
respondent

Degree of other-regarding behaviour of fellow 0.0676
artisanal fishers

Leader efficiency 0.0677
Equality of harvesting in the fishery 0.0026
Proportion of household income from artisanal 0.1795
fishing

Non-artisanal fishing occupation of the 0.1062
respondent

Proportion of houschold income from non- 0.0605
artisanal fishing occupation

Job satisfaction: inclination of respondent to 0.1353

choose fishing again as an occupation if given

the chance to live one’s life all over

Job satisfaction: inclination of respondent to 0.1003

changing fishing with another occupation at the

present

Number of membership in fishermen’s 0.4378*
organization

Proportion of fish catch marketed 0.1062

Destination of fish catch 0.1062

Level of price of fish catch 0.0123

“Exhibits strong association to mode of compliance to formal choice rules.

As discussed above, the strong “po:

ive” associations of both membership in

fishermen’s association and consistent compliance to the formal choice rules with

101

educational attainment are indicative of the enhancing and broadening effect of education
on the artisanal fishers’ civic participation (Young, ef. al., 2011). However, the strong,
association observed between the respondents’ mode of compliance to the formal choice
rules and number of membership in fishermen’s association (Table 9), as well as the
higher odds ratio for consistent compliance when a respondent perceives that he is a
member of BFARMC/SAMBBU (Table 11) could also indicate the positive impact of
group membership on cooperation. In Goette, ef. al. (2006), it was shown that group
membership can have a strong effect on the willingness of members to act unselfishly in
the service of the group in terms of them preferring greater cooperation with fellow group
members and having enhanced willingness to engage in altruistic punishment when
fellow group members are the victim of defection. Thus, if such effect characterizes
BFARMC/SAMBBU, it can be deduced that membership in it has increased the rate of
cooperation among its members as they believe more that other artisanal fishers,
specifically the other members of the group, will also consistently comply with the
formal choice rules, and that freeriders will eventually be punished, also by their fellow

association members (Goette, et. al., 2006).

Relationship of Institutional Arrangement-related Factors and
Mode of Compliance to Formal Choice Rules

As shown in Table 10, none of the institutional arrangement-related factors
included in the study exhibited strong association with the fishers’ mode of compliance to

the formal choice rules. However, the respondents’ perception of the scope of rule-

102

change needed in the current institutional arrangement has a phi-coefficient of 0.2919

which is near the threshold value of > 0.30.

Table 10. Measure of association between institutional arrangement-related factors
and the mode of compliance to the formal choice rules

FACTOR PHI-COEFFICIENT
Rule violation tolerance 0.1003
Scope of rule-change needed 0.2919
Level of rule violation 0.0026
Level of rule enforcement 0.1946
Level of rule monitoring 0.1276
Mode of sanctioning rule violations 0.0464
Ease in dispute adjudication 0.0751
Accountability of officers 0.1158
Performance of officers 0.0302
State intervention 0.0605

Table 11. Summary of simple regression coefficients and odds ratios of
socioeconomic and exogenous factors exhibiting strong association with
mode of compliance to the formal choice rules

REGRESSION
FACTOR COEFFICIENT ODDS RATIO
Age 1.5999 4.9524

Educational attainment 1.9363 6.9333


Table 11. Continued

103

REGRESSION
FACTOR COEFFICIENT ODDS RATIO
Size of household fixtures 2.2271 9.2727
Selling of Laguna de Bay nea 6.5385
catfish
Number of membership in Pa ary

fishermen’s association


CHAPTER V

SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS

Summary and Conclusions

The study provides an assessment of the compliance of the fishers of Barangay
Bucal to the formal choice rules enacted for artisanal fishing in the municipal waters of
Calamba City. It also evaluated the different socioeconomic characteristics of the
artisanal fishers, and the exogenous factors stemming from the said resource users, the
coastal fishery, and the institutional arrangement used in the management of the fishery.
Furthermore, it identified the factors influencing the consistent compliance of the fishers
to the aforesaid choice rules.

The artisanal fishers of Barangay Bucal composed the primary respondents of
the study. Semi-structured and Structured interview schedules were respectively used in
gathering data for the preliminary investigation phase and the formal survey phase.

Based on the result of the survey, it was found that consistent compliance to the
formal choice rules among the artisanal fishers of Barangay Bucal is moderate.
Nevertheless, this indicates that despite the existence of an alternative set of informal
choice rules, a slight majority of the fishers are still able to consistiently comply with the

formal choice rules. As such, this disproves the notion that the formal choice rules, which

105

are directly adopted from RA 8550, are unimplementable in its entirety. The use of tibog
comprises most of the incompliance to the formal choice rules; here, a slightly higher
number of fishers use tibog frequently compared to those who use it only occasionally.
This underscores the vital function of tibog in the use of gillnet which is the most widely
used fishing gear among the Barangay Bucal fishers. In the quantitative analysis that
followed, it was found that consistent compliance to the formal choice rules is
“positively” influenced if a) a fisher has medium to high number of household fixtures, b)
is >50 years old in age, c) has completed highschool, d) is into marketing his Laguna de
Bay catfish catch, and ) is a member of BFARMC/SAMBBU. These factors comprise
what Agrawal called “configuration of local conditions” that tipped decision nodes faced
by the artisanal fishers in favour of the consistent compliance to the formal choice rules.
Consequently, these results support the view that the artisanal fishers’ cooperation in
using the formal choice rules, which could lead to an improvement of the conservation of
the coastal fishery of Calamba City, could be increased a) if artisanal fishers are not

experi

icing survival-constraints that can prevent them from absorbing the cost inherent
in the consistent compliance to the formal choice rules; b) if they have the necessary set
of cognitive skills, interest, and knowledge of the political and ecological issues
surrounding the management of the coastal fishery which would enhance and broaden
their participation in the collective action necessary for it; and c) if they have developed
‘strong moral norms that would allow them to trust that other artisanal fishers would
reciprocate their cooperative behaviour of consistently complying to the formal choice

rules.

106

In order to improve the conservation of the coastal fishery through increased
cooperation among its artisanal fishers in using the formal choice rules, certain changes
to the current institutional arrangement affecting conservation efforts should be

considered.

Firstly, to increase the rate of consistent compliance to the formal choice rules,
the formal institutional arrangement structuring artisanal fishing in the coastal fishery of
Calamba City should be augmented. As of the present, only six formal rules make-up the
said institutional arrangement. Of this number, five are choice rules while one is
classified as boundary rule. Except for the formal choice rule against the use of motorized
push-net, all of the other formal rules have been converted into alternative and less
stringent informal rules or social norms (Appendix B). Based on field observations made
and in line with the work of Cole (n.d.) on the typologies of relationship between formal
rules and “working rules”, it is deduced that such structure of the institutional-
arrangement has resulted in a very limited enforcement of the formal choice rules. Thus,
the artisanal fishers of Barangay Bucal, with respect to their choice of artisanal fishing
mode, could not be expected to include in their calculation of total pay-offs the
sanctioning components of the formal choice rules as long as the informal choice rules
persist. Guided by the findings of this study that medium to high wealth level positively
influences consistent compliance to the formal choice rules, city ordinance/s that are pay-

off rule/s by nature should be enacted by the Calamba City Sanggunian Bayan in addition

107

to the five formal choice rules already existing. These pay-off rules should aim for the
giving of side-payments to incompliant artisanal fishers experiencing severe survival-
constraints in exchange for their consistent compliance to the formal choice rules until
such time they gain a more lucrative secondary employment. To achieve collective
action, the side-payments should be more than the violators’ present income from the

banned fishing methods (Baland & Platteau, 1996).

Thus, it is deduced that the present “absence” of disincentives for non-compliance
to the formal choice rules will be countered by the incentives for consistently following
them as will be realized by the pay-off transfer associated with the suggested pay-off
rules when enacted. RA 8550 provides the necessary constitutional basis for the
enactment of such pay-off rule/s. Specifically, these bases are found in, but not limited to,
DAO No.3 Series of 1998 (Sec. 2; Objective 2), DAO No.3 Series of 1998 (Sec. 16; Rule

16.7) and DAO No.3 Series of 1998 (Sec. 109).

Secondly, revision of the boundary-rules of the program “Training and Capal

ty

Building”, which is one of the recurent projects of Calamba City aimed at strengthening
the management of its coastal fishery, should be undertaken. Based on the result of the
study that higher educational attainment has strong positive associations with
membership in BFARMC/SAMBBU as well as consistent compliance to the formal
choice rules; thus, all of the barangay’s artisanal fishers should be made eligible to
participate in the said project and not only the FARMC leaders. As it is, the project is
spearheaded by the Calamba City Goverment, CFARMC and CENRO. It provides

paralegal trainings as well as trainings on leadership, team building, preparation of

108

project proposals, deputation of Bantay Lawa fishwardens, and parliamentary procedures
to FARMC leaders (CASD, 2014). By allowing the artisanal fishers to participate in it, it
is expected that their cognitive skills as well as their interest and knowledge of the many
political and ecological issues surrounding the management of the fishery will be
increased. By doing so, it is deduced that there will be an enhancement and broadening of
the artisanal fishers’ civic participation in the form of increased preference for
membership in BFARMC/SAMBBU and ultimately more consistent compliance to the

formal choice rules.

But more than remedying the present institutional arrangement to improve
cooperation among the artisanal fishers of Barangay Bucal, it is further recommended
that studies similar to this one should be conducted in the future. Specifically, these
studies should assess the other nine coastal barangays of Calamba City. This must be
done as the artisanal fishers of these other barangays also harvest from the same
municipal water and are therefore exposed and at liberty of exposing other artisanal
fishers to both negative and positive externalities coming from their activities in the said
CPR. Thus, a more sustainable institutional arrangement could be formulated if the
determinants of compliance to the formal choice rules among all groups of artisanal

fishers using the municipal water of Calamba City could be assessed.

LITERATURE CITED

AGRAWAL, A. 2002. Common resources and institutional sustainability. In: Ostrom, E.,
Dietz, T., Dolsak, N., Stern, P.C., Stonich, S. and Weber, E.U. (ed) The drama of
the commons. National Academy Press, Washington, DC, pp. 41-86

BALAND, J. AND PLATTEAU. 1996. Halting degradation of natural resources: Is there
a role for rural communities? Clrendon Press, Oxford, England

BARRIL, C.R. AND TUMLOS, E.T. 2010. Water quality trends and trophic state
assessment of Laguna de Bay, Philippines. Aquatic Ecosystem Health and
Management 5:2: 115-126. Retrieved from
http /www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/14634980290031811

BASURTO, X., KINGSLEY, G., MCQUEEN, K., SMITH, M., AND WEIBLE, C.M.
2010. A systematic approach to institutional analysis: Applying Crawford and
Ostrom’s grammatical syntax. Political Research Quarterly 63(3): 523-537.
Retrieved from http://prq.sagepub.com/conten/63/3/523

CITY AGRICULTURAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT. 2012. Calamba City FARMC
Profile. Calamba City, Laguna. Author

CITY AGRICULTURAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT. 2013. Calamba City FARMC
Profile. Calamba City, Laguna. Author

CITY AGRICULTURAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT. 2014. Calamba City FARMC
Profile. Calamba City, Laguna. Author

CITY AGRICULTURAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT. 2015. Calamba City FARMC
Profile. Calamba City, Laguna. Author

City profile. 2015. Retrieved from http://Awww.calambacity.gov.ph/index.php/ct-menu-

item-3/city-profile
COLE, D.H., n.d. Formal institutions and the [AD framework: Bringing the law back in.
Retrieved from

https://ostromworkshop.indiana.edu/pdf/seriespapers/2015s_c/Cole_paper.pdf

CONCEPCION, R.N., GAON, B., BANALO, R., BUEN, C., AND GUERRERO, E.
2014. Project component 2: RIHN, Kyoto, Japan-funded managing environmental
risks to food and health security in Asian watersheds [Powerpoint slides].
Unpublished manuscript.

110

CONCEPCION, R.N., KADA, R., GAON, B.F. AND BANALO, R. n.d. Community-
based, trans-sectoral validation research and development - Yaman ng Lawa
Yankaw Fish Garden Sanctuary Pilot Project. Manuscript in preparation

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION (FAO). 1997. Section 1.2: The
fisheries management process. In: Fisheries and Aquaculture Department (ed)
FAO technical guidelines for fisheries - fisheries management. Rome, Italy.
Retrieved from http://www. fao.org/docrep/003/w4230e/w4230e05.htm#bm05.2

HERRERA, E.C., NADAOKA, K., BLANCO, E.C. AND HERNANDEZ, E.C. 2011. A
partnership for sustainable lake development: collaborative monitoring and
research on Laguna de Bay, Philippines for management of resource use and
ecosystem conservation. Lakes and Reservoir: Research and Management. 16:
137-148.

HODGSON, G.M. 2006. What are institutions? Journal of Economic Issues XL: 1-25.

Retrieved from http://www.geoffrey-
hodgson. info/user/bin/whatareinstitutions.pdf

INTERNATIONAL CENTER FOR LIVING AQUATIC — RESOURCES
MANAGEMENT (ICLARM) and North Sea Center (NSC). 1996. Analysis of
fisheries co-management arrangements: A research framework. Retrieved from
https://dlc.dlib. indiana.edw/dlc/bitstrean/handle/10535/4874/Pomeroy.pdf?sequen
ce=l

KATON, B.M., POMEROY, R.S., AND SALAMANCA, A. 1997. The marine
conservation project for San Salvador: A case study of fisheries co-management
in the Philippines. Naga, Philippines. ICLARM and Haribon Foundation.

LACANILAO, F. 1987. Managing Laguna Lake for the small fishermen. SEAFDEC
Asian Culture. 9(3): 3-4, 8, 12.

LAGUNA LAKE DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (LLDA) n.d. 2009 to 2012 Annual
water quality report on the Laguna de Bay and its tributary rivers. Taytay, Rizal.
‘Author

MCGINNIS, M.D. 2010. An introduction to IAD and the language of the Ostrom
Workshop: A simple guide to a complex framework for the analysis of institutions
and their development. Retrieved from

http://php.indiana.edu/~mcginnis/iad_guide.pdf

MILLIGAN, K., MORETTI, E., AND OREOPOULOS, P. 2003. Does education
improve citizenship? Evidence form U.S. and the U.K. Retrieved from
http://eml.berkeley.edu/~moretti/citizen.pdf

11

OSTROM, E. 1990. Governing the commons. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
England

OSTROM, E. 2005. Understanding Institutional Diversity. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, New Jersey

PARTNERSHIPS IN ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT FOR THE SEAS OF
EAST ASIA (PEMSEA), DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT AND
NATURAL SCIENCES (DENR) & THE LAGUNA LAKE DEVELOPMENT
AUTHORITY. 2013. Total pollutant loading study in the Laguna de Bay-Pasig
River-Manila Bay watershed. Quezon City. Author.

POLSKI, M.M. AND OSTROM, E. 1999. An institutional framework for policy analysis
and design. Retrieved from
https://mason,gmu.edu/~mpolski/documents/PolskiOstromIAD.pdf

QUINTOS, C.R. 2007. Basic facts on Laguna de Bay: “the lake of Bay” [Powerpoint
slides).

SANTOS-BORIJA, L.C. 2005, May. Aquaculture development and management in
Laguna de Bay. Paper presented at First Living Lake African Regional
Conference. Kisumu-Mbita, Kenya.

SANTOS-BORJA, A. AND NEPOMUCENO, D.N. 2006. Laguna de Bay: Institutional
development and change for lakebasin management. Lakes and Reservoirs:
Research and Management | 1: 257-269.

SCHLAGER, E. 1990. Model specification and policy analysis: The governance of
coastal fisheries (Doctoral dissertation). University of Indiana, Bloomington,
Indiana

SCHLAGER, E., BLOMQUIST, W. AND TANG, S.Y. 1994. Mobile flows, storage, and
self-organized institutions for governing common-pool resources. Land
Economics 70(3): 294-317. Retrieved from
http://search.proquest,com/docview/206730043?accountid=47253

SHWARTZ, S.H. n.d. Basic human values: An overview. Retrieved from The Hebrew
of Jerusalem Online: hitp://segr-
did2.fmag.unict.iV/A llegati/eonvegno%207-8-10-05/Schwartzpaper.pdf

THOMSON, J.T. 1992. A framework for analyzing institutional incentives in community
forestry. Retrieved from http://www. fao.org/docrep/006/u7150e/u7150e00.htm


12

THOMSON, J.T. AND FREUDENBERGER, K.S. 1997. Crafting institutional
arrangements for community forestry. Retrieved from

http://www. fao.org/docrep/w7483e/w7483c00.htm
VATN, A. 2006. Institutions. http://isecoeco.org/pdf/Institutions_Arild_Vatn.pdf

WADE, R. 1994. Village republics: Economic conditions for collective action in South
India. Institute for Contemporary Studies, San Francisco, California

YNARES, C.A. 2006, November. The state of Laguna de Bay: conditions, trends, and
interventions [Powerpoint slides}

YOUNG, E. 2011. The impacts of educational attainment, professional interests, and
residency on community involvement and civic engagement. Colonial Academic
Alliance Undergraduate Research Journal: 2 (4): 1-18. Retrieved from:
http://publish.wm.edu/caaurj/vol2/iss 1/4

APPENDICES

113

Appendix A
Tables

114

Appendix Table 1. Complete data on the socio-economic characteristics of the open-lake

fishers in Barangay Bucal, 2015 (N=42)

CHARACTERISTIC FREQUENCY %
Age
16-30 2 4.76
31-50 18 42.86
> 50 22 52.38
Ethnicity
Barangay Bucal 32 76.19
Other Laguna towns 2 4.76
Batangas 4 9.52
Albay 1 2.38
Other places 3 714
Duration of residency in the barangay
15-30 8 19.05
31-45 7 16.67
46-60 21 50.00
Above 60 6 14.29
Household size
<3 3 714
3 8 19.02
4 10 23.81
5 5 191
6 6 14.23
>6 10 23.81
Brood size
13 26 62.00
46 12 28.57
7-9 4 9.52
Educational attainment
Elementary drop-out 8 19.05
Elementary graduate 9 21.43
High school drop out 9 21.43
High school graduate 15 35.71
College drop out 1 2.38


Appendix Table 1. Continued ...

115

CHARACTERISTIC FREQUENCY %
Duration of engagement in artisanal fishing
<15 5 1191
15-30 16 38.10
31-45 12 28.60
46-60 1 2.38
> 60 8 19.05
House structure type
Minimal 2 4.76
Low 8 19.05,
Medium 16 38.10
High 16 38.10
Number of household fixtures
Minimal 9 21.43
Low 19 45.24
Medium 12 28.57
High 2 4.76
Land ownership
0 sq.m 35 83.33
1-100 sq.m 3 714
101-200 sq. m 2 476
201-300 sq.m 1 2.38
> 300 sq. m 1 2.38
Motor-boat ownership
0 31 B81
T unit in 26.19

Appendix Table 2. Complete data on the characteristics of the coastal fishery as collected
from the artisanal fishers of Barangay Bucal, 2015 (N=42)

(CHARACTERISTIC FREQUENCY %
Open-lake fishery condition
Very bad 2 4.76
Bad 26 61.91
Good 9 21.43
Very good 5 191


Appendix Table 2. Continued

116

CHARACTERISTIC FREQUENCY %
Sufficiency of fish catch
Not enough 16 38.10
Just enough 2 50.00
More than enough 5 191
Size of the open-lake fishery
‘Small 8 19.10
Intermediate 3 31.00
Large 2 50.00
Observability of the artisanal fishers
Difficult 29 69.10
Easy 3 31.00
Observability of the fish sanctuary’s boundary
Difficult 2 4.80
Easy 40 95.24
Number of species catchers
Tilapia 4 97.62
Laguna de Bay catfish 40 95.24
Milkfish 36 85.71
Gourami 36 85.71
Catfish 32 76.19
Bighead carp 28 66.67
‘Snakehead/Mudfish 27 65.85
Silverperch/Therapon 19 45.24
White goby 7 40.48
White shrimp 13 30.95
Number of frequent species catchers
Tilapia 31 B81
Laguna de Bay catfish 24 $7.14
White shrimp i 26.19
Catfish 4 9.52
Silverperch 3 714
‘Snakehead/Mudfish 2 4.16
Gourami 2 4.76
White goby 1 2.38
Milkfish ) 0.00
Bighcad carp 0 0.00
Number of species sellers
Tilapia 33 78.57
28 66.67
23 54.76


117

Appendix Table 2. Continued ...

CHARACTERISTIC FREQUENCY %
Bighead carp 15 35.71
White shrimp 12 28.57
Laguna de Bay catfish 12 28.57
Snakehead 12 28.57
Catfish 9 21.43
Silverperch 8 19.05
White goby 3 714
Number of gear users
Gill net 38 90.48
Screen 17 40.48
Tibog 16 38.09
Pole and line WW 26.20
Fish pot 1 16.67
Harpoon/Spear 6 14.29
Manual siene 5 91
Electrofishing gear 3 7.14
Yankaw 1 2.38
Drift long line 1 2.38
Fish corral 0 0.00
Air riffle/gun 0 0.00
Dredge 0 0.00
Motorized push net 0 0.00
Namber of vessel users
Non-motorized 35 83.33
Motorized in 26.20
Number of frequent gear users
Gillnet 35 83.33
Tibog 9 21.43
Fish pot 6 1429
Harpoon 2 476
Manual seine fl 238
Screen 0 0.00
Pole and line 0 0.00
Yankaw 0 0.00
Fish corral 0 0.00
Drift long line 0 0.00
Air gun/rifle 0 0.00
Dredge 0 0.00
Electrofishing gear 0 0.00
Motorized push-net 0 0.00

Number of frequent vessel users
Non-motorized 27 64.29
Motorized 6 14.29


118

Appendix Table 2. Continued .......

CHARACTERISTIC FREQUENCY %
Number of gear owners
Gillnet 37 88.10
Tibog 14 33.33
Pole and line 2 28.57
Screen u 26.19
Fish pot 8 19.10
Harpoon 6 14.29
Manual seine 3 7.14
Electrofishing gear 2 4.76
Yankaw 1 2.38
Fish corral 0 0.00
Drift long line 0 0.00
Airgun 0 0.00
Dredge 0 0.00
Motorized push net 0 0.00
Number of vessel owners
‘Non-motorized 31 BB
Motorized 10 23.81
Observability of the banned fishing methods
None of the banned methods are observable 3 7.14
Some of the banned methods are observable 15 35.71
All of the banned methods are observable 4 57.14

Appendix Table 3. Complete data on the characteristics of the resurce users of the coastal
fishery as collected from the artisanal fishers of Barangay Bucal, 2015 (N=42)

(CHARACTERISTIC FREQUENCY %

Level of ecological knowledge

Low 25 $9.52

High 7 40.48
Interest of the fishers in the management of the fishery

Heterogeneous 23 54.76

Homogenous 19 45.24
Number of artisanal fishers using the fishery

‘Small 2 4.76

Intermediate 12 28.57

Large 28 66.67


119

Appendix Table 3. Continued .

CHARACTERISTIC FREQUENCY %

Availability of communication mechanism among the
artisanal fishers

None 3 7.14
Present 39 92.86
Level of ease in gathering the artisanal fishers
Difficult 31 B8l
Easy u 26.19
Frequency of fishery management related gatherings
Infrequent 28 66.67
Frequent 14 33.33
Attendance of the respondent in gatherings
Always absent 9 21.43
Occasionally present 19 45.24
Commonly present 14 33.33
Acceptability of the open-access status of the fishery
Unacceptable 1 2.38
Acceptable 41 97.62
Degree of other-regarding behaviour of fellow artisanal
fishers
1 3 714
2 3 7.14
3 17 40.48
4 8 19.05
5 " 26.19
Degree of other regarding behaviour of the respondent
1 5 11.90
2 5 11.90
3 18 42.86
4 6 14.26
5 8 19.05
Level of adhesion to rules during severe free riding
episodes
Will also ignore rules 1 239
Will adhere to rules sometimes 3 714
Will continue to completely adhere to rules 38 90.48
Leader respectal
Not respectable 9 21.43

Respectable 33 78.57


120

Appendix Table 3. Continued

CHARACTERISTIC FREQUENCY coe

Leader efficiency

Inefficient 4 33.33

Efficient 28 66.67
Leader legitimacy

Mlegitimate 4 9.52

Legitimate 38 90.48
Equality of harvesting in the fishery

Unfair u 26.19

Fair 31 BB
Future artisanal fishing plan

Will leave the fishery in 5 years time 3 7.14

Will still be in the fishery in 5 years time 39 92.86

Job satisfaction: Inclination of respondent to choose

fishing again as an occupation if given the chance to live
one’s life all over
Will take up artisanal fishing again 4 33.33
Will not take up artisanal fishing again 28 66.67

Job satisfaction: Inclination of respondent to changing
fishing with another occupation at the present

‘Not open to replacing artisanal fishing 2 52.38
Open to replacing artisanal fishing” 20 47.62
Proportion of household income from artisanal fishing
0 2 476
<%>0 8 19.05
% 12 28.57
>’ <% 2 4.76
% 8 19.05
>h<% 0 0.00
% 6 14.29
>% <1 3 714
1 1 2.38
Proportion of household income from non-artisanal
fishing occupation/s
i) 2 4.76
<%>0 5 11.90
% 5 11.90
>< 0 0.00
% 8 19.05
> <% 2 4.76
% 12 28.57


121

Appendix Table 3. Continued

CHARACTERISTIC FREQUENCY %
>”%<1 7 16.67
1 1 2.38
Proportion of household income from remittances
0 36 85.71
<%>0 3 714
% 1 2.38
>A 0 0.00
% 0 0.00
> <% 0 0.00
% 1 2.38
>%<1 1 238
1 0 0.00
Number of membership in fishermen’s association
None 9 21.43
1 32 76.19
>2 1 2.38
Degree of involvement in fishermen’s organization
Not active 2 50.00
Active 21 50.00
Proportion of fish catch marketed
0 3 714
<%>0 1 2.38
% 1 2.38
DUK 1 2.38
% 5 11.90
> <% 3 7.14
% 13 30.95
>%<1 7 16.67
1 8 19.05
Destination of fish catch
None 3 714
Barangay Bucal 28 66.67
Calamba City " 26.19
Predictability of price of fish catch
Difficult 3 714
Easy 39 92.86
Stability of price of fish catch
Prices do not change at all 6 14.26
Prices change regularly 34 80.95

Prices change erratically 2 4.76


122

Appendix Table 3. Continued

CHARACTERISTIC FREQUENCY %
Level of price of fish catch
Low 13 30.95
Intermediate 25 59.52
High 4 9.52
Level of demand for fish catch
Low 1 2.38
Moderate 2 4.76
High 39 92.86

Appendix Table 4. Complete data on the characteristics of the institutional arrangements
affecting artisanal fishing in the coastal fishery as collected from the artisanal
fishers of Barangay Bucal, 2015 (N=42)

CHARACTERISTIC FREQUENCY %

Level of rule knowledge

Low 2 4.76

Intermediate 26 61.90

High 14 33.33
Rule complexity

The rules are difficult to understand 4 9.52

The rules are easy to understand 38 90.48
Participatoriness of decision-making process

Non-participatory 9 21.43

Participatory 33 78.57
Rule n tolerance

Itis unacceptable to violate the rules in all situations 20 47.62

Itis acceptable to violate the rules in some situations 2 52.38
Scope of rule change needed

‘All of the rules need to be changed 3 714

Only some of the rules need to be changed 19 45.24

Alll of the rules need not be changed 20 47.62
Level of rule violation

High 5 11.90

Intermediate 6 14.26

Low 31 BB


123

Appendix Table 4. Continued
CHARACTERISTIC FREQUENCY %
Level of rule enforcement
Low 1 238
Intermediate 28 66.67
High 3 30.95
Level of rule monitoring
‘No monitoring is done 0) 0.00
Monitoring is done irregularly 17 40.48
Monitoring is done regularly 25 59.52
Mode of sanctioning
Graduated 34 80.95
Harsh 8 19.04
Ease in dispute adjudication
Difficult 16 38.10
Easy 26 61.90

Accountability of officers
The fishwardens and other officers are not held

accountable for their actions i Ee)
The fishwardens and other officers are not held 29 69.05
accountable for their actions ~
Performance of officers
‘The fishwardens and other officers are not performing
rf . 0 0.00
their fucntions
The fishwardens and other officers are only perfoming, 25 59.52
‘some of their functions
‘The fishwardens and other officers are performing all of 7 40.48
their functions
State intervention
‘The government is not participating in the management 5 on
of the fishery — E
‘The government is participating in the management of the 38 048
fishery
The government is just needlessly interfering with the
1 2.38
management of the fishery
Level of aid received
No aid is received 4 9.52
‘The aid received is not sufficient 26 61.90

The aid received is sufficient 12 28.57


124

Appendix B
Tables

Appendix Table 1. Critical Enabling Conditions for Sustainability on the Commons’

‘SOURCES
ENABLING CONDITIONS RW EO [BAP
Resource system characteristics
a) Small size +
b)_Well-defined boundaries *[*
©) Low levels of mobility
4d) Possibilities of storage of benefits from the resource ul
©) Predictability |
Group characteristics
a) Small size FS +
b) Clearly defined boundaries *[*
©)_Shared norms ¥
d)_ Past successful experiences — social capital .
€) Appropriate leadership — young, familiar with changing ;
external environments, connected to local traditional elite
f) Interdependence among group members * +
2) Heterogeneity of endowments, homogeneity of identities and :
interests
h) Low levels of poverty
Relationship between resource system characteristics and group -
characteristics
a) Overlap between user group residential location and resource |, :
location
b) High levels of dependence by group members on resource :
system
¢) Fairness in allocation of benefits from common resources +
d)_Low levels of user demand [Ez
) Gradual change in levels of demand (

RW - Wade (1988)

EO - Ostrom (1990)

B&P - Baland and Platteu (1996)
~ Added by Agrawal (2005)

"Adapted from Agrawal (2005)

Appendix Table 1. Continued ..

125

SOURCES

ENABLING CONDITIONS

RW|EO

B&P

Institutional arrangements

a) Rules are simple and easy to understand

b) Locally devised access and management rules

©) Ease in enforcement of rules

d) Graduated sanctions

©)

Availability of low-cost adjudication

f) Accountability of monitors and other officials to users

Relationships between resource system and institutional
arrangements

a) Match restrictions on harvests to regeneration of resources

External environment

a) Technology

T__ Low-cost exclusion technology

2. Time for adaptation to new technologies related to the
commons

b) Low levels of articulation with external markets

c) Gradual change in articulation with external markets

d) State:

T. Central governments should not undermine local
authority

2. Supportive external sanctioning institutions

3. Appropriate levels of external aid to compensate local
users for conservation acti

4. Nested levels of appropriation, provision, enforcement,
governance

RW - Wade (1988)

EO - Ostrom (1990)

B&P - Baland and Platteu (1996)
- Added by Agrawal (2005)

‘Adapted from Agrawal (2005)


Appendix Table 2. Categorization of ecological goods and services”

126

NATURE OF CONSUMPTI

SUBTRACTIVE JOINT
oy Private goods and Or
FEASIBILITY OF services
EXCLUSION ‘Common pool goods | Public goods and
DIFFICULT and services services

Adapted from Thomson and Freudenberger, 1997

Table 3. Prices per kilogram (P/Kg) of the different fish types sold by the open-lake fishers

of Barangay Bucal
SPECIES PRICE

Silverperch 60-80
White shrimp 50-75
Tilapia 20-75
‘Snakehead/Mudfish 60-70
Catfish 50-60
Milkfish 15-60
Gourami 30-40
Laguna de Bay catfish 20-35
Bighead carp 10-30


Appendix Table 4. The different types of rules and other institution:

127

statements existing

relative to the management of the fishery used by the open-lake fishers of Barangay

Bucal.

RULE TYPE

INSTITUTIONAL STATEMENT

Position rule

Al. (None)

A2. (Social norm)
City Ordinance No. 540 Series of 2013:

‘The Government of Calamba through the City Agricultural Services
Department must create the position of municipal open-lake fisher
through the implementation of the National Fisherfolk Registration
Program.

A3. (Social norm)
City Ordinance No. 541 Series of 2013:

The City Government of Calamba must create the position of
fishwarden through the formation of the City of Calamba Task Force
Bantay Lawa.

Boundary rules

BI. (Formal rule)
City Ordinance No. 540 Series of 2013:

‘The municipal open-lake fishers must be residents of legal age
engaged in the fisheries as a source of livelihood for their families
and residing at the city of Calamba at least six (6) months or else
they must not be listed in the registry of municipal fisherfolks and
must be fined Five Hundred Pesos (500.00) and their catch
confiscated when they engage in commercial fishing activity in the
municipal water.

B2. (Social norm)
Any open-lake fisher that engage in commercial fishing activity in
the municipal water of Calamba City must be considered as
municipal open-lake fishers regardless of their origin and their
purpose of fishing.

B3. (Social norm)

City Ordinance No. 541 Series of 2013:

Fishwardens must either be Barangay Officials, PSO, or BFARMC
members that have attended and completed a deputation training,
provided by the authorized resource person of the Bureau of


128

Appendix Table 4. Continued

RULE TYPE

INSTITUTIONAL STATEMENT

‘isherics and Aquatic Resources (BFAR) and Laguna Lake
Development Authority (LLDA).

B4. (Informal rule)

Fishwardens must cither be Barangay Officials, PSO, or BEARMC
members that have attended and completed a deputation training
provided by the authorized resource person of the Bureau of
Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR) and Laguna Lake
Development Authority (LDA) or else they must not perform the
duties and functions of being a fishwarden.

Choice rules

C1. (Formal rule)

City Ordinance 495 Series of 2011:

Municipal open-lake fishers must not harvest fish inside the fish
sanctuary or else they must either pay a fine of One Thousand Pesos
(1,000.00) or face imprisonment for ten (10) days for their first
offense; must either pay a fine of One Thousand Five Hundred Pesos
(1,500.00) or face imprisonment for not more than three (3) months
for their second offense; or must either pay a fine of Two Thousand
Five Hundred Pesos (2,500.00) or face imprisonment for not more
than six (6) months for their third offense.

2. (Informal rule)

Municipal open-lake fishers must not fish inside the sanctuary except
when they are using pole and line or else they must be ordered by the
fishwardens to stop doing so and have them write a signed deposition
of their violation, complete with their name and Barangay of origin, if
they are uninitiated with the Informal Choice Rules of the municipal
water; or the fishwardens must confiscate their catch and fishing gear
and penalized them to do community service if they are deemed
initiated with the Informal Choice Rules.

C3. (Formal rule)

DAO No.3 Series of 1998 (Sec.88):

Municipal open-lake fishers must not use electrofishing gears or else
they must be imprisoned from five (5) years to ten (10) years and
their catch, gears and vessels be confiscated.

C4. (Informal rule)

Municipal open-lake fishers must not use electrofishing gears or else
they must be ordered by the fishwardens to stop doing so and have
them write a signed deposition of their violation, complete with their


Appendix Table 4. Continued

129

ULE TYPE

INSTITUTIONAL STATEMENT

name and Barangay of origin, if they are uninitiated with the Informal
Choice Rules of the municipal water; or the fishwardens must
confiscate their catch and fishing gear and penalized them to do
community service if they are deemed initiated with the Informal
Choice Rules.

CS. (Formal rule)

DAO No.3 Series of 1998 (Sec.89):

Municipal open-lake fishers must not use fish nets with mesh size of
less than three centimeter (3 cm) measured between two (2) opposite
knots of a full mesh when stretched when they are catching fish
except when it is for white shrimps and other fish types which do not
grow comparatively large or else their catch, gears and vessels must
be confiscated and they must either pay a fine of not less than Two
Thousand Pesos (2,000.00) to Twenty Thousand Pesos (20,000.00),
be imprisoned from two (2) years to six (6) years, or both fine and
imprisonment as deemed by a court.

C6. (Informal rule)

Municipal open-lake fishers must only use fine mesh nets to catch
white shrimps and other fish types which do not grow comparative
large and must use them only during pre-dawn time before daybreak
or else they must be ordered by the fishwardens to stop doing so and
have them write a signed deposition of their violation, complete with
their name and Barangay of origin, if they are uninitiated with the
Informal Choice Rules of the municipal water; or the fishwardens
must confiscate their catch and fishing gear and penalized them to do
community service if they are deemed initiated with the Informal
Choice Rules.

C7. (Formal rule)

DAO No.3 Series of 1998 (Sec.90):

Municipal open-lake fishers must not use active gears, specifically
Tibog, Dredge and Motorized push-net, or else they must be
imprisoned from two (2) years to six (6) years; their catch, gears and
vessels must be confiscated; and, depending on the discretion of the
court, they may also pay a fine from Two Thousand Pesos (2,000.00)
to Twenty Thousand Pesos (20,000.00).

C8. (Informal rule)

Municipal open-lake fishers must not use tibog within the three
hundred (300) meter-protected zone of the municipal water or else
they must be ordered by the fishwardens to stop doing so and have


Appendix Table 4. Continued ...

130

RULE TYPE

INSTITUTIONAL STATEMENT

them write a signed deposition of their violation, complete with their
name and Barangay of origin, if they are uninitiated with the
Informal Choice Rules of the municipal water; or the fishwardens
must confiscate their catch and fishing gear and penalized them to do
community service if they are decmed initiated with the Informal
Choice Rules.

C9. (Informal rule)

Municipal open-lake fishers must not use dredge within the three
hundred (300) meter-protected zone of the municipal water and use it
only during day time or else they must be ordered by the fishwardens
to stop doing so and have them write a signed deposition of their
violation, complete with their name and Barangay of origin. if they
are uninitiated with the Informal Choice Rules of the municipal
water; or the fishwardens must confiscate their catch and fishing gear
and penalized them to do community service if they are deemed
initiated with the Informal Choice Rules.

10. (Formal rule)

City Ordinance No. 541 Series of 2013:

A fishwarden must enforce all fishery laws, rules and regulations
within his area of jurisdiction or else the authority of any deputized
fishwarden who hinders or obstructs the said enforcement must be
revoked.

CHL. (Informal rule)

A fishwarden must enforce the agreed fishery rules and regulations
within the protected zones of Barangays Bucal, Pansol and Lecheria
including the fish sanctuary or else his authority as a deputized
fishwarden must be revoked.

C12. (Social norm)

City Ordinance No. 541 Series of 2013:

A fishwarden may arrest without a warrant (of arrest) any person/s
who he/she witness to commit violations of any provisions of fishery
laws and ordinances subject to the provision of Sec.5 Rule 112.

C13. (Informal rule)

A fishwarden may order an ongoing illegal fishing activity to be
stopped and order an open-lake fisher/s to write a deposition; or
confiscate the catch and fishing gear of any open-lake fisher/s if he
witness hinv/her/them to be committing violation against any of the


Appendix Table 4. Continued ...

131

RULE TYPE

INSTITUTIONAL STATEMENT

agreed fishery rules or else his authority as a deputized fishwarden
must be revoked.

Aggregation rule

DI. (None)

D2. (Social norm)

A fishwarden must give his permission first before any municipal
open-lake fisher can fish inside the fish sanctuary using hook and
line.

Information rule

EI. (None)

(Social norm)

Municipal open-lake fishers who want to fish inside the fish
sanctuary must inform beforehand the fishwardens of their intention
to do so and the gear that they will be using.

Payoff rule

FI. (None)

F2. (Social norm)
City Ordinance No. 541 Series of 2013:

All fishwardens must be entitled to an honoraria amounting to One
Thousand Pesos (1,000.00) monthly and life insurance coverage.

F3. (Social norm)

City Ordinance No. 541 Series of 2013:

Neither the violator-open-lake fisher nor the fishwardens must be
given the illegally caught fish.

F4, (Social norm)

Resolution No. 151 Series of 2010:

FARMC members, its president, and its officers may receive a
monthly allowance of Five Hundred Pesos (500.00), One Thousand
Five Hundred Pesos (1,500.00), and One Thousand Pesos (1,000.00)
respectively subject to the availability of funds.

Scope rule

GI. (None)


132

Appendix Table 5. FARMC related project implemented in the City of Calamba (2010-

2013)

CATEGORY

PROJECT

DESCRIPTION

Livelihood
Development Projects
and Activities for
Fishery Sector

Distribution of Calamity
Assistance

The City Government (CC) and OXFAM
allocated 3.52M for fisheries rehabilitation
of damages caused by Typhoon Ondoy
and Santi. In all, 669 (479 by CC + 190 by
OXFAM) fisherfolks benefited from the
5,000.00 cash grant. 35 fish farmers were
also given 5,000.00 worth of catfish
fingerlings by the City Government.

Distribution of Gillnets

Annually 1000 pcs. of gillnets were
distributed by CASD to the FARMC
members of the 10 lakeshore barangays of
Calamba City. The specifications of
gillnets provided is based on the
recommendation of FARMC.

Distribution of Tilapia
Fingerlings

FAO donated tilapia fingerlings for
distribution for fish cage operators of the
city. The distribution was overseen CASD
and CFARMC.

Provision of Low-
Interest Loan

Calamba City Goverment provided loan
with interest rate of 6.00% per annum to
finance livelihood projects of the city’s
fisherfolks.

Conduct Livelihood
Trainings

4 post-harvest livelihood trainings were
conducted by Laguna State Polytechnic
University to women in the fisheries and
agriculture sector in 4 different barangays.
These trainings are: Casava Cake, Pichi-
Pichi, and Suman Making; Bangus
Deboning Seminar, Knife Fish Processing.

Environmental
Protection and
Conservation Projects
and Activities

Lakeshore and River
Clean-ups

CENRO initiated regular__clean-ups
participated by barangay officials, fishing
communities. (FARMC) and — private
companies in lakeshore barangays.

Establishment of Water
lily Breaker

Fishers established water lily breakers,
using bamboo and anahaw poles provided
annually by CASD, to protect the fis
boats at the port areas and to lessen


133

Appendix Table 5. Continued ...

CATEGORY PROJECT DESCRIPTION

obstruction when they go out to the lake to
fish.

recommendation of the CFARMC a total
of 5 ha area near Barangay Bucal was
declared by the City Govemment of
Calamba as a Fish Protected Area (FPA).

Law Enforcement and | Provision of Bantay The City Government of Calamba
Disaster Response Lawa Patrol Boat distributed motor engine and material for
Projects and Activities fabrication of fiberglass patrol boat to the

10 lakeshore barangays.

Research and Training | Training and Capability | 6 trainings for FARMC officers were
for FARMC Leaders | Building conducted on leadership, team building,
preparation of project proposal, deputation
of Bantay  Lawa _fishwardens,
parliamentary procedures, and paralegal

Appendix Table 6. Summary of the coefficients (with standard errors of estimates and
significance levels) and odd ratio (with confidence interval) in the predictive
formula derived from the logistic regression of the probability of the open-lake
fishers complete compliance of the formal choice rules as a function of their being
>50 yrs. old (ie. 1= >50 yrs. old)

= 95% CONFIDENCE
VARIABLE COEFF. STDERR P OR. iisris
1 1.5999 0.6700 0.0170 = 4.9524 1.3319, 18.4140

Intercept -0.6190 0.4688 0.1867


134

Appendix Table 7. Summary of the coefficients (with standard errors of estimates and
significance levels) and odd ratio (with confidence interval) in the predictive
formula derived from the logistic regressi
fishers complete compliance of the formal choice rules as a function of their being
able to finish high school able to finish high school)

95% CONFIDENCE
VARIABLE COEFF. STDERR P OR. LIMITS
1 1.9363 0.7568 0.0105 6.9333 1.5731, 30.5589
Intercept 0.4700 0.4031 0.2436

Appendix Table 8. Summary of the coefficients (with standard errors of estimates and
significance levels) and odd ratio (with confidence interval) in the predictive
formula derived from the logistic regression of the probability of the open-lake
fishers complete compliance of the formal choice rules as a function of their having
medium to high type of household fixtures (i.e. I= have medium to high type of
household fixtures)

95% CONFIDENCE.
VARIABLE COEFF. STDERR P OR. LIMITS
1 22271 0.8562 0.0093 9.2727 1.7315, 49.652

Intercept -0.4353 0.3870 0.2606


135

Appendix Table 9. Summary of the coefficients (with standard errors of estimates and
significance levels) and odd ratio (with confidence interval) in the predictive
formula derived from the logistic regression of the probability of the open-lake
fishers complete compliance of the formal choice rules as a function of their

tendency to sell their caught Laguna de Bay catfish (i.e. I= sell their caught Laguna

de Bay catfish)
95% CONFIDENCE
VARIABLE COEFF. STDERR P OR. Tinie
1 1.8777 0.8578 0.0286 6.5385. 1.2172, 35.1236
Intercept -0.2683 0.3684 0.4665

Appendix Table 10. Summary of the coefficients (with standard errors of estimates and
significance levels) and odd ratio (with confidence interval) in the predictive
formula derived from the logistic regression of the probability of the open-lake
fishers complete compliance of the formal choice rules as a function of their being
member of a fishermen’s association (i.e. 1= member of a fishermen’s association)

95% CONFIDENCE
VARIABLE COEFF. STDERR P OR. LIMITS
1 2.2460 0.811 0.0099 9.4500 1.7139, 52.1041

Intercept -1.5041 0.7817 0.0544


136

Appendix Table 11. Pairwise association of attributes identified previously as having strong
compliance to the formal choice rules in the municipal water of

HOUSE SELLS NOS. OF
FIXTURES  KANDULI ASSOCIATION

AGE EDUCATION

AGE 1

EDUCATION 0.135567314 1
HOUSE .
FIXTURES 0.370809924 —_0.277350098 1

SELLS KANDULI | 0.180906807 0.155043418 0.447213595" I

Nos. OF a
ASSOCIATION 0.191041708 —0.355779519 wa wa 1

“Intersecting attributes exhibit strong association with cach other

Appendix Table 12. Summary of the coefficients (with standard errors of estimates and
significance levels) and odd ratio (with confidence interval) in the pr
formula derived from the logistic regression of the probability of the open-lake
fishers in Barangay Bucal having medium to high type of household fixture as a

function of their being >50 yrs. old (i.e. 1= >50 yrs. old)
95% CONFIDENCE
VARIABLE COEFF. STDERR P OR. LiMrTs
1 1.7346 0.7576 0.0220 5.6667 1.2837, 25.0154

Intercept -1.7346 0.6262 0.0056


137

Appendix Table 13. Summary of the coefficients (with standard errors of estimates and

in the predictix
formula derived from the logistic regr ity of the open-lake
fishers in Barangay Bucal selling their caught Laguna de Bay catfish as a function
of their having medium to high type of household fixtures (i.e. I= have medium to
high type of household fixtures)

95% CONFIDENCE
VARIABLE COEFF. STDERR P OR. LIMITS
1 2.0794 0.7638 0.0065 5.6667 1.7905, 35.7442
Intercept 1.7918 0.5401 0.0009

Appendix Table 14. Summary of the coefficients (with standard errors of estimates and
significance levels) and odd ratio (with confidence interval) in the predictive
formula derived from the logistic regression of the probability of the open-lake
fishers being a member of BFARMC/SAMBBU as a function of their being able to
finish high school (i.e. 1= able to finish high schoo!)

95% CONFIDENCE

VARIABLE COEFF. STDERR P OR. TIMITS|

1 2.2380 1.1087 0.0435 = 9.3750 1.0672, 82.3530

Intercept 0.4700 0.4031 0.2436


138

Appendix C
Figures

Appendix Figure 1. Two components of the Calamba City Fish Garden and Sanctuary
(Adapted from CASD, 2012)

Appendix Figure 2. Extent of the fishery (“A”) frequently used
by the Barangay Bucal open-lake fishers as mapped
ie Bay ree arise sreaeaer Sore

139

MONTHS
J Fi/M/|A/M/ J J A/|}S|O/}N/D
SPECIES FISHING GEAR
HIGH WTRLVL | LOWWATERLEVEL | HIGH WATER LEVEL
Tilapia Peamary pict, SES saa sea OTT
yankaw, screen,
manual seine,
harpoon
Secondary: fish
corral, pole and line
Snakehead Primary: yankaw, Le
manual seine,
harpoon
Secondary: gillnet,

Laguna de Bay | Primary: gillnet,
catfish yankaw
Secondary: fish
corral, screen,
manual seine, pole
an

Gourami Primary: gillnet,
manual seine

Secondary: sereen

ee Ge

Catfish Primary: manual
seine
Secondary: gillnet,
sereen
Silverperch Primary: fish

corral, pole and line
Secondary: gillnet,

manual seine
Milkfish | Primary: gillnet
White shrimp Primary: fish corral
Secondary: gillnet
White goby ‘Secondary: gillnet,

fish corral, pole and
line

Bighead carp Primary: gillnet

casas ine ie em
——
———

{HE = months when the species is mostly available

Appendix Figure 3. Seasonality of the different fish types harvested by Barangay Bucal fishers

140

Geatching frequently catching selling

COOP SF Af UFO

Appendix Figure 4. Proportion of respondents that are catching, frequently catching and
selling the different species in the fishery used by the open-lake fishers of
Barangay Bacal

Number of respondents (%)

2 3

= 0

5 easy to observe
= Be difficult to observe
8 2

Use of Use of dredge Use of tibos.
electrofishing gear

Banned Fishing Methods

Appendix Figure 5. Trends of observability across the different banned fishing methods
occurring in the fishery used by the open-lake fishers of Barangay Bucal

141

Barangay Bucal Galamba City

Appendix Figure 6. Flow diagram of fish catch sold by the artisanal fishers in Barangay
Bucal

SANGGUNIANG

GeuTe PANLUNGSOD

BFARMC

Appendix Figure 7. Flow diagram showing the legislation of Ciey Ordina pertaining to
the management of the municipal water of Calamba City. in

142

BFARMC BANTAY

CHAIRMEN = EEE ome AWA
COLLECTIVE CHAIRMAN
BFARMC CFARMC

Appendix Figure 8. Flow diagram showing the creation of informal rules pertaining to the
management of the municipal water of Calamba City.

CSD
mime Court

Appendix Figure 9. Flow diagram of how disputes are adjudicated within the management
regime of the municipal water of Calamba City

143

Appendix D
Plates

Appendix Plate 1. Digman (Hydrilla verticillata) collected from the protected area in
Barangay Bucal (Adapted from Concepcion, 2014)

Appendix Plate 2. Sintas (Vallisnaria gigantia) collected from the protected area in
Barangay Bucal (Adapted from Concepcion, 2014)

Appendix Plate 3. A yankaw about to be
placed in the fish sanctuary
(Adapted from CASD, 2012)

Ls E
Appendix Plate 4. Bamboo poles set every 1.5 meters along the perimeter of the fish

144

sanctuary in Barangay Bucal

145

ter before an Plate Sb. The same stream with its water
rain blackened by burak after an
episode of heavy rain

Plate Sa. Clear streat
episode of hea

Appendix Plate 6a. Household trash disposed in
‘one of the tributaries running through
Barangay Bucal

‘Appendix Plate 6b. Kitchen waste-water disposed

directly into one of the tributaries
running within Barangay Bucal

Appendix Plate 7. Official fisherfolk
identification card issued to registered
municipal fisherfolks of Calamba City

146

Appedix Plate 8 Calamba City Task Force Bantay Lawa
Headquarter within the Fish Sanctuary (Adapted from
CASD, 2012)

‘Appendix Plate 9. Task Force Bantay Lawa patrol boat (Adapted
from CASD, 2012)

147

Plate 10. Patrol equipment used by the Task Force Bantay Lawa
(Adapted from CASD, 2012)

Plate 11. Sample schedule of patrolling duties of the Bantay
Lawa fishwardens

