AGRONOMIC AND PHYSIOLOGICAL PERFORMANCE OF PHILIPPINE SOYBEAN CULTIVARS UNDER HYPOXIC CONDITION

LIEZLY LUMOCSO MAGDUA

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Agronomy

May 2019

ABSTRACT

A two-factor strip plot field experiment was conducted from March to August 2017 and 2018
to screen response of cultivated soybean varieties to waterlogging at two developmental stages,
and distinguish the morphological traits of tolerant/susceptible cultivars, and identify traits that
can be used as selection criteria for flooding tolerance. Response of cultivars to the timing of the
stress at fourteen days waterlogged duration was significant on seed yield per se and on the seed
yield governing components. Based on seed yield damage index, PSB Sy1 is the most tolerant
genotype followed by the landrace 'Manchuria'; PSB Sy6 followed by PSB Sy3 were determined
as the most susceptible genotypes under waterlogged condition. The effect on soybean seed yield
of the two waterlogging stress timings (viz. 30 days after planting (DAP) and beggining bloom
(R1) stage) were equal in statistical rank. Forthwith, it is suggested that the number of pods plant⁻¹ coupled with high percentage of seed-filled pods and the weight of seeds (plant⁻¹) are the crucial
seed yield components. Flooding stress caused damage on root length and shoot dry matter
partitioning on susceptible genotypes, whereas the tolerant PSB Sy1 (across waterlogging
treatments) was able to increase its root length, and leaf and stem partitioned dry matter. It
appears that the tolerance mechanisms of soybean to waterlogging acts on the different seed yield
components. Result suggests that it is viable and crucial to test soybean cultivars or varieties for waterlogging tolerance based on seed yield response and its relevant component traits.

INTRODUCTION

The vulnerability of the Philippines to climate change comes from being
predominantly located in the tropics. The country ranks third among the world’s
countries most vulnerable to weather-related risk (IBRD, 2013). Because of unpredictable
climate patterns, the country’s agricultural productivity would continue to decline. In
tropical and subtropical regions, part of the severe crop losses are caused by prolonged
seasonal rainfall. Areas where rainfall is projected to decrease would face a growing
shortage of water, whereas the incidence of flooding increases in areas where rainfall is
intensified (PAGASA 2011). As early as the last quarter of the 19th century, a total of
90,880 hectares of poor drainage soils in the Philippines was already recorded (Recel,
1989) while a huge increase of almost six folds measuring a total of 511,456 hectares was
recently recorded in the country (Carating, 2013). These poorly drained land areas are
prone to and usually under soil waterlogging condition. Responding to these risks and

trends creates opportunities that can benefit the Philippine agriculture.

Soybean plants are important legume crops, used as a major source of food, protein,
and oil, worldwide. Soybean is used as a major protein ingredient in the formulation of
livestock and poultry feeds. At present, soybean is cultivated mainly for oil extraction
and for the protein-rich de-oiled cake, which is a very important by-product with great
commercial value (Singh and Shivakumar, 2010). In Asia, soybean farming is largely

intensive and subsistent, it is grown as a sole crop or intercropped with other upland

crops. Areas with productive rice or maize crop are usually suitable for soybean
production. Highlights of the 2014 Philippine Annual Soybean Review and Planning
Workshop was the report of “record-breaking” 5,280 hectares planted with soybean
across all regions noted during the 2013 cropping, resulting in a three-fold increase in
soybean production from 1,685 hectares in 2012 (Soybean TWG, 2014). In spite of the
substantial increase, the country’s soybean area of production is still inadequate which is
less than 1% relative to the US and China soybean cropped area, as well as compared to
the rice cropped area in the country. Local soybean production remains minimal. The
recorded soybean cropped area is only 21% of the land area planted to peanut which is its
co-oil leguminous crop. In support to building a strong soybean production industry in
the country, there is still a need to exploit the available soybean germplasm
notwithstanding the modest domestic development; since the country has the inevitable
demand for soybean grains for food and for feed formulation postulated by users and the
agribusiness company involved in feed-milling operations. Because of the limited
potential for increasing production area, it is very important that yield be accelerated
under favorable non-stress and unfavorable stress-prone cultivated lands in order to meet

increasing domestic and global demand.

Soybean production is beset by several problems, among which are flooding or soil
waterlogging. As with all the other crops, field production of soybean is also subjected to
multiple biotic and abiotic stresses, especifically, soil waterlogging condition or excess
water/moisture condition or flooding. For example, maize cropped areas are usually

suitable for soybean production preferably in maize-soybean rotation which is one of the

most important farm practice which deliver various physical and environmental gains.
However, even such advantageous practice is hindered especially in Southeast Asia
where 15% of the maize growing areas are affected by waterlogging (Rathore ef al.,
1998; Hou and Thseng, 1991). Among all of the abiotic stresses, soil waterlogged
condition is one of the major environmental stress factors that has a devastating effect on
crop growth and ultimately causes reduction in yield and production (Normile, 2008).
Waterlogging threatens soybean productivity in humid regions of Asia and is regarded as
a major impediment to yield increase in the monsoonal areas of Asia (Kokubun, 2013). In
the Philippines, waterlogging frequently occurs due to excessive rainfall, inappropriate or
over irrigation, or poor drainage with high water table and therefore is accelerated on
fine-textured soil sites. Waterlogging can happen during any growth stage of soybean, the
crop is commonly intolerant of waterlogging stress (Tougou ef al., 2012) especially
during vegetative (Sojka, 1985; Griffin and Saxton, 1988; Scott et al., 1989; Linkemer et
al., 1998). This stress also has adverse effects on crop growth and seed development of

soybean plants (Thomas and Sodek, 2005; Rao et al., 1999; Seong et al., 1999).

In spite of the obvious importance of the problem, little attention was paid to its study
unlike other extreme ecological stresses. The most economic way to reduce the damage
caused by waterlogging is to introduce waterlogging tolerance into current varieties
(Zhou, 2010). To achieve this target, sources of tolerance and a reliable waterlogging

tolerance evaluation method are crucial.

The general objectives of the study were to:

A. evaluate the response of popular soybean cultivars to waterlogging stress in early
season (30 days after planting, DAP) and late season (beginning bloom, R1 stage)
flooding, and

B. identify traits that can be used as selection criteria for flooding tolerance.

The specific objectives of the study are to:

1. study the effect of waterlogging stress on the agronomic and physiological traits
of the different soybean cultivars, and
2. analyze the morphological responses of the different soybean cultivars subjected

to waterlogging stress.

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

Effect of Waterlogging on Soil Oxygen and Chemical Properties

Armstrong and Drew (2002) on the topic of root growth and metabolism under oxygen
deficiency explained that during waterlogging, water, which preferentially replaces air
from soil pores is the single most operative impedance as a result of decelerating the
diffusion of O2 to 1/10,000 and decrease of O2 concentration to about 1/32 of that in air.
Furthermore, they illustrated that the final result is an effective resistance to flow which
is about 320,000 times greater in saturated soils than that of air; the resistance then drives
the development of root O2 deficiency.

Jackson and Colmer (2005) then elaborated that the excessive amount of water that
results in flooding stress generates a hypoxic situation.

Under hypoxic condition, the function of soil microbes becomes important for plant
life and growth. Tazi and Zeiger (2002) explained that anaerobic soil microorganisms
(anaerobes) reduce Fe** to Fe**, and because of Fe”* higher solubility, it can advance to
harmful concentrations when soils are anaerobic for more weeks. Moreover, they posted
that other anaerobes reduce sulfate (SO,”) to hydrogen sulfide (H2S), which is a
respiratory toxicant. They further compiled that under hypoxic condition with rampant
supply of organic substrate, bacterial metabolites of anaerobes such as acetic acid and
butyric acid are discharged into the soil water, and these acids along with reduced sulfur

compounds account for the offensive odor of waterlogged soil. All of those substances

made by microorganisms under anaerobic circumstance are deadly to plants at eminent
volume.

Taiz and Zeiger (2002) instilled that when temperatures are higher (greater than
20°C), oxygen consumption by plant roots, and soil fauna and microorganisms, can

totally deplete the oxygen from the bulk of the soil water in as little as 24 hours.

The Waterlogged Condition and Soybean Tolerance,
Physiology and Adaptive Traits

Waterlogged Condition

Critical review of Drew (1997) on injury and acclimation under hypoxia and anoxia
explained that waterlogging in the rooting zone takes place with poor drainage after rain

or irrigation (Drew 1997).

Recently, study of Borella ef al. (2014) on waterlogging-induced changes in
fermentative metabolism in roots and nodules of soybean genotypes concluded that
waterlogging hinder the oxygen supply to the root system which suppresses respiration,
and greatly cuts down the energy status of cells that influence important metabolic

processes.

Tamang and Fukao (2015) then resolved that excessive water in soybean negatively
impacts its productivity and viability from receiving multiple stresses including low

oxygen, low light, nutrient deficiency, and high risk of infection.

Classic observation of Sugimoto ef al. (1988) using ‘Tamahomare’ soybean variety
exposed that waterlogging obstruct stomatal conductance; Sojka ef al. (2005) then

pointed out that waterlogging hinder photosynthesis.

Waterlogging can obstruct hydraulic conductance. Everard and Drew (1987) observed
that the values of water flux through anoxic roots fell below those of aerobic controls in

7-d-old, maize roots.

Oxygen deficit created by waterlogging can degrade root functions such as water
uptake. Baradford and Hsiao (1982) studying on stomatal behavior and water relations of
waterlogged tomato plants observed that Stomatal conductance and transpiration are
reduced by 30% to 40% after approximately 24 hours of soil flooding. Oxygen deficit
also root nutrient uptake function. Amarante and Sodek (2006) determined that

waterlogging of soybean plants (Glycine max L.) led to impaired symbiotic No fixation.

Soil chemical properties also change when anaerobic conditions persist for several
days. This is followed by loss of chlorophyll of the lower leaves, arrest of crop growth

(Patel et al., 2014).

Soybean Waterlogging Tolerance

Early study of Heatherly and Pringle (1991) on soybean cultivars response to flood
irrigation of clay soil noted that soybean genotypes differ in their response to flood

irrigation.

Pires et al. (2002) studying on the morpho-physiological changes in Soybean in
flooded soils detected that differences existed between cultivars under flooded soil.

Malik et al. (2002) studying on the effect of different durations of waterlogging and
subsequent drainage on wheat summarized that the magnitude of yield loss caused by
waterlogging is associated to factors such as the growth stage of plants, depth of the
water level and duration of waterlogging. They found that during waterlogging, the
seminal root system stopped growing and did not recover to control values when drained,
and the leaf nitrogen concentration was severely decreased.

For soybean, early study of Sugimoto et al. (1988) on the effect of excess moisture
injury of soybeans cultivated in a upland field converted from paddy resolved that the
earlier the growth stage subjected to hypoxic condition was, the greater were the effects

of excessive soil moisture on bleeding, stomatal aperture and mineral absorption.

Waterlogging Tolerance Responses

Parelle et al. (2010) noted on the topic genetic variability and determinism of

adaptation of plants to soil waterlogging that induced traits can be roughly grouped into

short-term responses (e.g., metabolic adjustments) and long-term acclimations (e.g.,

development of aerenchyma).

Short Term Responses

A typical short-term response of roots is a decrease of respiration and an increase of
glycolytic flux and alcoholic fermentation. One of the known qualified plant responses to
soil waterlogging is the metabolic shift from aerobic respiration to anaerobic
fermentation, and most proteins induced throughout hypoxic conditions are enzymes

involved in the establishment of this fermentative pathway (Parent ef al., 2008).

Diverse enzyme activities, including that of alcohol dehydrogenase, lactate
dehydrogenase, pyruvate decarboxylase, and sucrose synthase, increased during the

hypoxic pretreatment (Germain ef al., 1997).

Borella et al. (2014) studying on the waterlogging-induced changes in fermentative
metabolism in roots and nodules of soybean genotypes settled that the activity of alcohol
dehydrogenase, pyruvate decarboxylase and lactate dehydrogenase enzymes, as well as

the content of ethanol and lactate, increased with hypoxia in roots and nodules

Alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) is one of a number of enzymes of glycolysis and
fermentation recognized to be synthesized preferentially under low O2, conditions. Result
of Andrew et al. (1993) study on hypoxic and anoxic induction of alcohol dehydrogenase
(ADH) in roots and shoots of Zea mays show that in root tips, ADH induction by anoxia

was small and transient relative to induction by hypoxia.

Tougou ef al. (2012) study on the responses to flooding stress in soybean seedlings
with the alcohol dehydrogenase transgene noted that when young soybean seedlings at an

early stage are transferred to flooding anaerobic conditions, alcohol dehydrogenase (Adh)


mRNA and Adh protein increase temporarily in the root tips, where active cell division

demands high energy production.

In plant cells, the activity of alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) is largely increased as a
response to oxygen deficit (Heldt et a/., 2011). ADH activity increases under different
stress conditions, including anoxia (Crawford, 1977). Taiz and Zeiger (2002) elucidated
that during episodes of anoxia, pyruvate produced by glycolysis is initially fermented to
lactate. Consequently, the proton production by glycolysis, and other metabolic
pathways, and decreased proton translocation across the plasma membrane and tonoplast
lead to a lowering of cytosolic pH. At lower pH, lactate dehydrogenase activity is
inhibited, and pyruvate decarboxylase is activated, this leads to an increase in the
fermentation of ethanol and a decrease in the fermentation of lactate at lower pH,
however, the pathway of ethanol fermentation consumes more protons than does the
pathway of lactate fermentation, but the pathway increases the cytosolic pH and enhances

the ability of the plant to survive the episode of anoxia.

The net yield of ATP in anaerobic fermentation is only 2 moles of ATP per mole of
hexose sugar respired (compared with 36 moles of ATP per mole of hexose respired in
aerobic respiration) (Taiz and Zeiger, 2002), consequently, it convey changes in the
respiratory metabolism of roots (Tewari and Arora, 2016) that originates in part from a
lack of ATP to drive essential metabolic processes (Drew, 1997) resulting to energy

deficiency (Andrews and Pomeroy, 1989). Abrupt changes in respiratory metabolism in


turn produce toxic metabolites and accumulate toxins like lactic acid (C3H¢6O3) and

ethanol (C2HsOH) as anaerobic condition prevail (Parent et al., 2008; Perata et al., 2011).

Soil waterlogging condition also leads to decreased biological nitrogen fixation, as
nodules need sufficient oxygen for carrying aerobic respiration and supplying ATP,
which is essential for maintaining nitrogenase activity. Study of Amarante and Sodek
(2006) on waterlogging effect on xylem sap glutamine of nodulated soybean settled that

waterlogging of soybean plants (Glycine max L.) led to impaired symbiotic N2 fixation.

Under oxygen-limiting condition, ATP production is restricted; RNA and protein
syntheses are highly inhibited except for the synthesis of specific RNAs and anaerobic
polypeptides, one of which is alcohol dehydrogenase (Andrews ef al., 1993). These

unsuppressed RNAs and proteins are involved in glycolysis and ethanol fermentation.

Long Term Responses

Long-term responses are mainly related to growth, either of existing or of newly

formed structures.

Classic study of Justin and Armstrong (1987) on the anatomical characteristics of
roots and plant responses to soil flooding showed that flooding response and tolerance
were related to fractional root porosity.

On injury and acclimation under hypoxia and anoxia, early review of Drew (1997)

distinguished that metabolic changes under anoxia help maintain root apical meristem


cell survival by generating ATP anaerobically and minimizing the cytoplasmic acidosis
associated with cell death. Behind the root apex, where cells are fully expanded,
ethylene-dependent death and lysis occurs under hypoxia to form continuous, gas-filled

channels (aerenchyma) conveying O2 from the leaves.

Recent critical review of Kokubun (2013) on the genetic and cultural improvement of
soybean for waterlogged conditions in Asia remarked that soybean cultivars were found
to form aerenchyma, which transports O2 from aboveground tissues to the root system, in

response to waterlogging.

Shimamura et al. (2010) put forward that aerenchyma provides a low-resistance Oz
transport pathway that enhances plant survival during soil flooding. Study on soybean
root morphological and anatomical traits associated with acclimation to flooding by
Bacanamwo and Purcell (1999) recorded that no aerenchyma was observed in roots of
nonflooded plants; however, it was abundant in roots of flooded plants. Their results
indicate that acclimation to flooding in soybean involves preferential allocation of
photosynthates to development of porous adventitious roots and that aerenchyma

formation for soybean relying on N> fixation is critical for acclimation to flooding.

Result of Shimamura er al. (2003) on the formation and function of secondary
aerenchyma in hypocotyl, roots and nodules of soybean (Glycine max) under flooded
conditions concluded that after 14 days of treatment, porosity exceeded 30% in flooded
hypocotyl with well-developed secondary aerenchyma, while it was below 10% in

hypocotyl of irrigated plants that had no aerenchyma


Result of Thomas ef al. (2005) concluded that flooding resulted in the rapid formation
of adventitious roots and aerenchyma between the stem (immediately above the water
line), roots and nodules. In the submerged stem, taproot, lateral roots and adventitious
roots, lysigenous aerenchyma arose initially in the cortex and was gradually substituted

by secondary aerenchyma arising from cells derived from the pericycle.

Marashi and Mojaddam (2014) results showed that aerenchyma tissue and
adventitious roots increased under waterlogging stress. The maximum and the minimum
adventitious roots and aerenchyma tissue observed under 14 and 7 days waterlogging and
the maximum and the minimum adventitious roots and aerenchyma tissue observed under

5 and 0 cm water above the soil surface, respectively.

Pires et al. (2002) study on morpho-physiological changes in soybean in flooded soils
showed that the soybean stayed under flood from stadium V2 to V5 (21 days) presented
mechanisms (stem base hypertrophy and adventitious roots with aerenchyma), that
allowed its adaptation to hypoxia conditions under flooded soil. There was reduction in

the levels of N, K, Mg and Mn and increase in the level of Fe in the leaves when flooded

Bailey-Serres and Voesenek (2008) critical review on flooding stress acclimations and
genetic diversity marked that the multifaceted alterations in cellular and organ structure
that promote access to and diffusion of O2 processes are driven by phytohormones,

including ethylene, gibberellin, and abscisic acid.

Reid and Bradford (1984) composed on the effects of flooding on hormone relations

that O2 deficiency inhibits synthesis of indole acetic acid (IAA), gibberellins, and


cytokinins by roots. However, in flooded pea plants, the concentration of abscisic acid
(ABA) in the xylem sap increases (Zhang and Davies, 1987) and that increase in ABA
originated both from a release of ABA sequestered in chloroplasts and from increased
concentration of ABA in the xylem sap delivered to the leaves by the roots when the
latter organ are under stress (Taiz and Zeiger, 1998), this increase offers a ready
explanation for the decline in stomatal conductance and leaf growth that take place with

flooding (Bradford and Hsiao, 1982).

Marashi and Mojaddam (2014) study on adventitious root and aerenchyma
development in wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) subjected to waterlogging showed that
increased ethylene to accelerate aerenchyma tissue formation. Oxygen at below ambient
levels is known to stimulate ethylene production. Oxygen deficiency stimulates the
methionine-ethylene intermediate 1-aminocyclopropane-l-carboxylic acid (ACC)
production by roots, and the ethylene precursor is carried in the transpiration stream to
the leaves (Else and Jackson, 1998) where it is readily converted to ethylene. Ethylene in
turn is known to stimulate aerenchyma production in some roots and can also affect root
growth (Armstrong and Drew, 2002). Enlargement of this gas spaces is one of the most
important adaptations which help prevent the onset of oxygen deficiency in growing roots

(Arber, 1920; Justin and Armstrong, 1987; James and Sprent, 1999).

Early study of Drew et al. (1979) on maize showed that ethylene treatment hastened
the emergence of adventitious (nodal) roots from the base of the shoot, but slowed their

subsequent extension. Ethylene also promoted the collapse of cells in the cortex of these


roots, with lysigenous development of prominent air spaces (aerenchyma). Their results
suggested that adventitious rooting and cortical air space formation in nodal roots in Zea
mays may be stimulated by enhanced concentrations of endogenous ethylene arising
either from entrapment of the gas by unstirred water layers around the roots and/or by
increased biosynthesis.

On the other hand, study of Shimamura et al. (2014) on the role of abscisic acid in
flood induced secondary aerenchyma formation in soybean hypocotyls showed that
application of 1.0 4M ABA suppressed the enlargement of phellogen-derived cells,
thereby suppressing subsequent gas space formation, and then almost completely
inhibited aerenchyma development. Their results indicated that secondary aerenchyma
formation requires a decrease in negative regulator ABA in soybean plants, that is, ABA
inhibits elongation of cells derived from phellogen in secondary aerenchyma formation

such as internodal cell elongation of floating rice stems.

Waterlogging Tolerance Physiology

There are two principal reasons for differences in flooding tolerance: morphological

differences resulting in differences in the transport of oxygen to roots and biochemical

differences in response to anaerobic conditions.

Biochemical Waterlogging Tolerance

Under stress, enormous amounts of reactive oxygen species (ROS) are produced that
can cause lipid peroxidation, resulting in damage to cell membranes, protein oxidation,

enzyme inhibition, and strand breakage in nucleic acids.

Owing to low oxygen concentrations induced by waterlogging, the balance of active
oxygen is disrupted and the active oxygen species (ROS) would be accumulated,
sequentially, the membrane lipid peroxidation and the variations of anti-oxidation system

is induced in cells which suffer from low oxygen stress (Blokhina, 2000).

Major ROS scavenging enzymes in plants include superoxide dismutase (SOD),
catalase (CAT), ascorbate peroxidase (APX), and glutathione reductase (Loggini et al.,
1999). POD (peroxidase), a protective enzyme involving in membrane lipid peroxidation,
can eliminate active oxygen species (such as H2O>2 and -OH). Previous studies indicated
that high POD activity was the physiological basis of plant against abiotic stress (Zhou et
al. 1999); additionally, it is known that the activities of POD were significantly
negatively correlated with MDA content, referring that POD may play an important role

in preventing plants from cell membrane lipid peroxidation (Yong-Zhong ef al., 2010).

Physiological and genetic evidence clearly indicates that the ROS scavenging systems

of plants are an important component of the stress protective mechanism (Allen, 1995).

When flooded at the VI or V4 growth stages, concentrations of N and K in the above-

ground plants were lower than the control after the flood. When flooded at R2,


concentrations of N and K were lower than in the control. The soybeans were particularly

sensitive to the seven days of continuous flood at the R2 growth stage (Scott ef al., 1990).

Sung (1993) study on waterlogging effect on nodule nitrogenase and leaf nitrate
reductase activities in soybean showed that imposition of waterlogging either at R1
(anthesis) or RS (commencement of seed fill) growth stage suppressed the activities of

nodule nitrogenase and leaf nitrate reductase.

Morphological Waterlogging Tolerance

Trought and Drew (1980) study on shoot and root growth in relation to concentrations
of dissolved gasses and solutes in the soil solution inferred that waterlogging slowed
shoot fresh weight accumulation, leaf extension and nodal root growth; it also caused

death of the seminal root system and early senescence of the lower leaves.

Sallam and Scott (1987) study on the effects of prolonged flooding on Soybeans
during vegetative growth concluded that prolonged flooding significantly reduced all

soybean root and shoot growth parameters.

Summary of Vartapetian and Jackson (1997) review on plant adaptations to anaerobic
stress determined that mechanisms that underlie short-and long-term tolerance to external
anaerobic conditions for roots include metabolic adaptations such as avoidance of self-

poisoning and cytoplasmic acidosis, maintenance of adequate supplies of energy and


sugar, modifications to gene expression and metabolic acclimation to tissue anoxia by

previous exposure to partial oxygen shortage

Malik er al. (2002) study on short-term waterlogging effects on the growth and
physiology of wheat concluded that during waterlogging, the seminal root system stopped
growing. Leaf nitrogen concentration was severely decreased. When waterlogged pots
were drained, seminal root mass did not recover to control values. By contrast,

adventitious roots resumed elongation after drainage.

Morita et al. (2004) study on the effects of waterlogging on root system of soybean
concluded that growth of taproot and its lateral roots is suppressed by waterlogging,
while formation of adventitious roots is promoted. Thus, soybean plants often form

shallow root system under waterlogging conditions.

Henshaw ef al. (2007) study on the root and nodule development response of soybean
genotype to early-season flooding concluded that flooding reduced soya bean primary
root weight, length and volume across genotypes. Genotypic differences in root
development and tolerance to flooding were noted, with early-season flood tolerance
correlated with primary root dry weight, length and surface area, and adventitious root
dry weight. Their results indicate that full season trials may be necessary to identify

flood-tolerant soya bean germplasm.

Patel et al. (2014) study on flooding: abiotic constraint that limit vegetable
productivity inferred that continued flooded conditions lead to lack of oxygen in the soil,

restricting respiration of the growing roots. Additionally, plant transpiration is affected


under anaerobic conditions and extended waterlogging results in root death due to

inadequate oxygen supply.

Bradford and Hsiao (1982) study on the stomatal behavior and water relations of
waterlogged tomato plants concluded that stomatal conductance and transpiration are

reduced by 30% to 40% after approximately 24 hours of soil flooding.

Spooner (1961) study on the effects of irrigation timing and length of flooding periods
on Soybean yields detected that the determinate soybean cultivars were more susceptible

to prolonged flooding during early reproductive growth than early vegetative growth.

Villalobos-Rodriguez and Shibles (1985) study on the response of determinate and
indeterminate tropical soybean cultivars to water stress revealed that indeterminate
cultivars were better able to recover from water stress than were determinate ones, as
indicated by their greater seed yield after recovery from stress treatment. This response

was associated with more pods per node rather than with other yield components.

Shimamura ef al. (2010) study on the stem hypertrophic lenticels and secondary
aerenchyma enable oxygen transport to roots of soybean in flooded soil concluded that
hypertrophic lenticels on the stem of soybean, just above the water surface, are entry
points for Oz and these connect to aerenchyma and enable Oy transport into roots in

flooded soil.

Shimono ef al. (2012) study on the interactive effects of elevated atmospheric CO

and waterlogging on vegetative growth of soybean showed that the negative effects of the


waterlogging were greater in root dry weight than in top dry weight, and the root

exudation per unit root dry weight was also reduced by waterlogging.

Recently, Tewari and Arora (2016) on soybean production under flooding stress
emphasized that flooded conditions decrease root development, hence reducing the crop’s

ability to absorb water and nutrients

Agronomic Waterlogging Tolerance

Minimal seed or biological yield reduction is the ultimate criteria for plant
waterlogging tolerance, but the inherent components and processes which promote such
tolerance can be examined. VanToai ef al. (1994) studying on the genetic variability for
flooding tolerance in soybeans defined that flooding tolerance can be defined as high
yield under flooding stress. Their study documented that differences in flooding tolerance

existed among U.S. soybean cultivars.

Early study of Spooner (1961) on the effects of irrigation timing and length of
flooding periods on soybean yields showed a linear decrease in seed yield with flood

duration.

In relation to seed yield, Hedley and Ambrose (1981) remarked that the high planting
densities required to attain good yields with the leafless pea make it a necessity to select

plants with reproductive sinks that are tolerant of competitive environments.


Improvement of plant waterlogging tolerance critical review of Zhou (2010) notify
that germplasm evaluation based on grain yield may be confounded because of the
possibility that tolerance and recovery mechanisms only partly contributed to the grain

yield after the waterlogging stress was terminated.

Early study of Griffin and Saxton (1988) on the response of solid-seeded soybean to
flood irrigation studied that when water was held longer than 2 d_post-flowering,
significant yield reductions were noted. For their 2 year with flood periods of 4 or 8 d,
yields for soybean flooded at V6 were substantially higher than yields from the R2 or R2
+ RS treatments. Increased numbers of both seeds per pod and seeds per plant accounted

for the higher yields in the V6 treatment.

Scott et al. (1989) study on the flood duration effects on soybean growth and yield
noted that flood duration effects on the soybean plant were manifested in yellowing and

abscission of leaves at the lower nodes, stunting, and reduced dry weight and seed yield.

Linkemer ef al. (1998) study on waterlogging effects on growth and yield
components in late-planted soybean showed that the early vegetative period (V2) and the
early reproductive stages (R1, R3, and R5) were most sensitive to waterlogging. Yield
loss in both field and greenhouse studies was induced primarily by decreased pod

production resulting from fewer pods per reproductive node.

Sugimoto et al. (2000) study on the effects of excess moisture in the soil at different
stages of development on the growth and seed yield of soybean showed that at the flower

bud differentiation stage, seed yield and vegetative growth were markedly depressed by


both waterlogging and flooding treatments. The longer the duration of the treatment, the
severer the effects on seed yield. In their case, the numbers of branches and nodes per
plant were decreased, whilst the shedding of buds, flowers and pods were increased. The
resultant decrease in the number of pods per plant was the major reason for the decrease
in seed yield. At the ripening stage, soybean was more tolerant to excess moisture in the
soil. Vegetative growth was not affected by either treatment of the water table. The major

reason for the decrease in seed yield was due to the decrease in the 100 seed weight.

Sullivan et al. (2001) study on evaluating on-farm flooding impacts on Soybean
showed that there was a significant negative correlation of flooding duration with the
stand count, height, number of pods, and yield of soybean. There was no significant

correlation of flooding duration with seed weight, oil, or protein content of the seeds

VanToai et al. (2010) study on flooding tolerance of soybean germplasm from
southeast Asia under field and screen-house environments demonstrated that flooding for
two weeks at the R2 growth stage reduced grain yield under field conditions between
36% and 100% (all plants dead). Tolerance to R2 flooding was associated with higher
number of pods per plant and 100-grain weight. While there was no correlation in yield
between field and screen-house tests, the flood tolerance ranking of the field test was
correlated with the ranking of one screen-house test. Screen-house tests could distinguish

tolerant from susceptible varieties based on plant survival and grain yield.

Egli and Yu (1991) study on crop growth rate and seeds per unit area in soybean

showed that seeds per m? as a direct function of canopy photosynthesis and a partitioning


coefficient. They further reiterated that the number of seeds per unit area is an important

yield component in soybean

Verma (1992) study on correlation and path analysis in blackgram revealed that the
branches per plant, clusters per plant, pods per plant, seeds per pod, pod length and

hundred seed weight exhibited significant and positive correlation with yield per plant.

Seong et al. (2000) study on the responses of soybean cultivars to excessive soil
moisture imposed at different growth stages revealed that cultivar differences in response
to excessive soil moisture condition were conspicuous in seed dry weight and harvest
index (HI) but not in the response to seed number or pod number per plant. The timing of
irrigation causing the condition of excessive soil moisture influenced the vegetative or

reproductive traits.

Board and Modali (2005) study on the dry matter accumulation predictors for optimal
yield in soybean revealed that environmental effects on yield were regulated by node and

reproductive node number per area, pod number per area, and seed number per area.

Collaku and. Harrison (2005) study on heritability of waterlogging tolerance in wheat
concluded that selection for a relatively highly heritable trait, such as kernel weight,
would be an effective way to improve waterlogging tolerance in early generations, as

grain yield has a low heritability.

Fageria (2009) determined that number of pods is one of the most important yield

components in determining grain yield of dry bean.


Kumidini (2010) composed on soybean growth and development topic noted that
vegetative development is, in part, a function of the rate of development of main stem
nodes, the final main stem node number and branching, all of which influence the canopy

structure.

Rotundo ef al. (2012) study on the physiological strategies for seed number
determination in soybean revealed that seed number was associated with rapid growth

rates, increased partitioning and greater seed set efficiency.

Kuswantoro (2015) study on agronomical characters of some soybean germplasm
under waterlogging condition revealed that waterlogging was started at 21 days after
planting until harvesting by applying water level about 5 cm above the soil surface. The
results showed that soybeans could grow and produce grains even in a waterlogging
condition in almost throughout its life cycles. Genotype which had the highest grain yield

was supported by the number of pods per plant.

Matsuo et al. (2017) summary on vegetative and reproductive morphology in soybean
breeding noted that the most important factors for bean productivity are the number of

pods per plant and the total weight of seeds per plant.

Board and Kahlon (2011) summarized that for soybean: yield components which have
potential to influence yield are seed number per area (seed m”), seed size (g per seed),
seed per pod (no.), pod number per area (pod m”), pod per reproductive node (no.),
reproductive node number per area (reproductive node m”), percent reproductive nodes

(%; percentage of nodes becoming reproductive), and node number per area (node m”).


yield is controlled by primary yield components seed size and seed m”; seed m” is
controlled by secondary yield components seed per pod and pod m”; pod m” is
controlled by tertiary yield components pod per reproductive node and reproductive node
m”; and reproductive node m” is controlled by quaternary yield components node m”?
and percent reproductive nodes.

It is essential to improve food production in the face of increasing extreme weather
events such as soil waterlogging conditions and the most economic way to reduce the
damage caused by waterlogging is to introduce waterlogging tolerance into current

varieties (Zhou, 2010). To achieve this target, both sources of tolerance and a reliable

trait evaluation method are crucial.

MATERIALS and METHODS

Experimental Site

Field experiment was conducted at the experiment station of the University of the
Philippines Los Bafios. Durig the first trial, planting was done on March 13, 2017 at IRRI
dryland lot UW (14° 8' 32.0064" N latitude , 121° 15' 40.7412" E longitude; altitude of
30masl). The trial was repeated the following year wherein planting was done on March
12, 2018 at lot UQ (14° 8' 35.6892" N latitude, 121° 16' 1.2792" E longitude; altitude of
31masl). The two cropping seasons encompassed the long-day condition in the region.
The experimental area was a plain, upland topography after long term rice-rice cropping
system; characterized by a Macolod clay loam soil type classified as Typic Dystrudepts
(USDA soil taxonomy), brown-colored having a tenacious clay loam surface soil and is
poorly drained primarily derived from volcanic tuff (Carating et al., 2014). The cultivated
areas are planted to upland field crops (Cereals, root crops, sugarcane), fruit (Lansium
domesticum), and industrial crops (Cocos nucifera) (Carating et al. 2014). The first upper
layer has tenacious friable gravelly in structure and consistency and clay loam soil
texture, whereas the second layer has granular sticky compact in structure and

consistency and clay soil texture (DA-BSWM, 1946).


Soil Sampling and Analysis

Initial soil sampling was made for the entire experimental area. Following the W-
shaped sampling pattern, a composite soil sample taken to a depth of 6-7 inches was
secured into a labeled waterproof container and was processed. A portion of the
composite sample was submitted to the Agricultural Systems Institute - CAFS, UPLB for
analysis. The chemical properties of the experimental area prior to planting are presented

in Appendix Table 1.

Experimental Unit, Treatments, and Design

Three popular and one land race soybean cultivar was used namely: the (1) PSB Syl
(“LG Soy1”) and (2) PSB Sy3 (“LG Soy2”) developed by the National Crop Research
and Development Center - La Granja station, (3) PSB Sy6 (“Tiwala 8”) developed by the
Institute of Plant Breeding-UPLB, and (4) the landrace ‘Manchuria’ — an unregistered
cultivar but is widely cultivated in soybean growing areas in Mindanao land mass
especially in Caraga and Zamboanga region. All test materials have intermediate (narrow
and ovate) leaf shape and are yellow-colored seed acquired from their designated
improvement center and/or growing areas.

Two-factor field experiment was conducted following the strip-plot design described
by Gomez and Gomez (1984). Treatments were considered as the first factor and

randomly assigned to the vertical-strip plot whereas experimental cultivars were


considered as the second factor and was randomly assigned to the horizontal-strip plot
(independent of the vertical-strip plot randomization) to control independence of error for
statistical analysis. The experiment was arranged following the randomized complete
block design (RCBD) lay-out replicated thrice. Each plot consisted of six (6) rows of 5
meters long isolated at 60 cm distance between rows; the two (2) outer rows were
designated as border rows and the four (4) inner rows as data rows. Isolation between
blocks was implemented by inserting one (1) meter distance between blocks serving as
the alley way. For the first factor, three (3) water management regimes was implemented
namely: (i) Normal condition, where no waterlogging at any stage of the crop or normal
water management; (ii) Thirty days after planting (30DAP WL) and (iii) R1 (Fehr and
Caviness 1977; Appendix Figure 2) stage (Rl Stage WL) soybean waterlogging.
Experimental plot of the latter two treatments were secured by making compact levee
(Appendix Figure 6B) around the plot to hold the desired water depth. Waterlogging
(Appendix Figure 6A) was implemented by complete flooding the appropriate plots for
fourteen (14) days straight, maintaining ~5-10 cm water depth above the soil surface

(Appendix Figure 6C,D).

Establishment, Cultural Management, and Practices

The experimental area was subjected to conventional land preparation. In brief,

mowing implement was used to cut down standing weeds, a pass of mould board

harrowing then was implemented to expose the soil and incorporate plant biomass, the


soil then was pulverized; finally, furrows were set at 60 cm apart. All land preparation
phases was conducted using farm tractor using appropriate implement at each land
preparation stage.

At planting, the national cooperative testing (NCT) nationwide fertilization rate of 30-
30-30 (N, P20s, K2O, kg/ha respectively) was applied. The complete granular fertilizer
(14-14-14 NPK) was used to satisfy the fertilization rate which was 64.3 grams per
individual row of 5 meter length. The whole fertilization rate was applied once as basal;
the fertilizer was evenly drilled in each individual row and was covered with the adjacent
ridge soil. Seeding then was initiated by evenly drilling seed-packet-contained excess
seeds in each row and covered with the fine ridge soil. Thinning to fifteen (15) plants per
linear meter was conducted fourteen (14) days after planting (DAP). Supplemental
overhead irrigation was implemented after seeding and occasionally until soybean
maturity when rainfall was not sufficient. Weed population was controlled by manual
hand weeding twice before the canopy closes, tractor driven inter-row cultivation was
also implemented at twenty one (21) days after seeding, and occasional mowing was
implemented in between rows until soybean maturity. Chemical insect pest prevention
(and/or control) was carried out by applying a broad spectrum insecticide Lannate™ (40
SP; Methomyl active ingredient) at 15 and 25 DAP and Sevin™ (50 WP, Carbaryl active

ingredient) from 35 DAP until maturity at 30 days interval.


Meteorological Data

Experimental area’ daily solar radiation, rainfall, maximum and minimum
temperature, sunshine hours, wind speed, and relative humidity were taken from the

nearest agro-meteorological station.

Data Collection, Handling and Processing

Phenological Data

Days to fifty percent Emergence

This was recorded as the number of days from sowing to such time when
approximately fifty percent of the seedlings have emerged being the appearance
of the first leaf lamina breaking through the soil surface. This was conducted by

visual observation.

Days to fifty percent Flowering

This was recorded as the number of days from emergence to that day when

fifty percent of all plants in the inner row have produced their first open flower.

LIBRARY 7

Yield and Yield Components

The seed yield was taken plot-wise and converted into tons per hectare. Four (4) linear
meters (equivalent to 2.4 m? plot area) from the inner four rows by Quadrat design was
harvested in each plot, that is, a linear meter containing no less than 10 plants from the
central portion of each of the four inner rows was harvested. Harvesting was done by
cutting the confined plants (in the Quadrat) close to the soil surface leaving no more than
2 cm stubble. Harvested plants in each plot were counted and recorded, threshed and
processed, and used to obtain the plot seed weight and moisture content to derive
adjusted grain yield on a plot basis at 14% moisture content employing equation 1;
whereas ten random subsample plants was used to measure central stem node number,
central stem branch number, central stem podding (reproductive) node, branch podding
(or reproductive) node, pods per node, pods per plant, percent filled pods, and 100 seed
dry matter weight (HSW); the ten subsamples then was segmented to (i) leaves (all leaf
lamina material), (ii) stem (including petiole), (iii) roots (root mass fraction) that was
separated at the cotyledonary node, (iv) pods (without seeds), and (v) seeds for dry
weight partitioning coefficient (%) determination. All dry weight and seed moisture
content measurements were conducted by oven drying samples at constant 70°C for 72
hours straight in a forced-air oven. All weight measurements were carried out using a
calibrated electronic weighing scale (JCS-3K Model, AA Annex Automation Inc.,

Singapore).


Yield stability index (Bouslama and Schapaugh, 1984) of soybean cultivars based on

seed yield was computed following the equation 2.

7 [Plot seed weight(kg)X Fora Fh ae ui
Seed Yield (t Ha )= TAT (eq. 1]

Normal condition - Waterlogged condition

WS seed Yield = x 100 [eg. 2]

Normal condition

Root System Morphology Evaluation

Evaluation of the root system morphology was conducted at maturity following the
root excavation method outlined by Bohm (1979). Briefly, six (6) randomly selected
plants representing an average growth performance of the plot within the inner four rows
in each plot was tagged. Using local steel spade, a drench was dug at ~25 centimeter
away from the plant stem for the four sides resulting to a cube at a depth of ~30
centimeter. The root system confined in the cube of soil then was excavated. The samples
were separately placed in a net bag; all the samples were placed in a plastic container and
soaked overnight. The root system then was gently washed and cleaned from the
remaining adhering soil particles and placed in a clean net bag. All samples then were
stored, fully submerged in a 95% ethyl alcohol solution for not more than seven (7) days.
Stored root samples were photographed by scanning (Appendix Figure 8A) over EPSON
Perfection V700 PHOTO (Model: B11B178011, Epson America, Inc.,) calibrated for
Regent Instruments Software, wherein individual root samples were laid plane on the

standard tray (STD4800) and submerged with distilled water prior to image acquisition


(Appendix Figure 8B). Root system morphology analysis of the scanned image was
conducted with the WinRHIZO PRO 2013 program (Regent Instruments Canada Inc.,
Quebec, Québec, Canada; Appendix Figure 8C); image analysis measurements then were

collated in the Microsoft Excel Office® Program (Microsoft™ Corporation).

Data Analysis

Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted to detect significant effect of the
treatments, cultivars and their interaction on the seed yield, yield components and root
traits of soybean using the Statistical Tool for Agricultural Research (STAR®,
International Rice Research Institute) software, consistent with the design of the
experiment (strip-plot lay-out arranged in randomized complete block design). Means
detected with significant difference was compared according to Fisher’s protected LSD
post hoc means comparison. Correlation analysis using treatment means over replications
in years by cultivars interaction data points, relating root architectural traits and yield
components to seed yield was also conducted through multiple linear Pearson’s

correlation analysis.

RESULTS

Weather Condition

No drought condition was experienced by the tested soybean cultivars during the
experiment though low rainfall was observed during the early phase of the crop
(Appendix Figure 1, Rainfall) in both years. Lesser precipitation in year 2018 was
corrected by supplemental irrigation (Appendix Figure 5). In both years, air temperature
fluctuation was recorded during the first three weeks after planting (7-21DAP) in the
experimental area (Appendix Figure 1, temperature), from there on the air temperature
increased during the succeeding three weeks (35-42 DAP); the next temperature
fluctuation recorded was at twelve to fourteen week (84-98 DAP) and the air temperature
from there on decreased exponentially until harvesting. The observed temperature
fluctuation also imposed fluctuation in heat units (Appendix Figure 1, heat units),
consequently, the plants were exposed to heat stress when the air temperature exceeded
the optimum maximum air temperature at 30°C (Hollinger and Angel, 2019; Appendix
Figure 1, heat stress units). Across years, mean heat stress units of 2.341.4°C from
emergence to around flowering was experienced by the plants. There was a two-fold
increase in heat stress units (4.2+0.3°C) experienced by the plants after flowering which
persisted for six weeks then declined to 2.2+1.1°C until harvesting. Daily total incident
solar radiation is directly proportional to the temperature (Stefan-Bolzman Law), and is

positively correlated with the sunshine duration (Kimball, 1919; Angstrém, 1924) but


negatively correlated with the amount of cloud cover (Kasten and Czelplak, 1979; Gul er
al., 1998). Throughout the duration of the experiment in both years, the trend was a
decreasing incident solar radiation resulting from decreasing daily sunshine duration
(Appendix Figure 1, sunshine) and increasing cloud cover (Appendix Figure 1, cloud
cover). In both years all test genotypes germinated (50% emergence) 10+1 days after

planting (DAP) and flowered (50% R1 stage, Fehr and Caviness, 1977) 45+1 DAP.

Analysis of Variance over Two Years

Combined ANOVA over two years showed that soybean cultivars, treatments, and
their interaction had distinct influence on the root architectural traits, yield and yield
components (Appendix Table 1 and 2). Bartlett chi-square goodness of fit and Shapiro-
Wilk error terms normality distribution tests on the observed variances for most of the
traits considered showed that the variance among tested soybean cultivars that received
the same treatment (and vice versa) was uniform (i.e. homogenous) and normally
distributed (P<0.05), respectively. Root surface area, volume and number of root tips and
percent filled pods were not normally distributed (P<0.05) but were homogenous. Over
two years, exclusive of the 100 seed weight parameter, the genotypes and treatment and
interaction effects, and block effects was also in additive manner as observed by no
significant difference across block on the rest of the measured parameters, implying that
the genotype and treatments effect was constant across blocks and vice versa. Coefficient

of variation of the traits measured showed a range from 7.88% to 68.39% which is


classified as low to high, respectively according to Pimentel-Gomes (2000), indicating
equivalent degree of precision with which the genotypes, treatments, cultivar-treatment
interaction were compared, and reliability and validity of the experiment (Gomez and

Gomez, 1984).

Performance of Soybean Cultivars

The range of soybean seed yield (across treatments and years) observed was between
0.62 to 0.97 t ha’! adjusted to 14% moisture content (Figure 1). Tested genotypes had
significant seed yield difference (P<0.10). PSB Sy6 and ‘Machuria’ had the highest mean
seed yield followed by PSB Syl and PSB Sy3. PSB Sy6, ‘Manchuria’, and PSB Syl
were comparable to each other while the PSB Sy3 cultivar had 34.7% significantly lower
mean seed yield against the highest seed yield obtained.

Except root volume, soybean cultivars differed significanlty in root architectural traits
(P<0.01; Appendix Table 1). Genotype PSB Syl and PSB Sy6 had the longest
comparable mean root length per plant recorded of 484.16 and 447.79 mm, respectively,
while, the other two genotypes, PSB Sy3 and 'Manchuria' performed relatively shorter
root length of 335.93 and 326.84 mm, respectively. The shortest root length recorded that
of PSB Sy3 was nearly a fold (67.51%) shorter than the longest root length recorded that
of PSB Syl (Figure 10. The ranking was true to the rest of the root traits measured

(Figure 11 to 13).


20 :
gets ;
= a ’ al
a= a ane r
O10), |g @al afte e, ie

HH oe

fd =
o an
__ j

ak ies Se aa i We ne Sra Tt
~- Ol=- MO OC BB HizwZ22 dia is 2oaiwe 2 2
SSSSS SPSS ESS ESSERE SES 2
®D Do oO: oO o

35228 8\2 3 2% B22 R= 3 B22
$seee se ga 8a) 8a, 8a Ba
& z| z| &

PSB Sy1 | PSBsy3 | PSB sy6 ‘Manchuria

Figure 1. Mean seed yield (14% MC t ha”) of soybean cultivars subjected to
waterlogging treatments. A. Comparison of years (across cultivars and
treatments); B Comparison of cultivars (across years and treatments); C.
Comparison of Waterlogging treatments (across years and cultivars); and D.

Interaction of cultivars and treatments.


30 . _
a
25 a a 4 8
I i
HS a a A !
§ 2 ab 5
2 T b i
3. be be | ab a
St a u
315 ry
§8 aa
n
§ 10
Cc
Do
o c
5 . 0
a re cee eigu gseoaisez ais 2. loo
RgSSS obs eRe eee Ee eRes
SRB BR SSS BSSBLSS BSS BSS S
8 Sliaana & a s a 8 as 8 3| a sf
= S| =] 82) 82 82 82 82
1 x al x| | x
| PSB Sy1! PSB sy3 PSB Sy6 ' Manchuria

Figure 2. Mean central stem node number of soybean cultivars subjected to waterlogging
treatments. A. Comparison of years (across cultivars and treatments); B
Comparison of cultivars (across years and treatments); C. Comparison of
Waterlogging treatments (across years and cultivars); and D. Interaction of

cultivars and treatments.

Figure 3.

fo>}
> |
=

Central Stem Branch Number
(count)
w


Year 2017 |
Year 2018 |

Normal |

PSB Sy6 |
30DAP WL |

Manchuria


R1 Stage WL

30DAP WL |

Normal ,

a i
fia - |
|
i

6b
Be?
7 ff

a

i ——T A Tt [= “To T \
siBesiresibes
R2% 22% B22 8
ss a Fadl Ss a
no on n on
Sl oe = oO —
a z| a a
y1'_PSB sy3 "PSB Syé “Manchuria

Mean central stem branch number of soybean cultivars subjected to

waterlogging treatments. A. Comparison of years (across cultivars and

treatments); B Comparison of cultivars (across years and treatments); C.

Comparison of Waterlogging treatments (across years and cultivars); and D.

Interaction of cultivars and treatments.


20 ee —; .
H ga
o | c| ; |
B A (2)
ao 14 : fa a a
3 a
2 21 J} 6 6
Ps a ab ab ab " b
SS104a | ba,le “ a @
ee 6 fe) a
Oo 64 ce Pa
4 oO a
0 a ae rr T T 7—T T T T H T T
™~ Oi—- MO CO O/H 2] Hina lt Hint HianHt2'i13
~ - OOM S/S S| S S| S oS S| S a
oO NNnNDn €|/2 za =z a z
Ssiaaas Gs as S28 Ssh Ss
| oO oO Ow Oe oO
i a oc a fat oc
PSB Sy1' PSB Sy3 ' PSB Sy6 ‘Manchuria

Figure 4. Mean central stem podding node (or pod-bearing nodes in the central stem) of
soybean cultivars subjected to waterlogging treatments. A. Comparison of years
(across cultivars and treatments); B Comparison of cultivars (across years and
treatments); C. Comparison of Waterlogging treatments (across years and

cultivars); and D. Interaction of cultivars and treatments.

Branch Podding Node

(count)


30 -

nN
Ss

=
a

=
o

ee

a


Year 2017 |
Year 2018

PSB Syl |
PSB Sy3 |

PSB Sy6_

Manchuria |

Normal

30DAP WL |

Ri Stage WL

°

@

=
°

Hi-
Oo

Normal |

~~
n
wo

30DAP WL |

S R1 Stage WL |

Ss

Normal —
30DAP WL |

J!
=
o
D
Bs}
n
=
a

Normal

30DAP WL

Figure 5. Mean branch podding node (or pod-bearing nodes in the branches) of soybean

cultivars subjected to waterlogging treatments. A. Comparison of years (across

cultivars and treatments); B Comparison of cultivars (across years and

treatments); C. Comparison of Waterlogging treatments (across years and

cultivars); and D. Interaction of cultivars and treatments.


160 oe —
“po 8 B :
{sa}
° a a
120 | * _—
i"
= 100- Pw 6 | Oo
Eo a a) T
BS oF | '
$3 810 a a 6
ge e 9184 :
& 60 L a?
40 ‘ a
| CG B
oy -_
0 as i a a aan aL ppp — i. a |
~S O]—~ | Cig 2 | s ered wi 2in2z2
S glean sl\e== essitzslps zigz =
~ vimana o/s Ed Sis 2 esa Bs 2 gis a 2)
NDnNN |= za 2a =a =a
BSE EE gl” 8 5)” 8" 8 5)” Bal" 8 8
& al z| & &
PSB Sy1 ' PSBSy3 | PSB sy6 ‘Manchuria

Figure 6. Mean pods per plant of soybean cultivars subjected to waterlogging treatments.
A. Comparison of years (across cultivars and treatments); B Comparison of
cultivars (across years and treatments); C. Comparison of Waterlogging
treatments (across years and cultivars); and D. Interaction of cultivars and

treatments.


8 nn
oo o ;
74 a
a i
o 5 }
35 b 6 ‘
iS ag
ora
B34 B} 5 wa 6
3 a
& 34° be a 2 a
' a
a es a
24 cd .
4 a
~- Or OO Cit Hlew2H2dii«w2t 2st H2ivn2
Ege oo S|E = S22 ES SEF SES
~winpoom sis? SiS Sse ¥ise Fseg
a NNNM C= z 2 2 jz x
Sse fe seal 8s Bal” 8a Ba
oO oO = oOo oO oO =
i z| z| Ee &
PSB Sy1'! PSB Sy3 PSB Sy6 “Manchuria

Figure 7. Mean pods per node of soybean cultivars subjected to waterlogging treatments.
A. Comparison of years (across cultivars and treatments); B Comparison of
cultivars (across years and treatments); C. Comparison of Waterlogging
treatments (across years and cultivars); and D. Interaction of cultivars and

treatments.


70 .
Bo fo]
60 b
if
n
B40) F #
Bee oil? ‘ ab
ira , ia * 4 Pa a i »
+ | 4% O be a a
20 - oe “loge
L I
10 | by a o ,
Ps B
~- Ol- MO OO O/B HH] Hj$ia] 242 5B] 2H]!'altiisa a
Ssleooea s\EPS/ESSESSES SPSS
Sinan s|5% s5% 35% 35% 85a 8
oa
ggeaa si Sal 8a gay gal sa
mo oO oO oO ao
Pad wo a | =| fava
PSB Sy1! PSB sy3 ' PSB sy ! Manchuria

Figure 8. Mean percentage of filled seeds of soybean cultivars subjected to waterlogging
treatments. A. Comparison of years (across cultivars and treatments); B
Comparison of cultivars (across years and treatments); C. Comparison of
Waterlogging treatments (across years and cultivars); and D. Interaction of

cultivars and treatments.

(g DM)

for}

100 Seed Weight

Figure 9.


B

J!
=

o
a
an
—
oa

Normal |
Normal |
30DAP

Year 2017 |
Year 2018
PSB Sy1 |
PSB Sy3 ,
PSB Sy6 |
Manchuria
S3ODAP WL |
R1 Stage WL

PSB Sy1

Normal |
3ODAP WL
R1 Stage WL

Normal

30DAP WL

R1 Stage WL |

Normal

30DAP WL
R1 Stage WL

PSB Sy3

PSB Sy6 “Manchuria |

Mean 100 seed oven dried weight of soybean cultivars subjected to

waterlogging treatments. A. Comparison of years (across cultivars and

treatments); B Comparison of cultivars (across years and treatments); C.

Comparison of Waterlogging treatments (across years and cultivars); and D.

Interaction of cultivars and treatments.


al of : |
600 ;
a
a b i
500 | a oo =
a ;
££ i a Oo
2 40 ja a be a : a be |
= a a - a
OE coe Le] i |
8 E300 _
200 |
100 |
ho 22 8 2z2laa z|3 =! als als =|
ISSISSS SESSESS ESS ES SESE
28g 3B o/5% 15% 95% 35% 85% 8
oo 0 i=
sgeees Ba ga 8a 2a Be
recliners EE
PSB Sy1 | PSB sy3 ' PSB sy6 | Manchuria

Figure 10. Mean root length of soybean cultivars subjected to waterlogging treatments.
A. Comparison of years (across cultivars and treatments); B Comparison of
cultivars (across years and treatments); C. Comparison of Waterlogging
treatments (across years and cultivars); and D. Interaction of cultivars and

treatments.

Root Surface Area
(mm? plant’)

~~
Oo


al lo |
B
7 a a
J abe ® i) ’ a |
, a 4
8 o c 5 be a a 8 U c ‘ be al
7 Qo a = i
a - ,lCUe s |
ao |
a
3 en Sea ar sd J SS
‘BS SSS PZ ESS ESSERE SESE
Skane sso g5o 5% 355 35% 8
SSjexeeX2 si agai aai*aar-aag “ag
= 2) 82) 82 82 82 8%
x «| al | rg
PSB Sy1 ' PSBSy3 ' PSB sy6 | Manchuria

Figure 11. Mean root surface area of soybean cultivars subjected to waterlogging

treatments. A. Comparison of years (across cultivars and treatments); B

Comparison of cultivars (across years and treatments); C. Comparison of

Waterlogging treatments (across years and cultivars); and D. Interaction of

cultivars and treatments.


2.0 ; _ :
A c
Jo @ cc] |
16 ab t
, a . ran
1.4 a a a a!
o~ | be wo O)* ¥ B ” B 6 @ * i
gel la be @ ie ab be bbe a 6 o |
$210 a ' ea, a |
sf ’ a
g£08 ja
0.6
0.2
Im Ole © © Ola HY H's ol@G cs oaiw22
Re 2S SES Ses sla cea Bas
ama ols [=] {=} Ss {=}
BEINN D cla SPizxt Vs =) 4 =) a b=)
xX &| z| «| x
PSB Sy! ! PSBsy3 | PSB syé 'Manchuria

Figure 12. Mean root diameter of soybean cultivars subjected to waterlogging treatments.
A. Comparison of years (across cultivars and treatments); B Comparison of
cultivars (across years and treatments); C. Comparison of Waterlogging
treatments (across years and cultivars); and D. Interaction of cultivars and

treatments.


2.5 4 7
a 8
a
20 44
is)
gm15 ja
ee) | laa
Sa a LJ
St ab
2510 4
e210 Fa
0.5 - i
|
[ys ols O Sig a
NS Vinam 6/5 &
S82 22 si- Ss
+> =| 3
|

Figure 13. Mean root volume of soybean cultivars subjected to waterlogging treatments.
A. Comparison of years (across cultivars and treatments); B Comparison of
cultivars (across years and treatments); C. Comparison of Waterlogging
treatments (across years and cultivars); and D. Interaction of cultivars and

treatments.


a m Seed
Ea teii| mPod
f ef | =, GLeaf
202 4 (Beale z ‘| Stem
01 5 i oe es ae ae “| mRoot
0.0 —— ee i
iS Ol Saget Hiatt +ia itz a
SRP SS 20 ESE SCE SCE sees
5 5 ej2a 2a 2 2zaoz2zaQ
SSeeES" Sal sa ag ga ee
a a a a a
PSB Sy1 PSB Sy3 PSB Sy6 Manchuria

Figure 14. Plant segment dry weight partitioning of soybean cultivars subjected to
waterlogging treatments. A. Comparison of years (across cultivars and
treatments); B Comparison of cultivars (across years and treatments); C.
Comparison of Waterlogging treatments (across years and cultivars); and D.

Interaction of cultivars and treatments.

Secondary plant architecture-related seed yield components of soybean cultivars were
significantly different (Table 2). Central stem node number and the number of
reproductive node (the stem podding node) significantly differed between genotypes

(Ps<0.05). PSB Sy] had the most central stem node number per plant of 22.7 followed by


PSB Sy6 (17.3), 'Manchuria’ (14.4), and PSB Sy3 (14.3; Figure 2); consequently, PSB
Syl, PSB Sy6, PSB Sy3 and 'Manchuria' had the most number of reproductive node
(pod-bearing node) in the central stem in decreasing order (Figure 4), with the PSB Sy]
cultivar obtained the most number but comparable to that of the PSB Sy6 and PSB Sy3
but significantly differing from the ”Manchuria’ genotype. Branching (central stem
branch number) and the reproductive node number from the stem branch (pod bearing
node from the branch) also differed significantly between soybean cultivars (P<0.05,
Figure 3 and 5). PSB Sy6 consistently had the most mean branch number and
reproductive node from the branch per plant of 3.2 and 20.6 count, respectively. PSB Sy1
and PSB Sy3 performed comparably lower in this trait with the PSB Sy6. The landrace
Manchuria consistently had the fewer mean number of branching (Figure 3) and branch
reproductive nodes (Figure 5) of only 1.8 and 4.8, respectively.

Primary seed yield components of soybean cultivars was significantly different (Table
2). Mean pods per plant (P<0.05) and pods per node (P<0.05) significantly differed
between genotypes. PSB Sy1 had the most mean pods per plant of 107 (Figure 6) though
it hat the intermediate pods per node of 3.7 among the genotypes. Conversely, the
landrace 'Manchuria' had the lowest pods per plant of 56 but it had the most pods per
plant of 6. PSB Sy3 and PSB Syé6 had the comparable intermediate mean pods per plant
of 70 and 88, respectively, and pods per node of 2.4 and 2.8 relatively to the two extrems
obtained by PSB Syl and Manchuria. soybean cultivars also differed significantly in

mean percentage of filled pods (P<0.05) and 100 seed dry matter weight (HSW; P<0.05).


The recorded range for percent pod filling was only 12.6% to 32.5% (Figure 8) and 9.0
grams to 11.2 grams on the HSW (Figure 9) across the tested soybean cultivars. PSB Sy6
had the highest mean percent filled pods of 32.5% whereas ‘Manchuria’ had the highest
HSW of 11.2 grams. The PSB Sy1, PSB Sy3 and ‘Manchuria’ had the lowest comparable
percentage filled pods whereas PSB Syl, PSB Sy3 and PSB Syé6 had the lowest
comparable HSW .

Across cultivars and treatments, partitioned dry matter to the roots differed
significantly (P<0.05) between years, wherein, a mean of 0.7 partioning coeffcient was
recorded for year 2017 whereas a two-fold redcution to 0.3 was recorded for year 2018
(Figure 14).

There was no significant difference on the amount of dry matter partioned to the root
system, leaf, and seed (the harvest index, HI; Figure 14). Whereas cultivars differed
significantly (P<0.05) on the dry matter partitioned to stem and pod segments. PSB Sy6
and 'Manchuria' had the highest dry matter partitioning to the stem whereas PSB Sy] and

PSB Sy3 had highest dry matter partitioning to plant pod segement.

Effect of Waterlogging Treatments

Waterlogging treatments differentially affected seed yield of soybean cultivars
(P<0.10). Across genotypes, non-stressed or non-waterlogged ("Normal") condition
recorded the highest mean 14% moisture seed yield of 1.2 tons per hectare. The two

waterlogging stress conditions significantly reduced soybean seed yield; fourteen (14)


days waterlogging of soybean cultivars at the thirtieth (30) days after planting had
resulted to 54.6% reduction relative to the non-waterlogged (Normal) plots, whereas the
same waterlogging duration imposed at the R1 stage of soybean had reduced seed yield to
a magnitude of 39.9% and is comparable to the yield reduction of the latter treatment as
revealed by post hoc Fisher's LSD mean comparison (Figure 1).

On the root architectural traits of soybean (across year and genotypes), root length,
root diameter, and root tips statistically differed between waterlogging treatments
(P<0.05) while the effect of waterlogging treatments on the root surface area and root
volume did not differ statistically. Normal condition had the shortest root length recorded
of 335.4 mm while 30DAP WL and R1 Stage WL treaments promoted an increase in root
length at 20.5% and 22.2%, respectively. On the root surface area, although there were no
significant statistical difference, the Normal plots had the lowest mean of 90.5 mm? per
plant while 30DAP WL treatment resulted to an 8.1% increase in the area, whereas R1
Stage WL treatment increased the area at 11.7% relative to the Normal plot. On the root
diameter, R1 stage WL plots had the widest mean root diameter per plant but did not
differed significantly in Normal plot, while 30DAP WL treatment resulted to reduction at
13.4% relative to the Normal plot. On the root volume, although there were no significant
statistical difference, Normal plots also had the highest mean root volume per plant of 2.0
cm’, relatively to this, 30DAP WL treatment and RI Stage WL resulted to reduction in
this root trait at 18.2% and 10.2%, respectively.

Secondary plant architecture-related seed yield components of soybean (across

genotypes) was also significantly affected. Waterlogging treatments did not show


statistical difference in central stem reproductive or podding node number but established
significant difference on the plant central stem node number (P<0.05), branch number or
branching (P<0.05), and branch reproductive or podding node (P<0.10). Normal plots
and 30DAP WL treatment had the least and comparable central stem node while R1 stage
WL promoted an increase of 30.1% relative to Normal plot. Normal plots and R1 Stage
WL treatment had the least and comparable number of branching while 30DAP stage WL
promoted an increase of 57.6% relative to Normal plot.. Consistent with the effect on
mean central stem node and, R1 Stage WL treatment also had effected the most number
of reproductive node number derived from the central stem, whereas Normal plot and
30DAP WL treatment had the comparable mean value recorded.

On the primary seed yield components measured, pods per node, pods per plant and
HSW did not differ significantly between waterlogging treatments across genotypes,
however, percentage filled pods (P<0.05) was significantly different between
waterlogging treatments. The range of percent filled pods was low and is between 16.9%
to 27.9% (across years and treatments). Normal plot had the most percent filled pods,
while 30DAP WL and R1 Stage WL treatment decreased percent filled pods relative to
the Normal plot by 21.5% and 64.6%, respectively.

Waterlogging treatments did not cause significant difference in the soybean plant
segmental dry matter partitioning. Harvest index was alike for all waterlogging
treatments across genotypes.

There was no statistically significant difference between the two waterlogging stress

condition employed in seed yield reduction relative to the Normal plot.


Interaction Effect of Waterlogging Treatments on Soybean Cultivars

Significant interaction effect existed between the two factors at P<0.05, this indicates
that the cultivar difference was significantly affected by the treatments and that the
treatment effect differed significantly with the genotypes used. Within PSB Syl,
subjected to Rl Stage WL had the highest recorded mean seed yield of 1.1 tons per
hectare which is 21.2% higher but is statistically comparable to the mean seed yield
recorded from the Normal plot; whereas, this cultivar subjected to 30DAP WL treatment
effected the most reduced mean seed yield which was 1.9% relative to the Normal plot
(Figure 1). In PSB Sy3, Normal plot treatment attained the highest mean seed yield at
0.86 tons per hectare, this cultivar when subjected to 30DAP WL had a reduced mean
seed yield relative to the Normal plot by 15.5% but did not statistically differed, while
when subjected to Rl Stage WL treatment it had the reduced mean seed yield of only
0.25 tons per hectare, a 240.7% mean reduction relative to Normal plot. PSB Sy6 had the
highest mean seed yield recorded across all treamtment-cultivar interactions at 1.7 tons
per hectare under Normal condition of 1.9 tons per hectare, but subjecting this cultivar to
30DAP WL and R1 Stage WL effected an extreme mean seed yield reduction by 645.5%
and 150.9%, respectively. The landrace ‘Manchuria’ yielded the mean of 1.1 and 1.0 tons
per hectare under R1 Stage WL and Normal strip plot and was statistically comparable;
however, this cultivar subjected to 30DAP WL treatment effected a significant mean seed
yield reduction to 0.7 tons per hectare and had the the mean reduction of 55.8% relative

to the Normal plot.


On the root length component of the root architectural traits, there was significant
interaction existed between the two factors at P<0.05; this indicates that the cultivar
difference was significantly affected by the treatments and this was true also to the
measured root surface area, root diameter, root volume, and root tips. Within PSB Syl,
under Normal and R1 Stage WL strip plot treatments had the a statistically comparable
mean root length, however, this cultivar when subjected to 30DAP WL treatment effected
a significant increased mean root length at 33.1% relative to Normal plot mean root
length; similar trend was observed on the root surface area in this cultivar, but on mean
root diameter per plant, 30DAP and R1 Stage WL treatments effected a significant
reduction by 23.9% and 22.5%, respectively, relative and is non-comparable to the mean
root length under Normal strip plot; mean root volume responded in the same manner as
root diamter in this cultivar. In PSB Sy3, the 30DAP WL treatment effected the reduction
on all the root architectural traits measured across all treatment-cultivar interaction; it
reduced root mean root length and root surface area relative to Normal condition
treatment by 0.1% and 0.2% but did not statistically differ to Normal condition, mean
root diameter by 18.1%, and mean root volume by 69.2% per plant; meanwhile, the R1
Stage WL treatment relative to Normal condition increased the mean root root length by
44.5%, root surface area by 38.2, root diameter by 15.3%, and root volume per plant by
33.8%. In PSB Sy6, Normal strip plot treatment had the shortest mean root length per
plant which differed significantly to the measured value under 30DAP and R1 Stage WL
treatments; such that mean root length per plant was increased by 29.7% and 42.6% when

this cultivar was subjected to 30DAP and WL treatment, respectively. Similar trend of


treatment effect was observed on the mean root surface area and root volume per plant.
Contrariwise, reversed trend of the treatment effect was observed on the mean root
diameter per plant, such that the lowest mean value observed was under the Normal strip
plot treatment and subjecting this cultivar to 30DAP and R1 Stage WL treatment
promoted a decreased mean root diameter by 23.6% and 10.7%, respectively. Aside from
the root volume, there was no significant difference between the observed mean value for
the rest of the root traits measured under Normal and R1 Stage WL treatments in the
landrace ‘Manchuria’; significant reduced mean value was recorded when this cultivar
was subjected to the 30DAP WL treatment causing a reduction of 0.6% on the mean root
length per plant, root surface area by 6.1%, and root volume by 18.8% relative to under
Normal strip plot treatment.

On the secondary plant architecture-related seed yield components of soybean,
significant interaction effect difference existed between the two factors at P<0.05; this
indicates that the cultivar difference was significantly affected by the treatments and vice
versa. Exclusive of the extent of branching (central stem branch number) and branch
podding node, the number of node coming from the central stem, reproductive node
coming from the main stem of PSB Sy] did not significantly differ across waterlogging
treatments. PSB Syl under Normal strip plot treatment had most mean number of
branches per plant of 4.1, however subjecting this cultivar to 30DAP and R1 Stage WL
treatments effected reduction in branching by 93.7% and 38.5%, respectively. The PSB
Sy3 under Normal strip plot treatment had the mean central stem node number of 17.5,

subjecting this cultivar to 30DAP WL treatment effected a significant reduction on this


trait by 453.6%%, contratriwise, subjecting this cultivar to Rl Stage WL promoted an
increased value in this trait by 21.5%, relative to under Normal conditon treatment.
Similar response trend was observed on the reproductive node coming from the central
stem and branch. The extent of branching (central stem branch number), however, was
reduced in the two stress stages by 485.3% and 6.2% in 30DAP WL and RI stage WL.
The secondary yield components of PSB Sy6 was increased by either of the waterlogging
stress treatment. 30DAP WL increased the mean central stem node number by 81.9%,
extent of branching by 52.4%, and reproductive nodes coming from the central stem by
64.2 and branches 64.1, relative to under Normal condition treatment; whereas subjecting
this cultivar to Rl Stage WL treatment promoted a relatively higher degree on the
measured secondary traits by 83.6%, 64.6%, 73.7%, and 67.1%, respectively. The mean
number of central stem node number of the landrace ‘Manchuria’ did not differ
significanlty across waterlogging treatments although 30DAP and R1 Stage WL
treatments effected a reduced number on this trait by 15.0% and 14.9%, respectively. The
mean number of reproductive node coming from the branches were comparable across
waterlogging treatments although 30DAP and R1 Stage WL treatments effected a
reduced number on this trait by 8.4% and 58.7%, respectively. Normal and R1 Stage WL
treatments had the most comparable effect on the extent of branching while 30DAP WL
treatment effected intermediate significant reduction on this trait by 38.4% relative to
under Normal condition treatment; same trand was also observed on the reproductive
node coming from the central stem where 30DAP WL treatment reduced the mean value

by 66.3%.


The primary seed yield components had significant interaction effect difference
existed between the two factors at P<0.05; this indicates that the cultivar difference was
significantly affected by the treatments and vice versa. PSB Syl under Normal and
30DAP WL treatment had comparable mean total pods per plant although the latter
treatment had 5.9% lower value relative to the former treatment; notably, subjecting this
cultivar to Rl Stage WL treatment resulted to a significant reduced value in this trait by
38.6% relative to under Normal condition strip plot. Mean pods per node did not differ
across waterlogging treatments in this cultivar though 30DAP and R1 Stage WL
treatments effected a 0.4% and 30.4% decrease, respectively, relative to under Normal
condition strip plot. Although treatments had equal statistical rank, the Waterlogging
stress treatments increased the ratio of seed-filled pods over the total harvested pods by
29.3% and 38.3% promoted by 30DAP and R1 Stage WL treatments, respectively.
Waterlogging stress treatments increased significantly the 100-seed dry matter weight
contrastive under Normal condition by 8.9% and 1.6% for 30DAP WL and R1 stage WL,
respectively. PSB Sy3 under Normal condition strip plot had pods per plant of 79.4,
subjecting this cultivar to 30DAP WL treatment decreased the mean value significantly
by 398.7% whereas subjecting the cultivar to Rl Stage WL treatment effected a
significant increase in mean value of this trait by 29.9%, contrastive to under Normal
condition. Similar treatment effect trend was obsserved on mean pods per node and
percentage of seed-filled pods. Notably, both waterlogging stress treatments increased
significantly the 100-seed dry matter weight contrastive under Normal condition by

16.0% and 16.1% for 30DAP WL and RI stage WL, respectively. Waterlogging


treatments significantly affect PSB Sy6 mean pods per plant, pods per node, percent
seed-filled pods, and 100-seed dry matter weight. Among the cultivars under normal
condition, PSB Sy6 had the least recorded mean pods per plant of 27.2, however,
subjecting such cultivar to 30DAP and R1 Stage WL treatment significant promoted an
increase in mean value of the trait by 27.1% and 19.5%, respectively. Similar treatment
effect trend was observed on the mean pods per node, while reverse trend was observed
on the percent seed-filled pods and 100-seed dry matter weight, wherein, 30DAP effectd
a reduction in the mean value by 107.8% and 2.5% of the percent seed-filled pods and
100-seed dry matter weight, respectively, whereas R1 Stage WL treatments effected a
reduction in the mean value by 781.3% and17.8%, of the percent seed-filled pods and
100-seed dry matter weight, respectively. The landrace 'Manchuria’ under Normal and
30DAP WL treatment had comparable mean pods per plant and pods per node; however,
subjecting the landrace cultivar to Rl Stage WL treatment significantly effected a
reduction at 40.2% and 33.9% on this two traits, respectively. The landrace 'Manchuria’
under Normal and R1 stage WL treatment had comparable percentage of sedd-filled
pods; however, subjecting the landrace cultivar to 30DAP WL treatment significantly
effected a reduction at 23.0%. Though equally ranked statistically, the 100-seed dry
matter weight of the landrace ‘Manchuria’ was reduced in waterlogging treatmens by
13.7% and 5.1% when subjected to 30DAP WL and RI stage WL, respectively.

Among the plant segmental dry matter partitioning coefficient, significant interaction
effect difference existed between the two factors at P<0.10 on the pod and seed segments.

As shown in Figure 14 shows the plant segment dry weight partitioning of soybean


cultivars subjected to waterlogging treatments. Subjecting PSB Syl to waterlogging
treatments reduced the pod partitioning coefficient by 36.8% and 39.4% in 30DAP WL
and RI stage WL, respectively; seed partitioning coefficient is also reduced in this
cultivar under waterlogging treatments by 59.4% and 450.3% in 30DAP WL and R1
stage WL, respectively. Subjecting PSB Sy3 to waterlogging treatments reduced the pod
partitioning coefficient by 16.4% and 23,4% in 30DAP WL and RI stage WL,
respectively; seed PC is also reduced in this cultivar under waterlogging treatments by
28.3% and 34.1% in 30DAP WL and R1 stage WL, respectively. Subjecting PSB Sy6 to
waterlogging treatments reduced the pod partitioning coefficient by 27.5% and 6.9% in
30DAP WL and R1 stage WL, respectively; but seed partitioning coefficient is increased
in this cultivar under waterlogging treatments by 5.1% and 34.5% in 30DAP WL and R1
stage WL, respectively. Notably, subjecting the landrace ‘Manchuria’ to waterlogging
treatments increased the pod PC by 22.6% and 26.9% in 30DAP WL and RI stage WL,
respectively; seed partitioning coefficient is also increased in this cultivar under
waterlogging treatments by 57.1% and 73.5% in 30DAP WL and RI stage WL,

respectively.

Correlation of Traits to Seed Yield

Using treatment means over replications in years by cultivars interaction data points,
multiple linear correlations analysis relating roots architectural traits and yield
components to seed yield revealed that under normal condition, soybean seed yield has

significant high negative correlation to central stem node number, extent of central stem


branching, and central stem podding node, and number of pods per plant; on the other
hand, seed yield has significant high positive correlation to percentage of filled pods
(Table 4). Under 30DAP WL stress, seed yield has significant negative correlation to
extent of branching only (Table 5), while in R1 stage WL stress, seed yield has
significant high negative correlation to the root surface area (Table 6). Across treatments,
seed yield has significant intermediate negative correlation to central stem node number,
branch podding node, and pods per plant, and significant intermediate positive correlation

with percentage of filled pods (Table 7).

Damage index based on seed yield

PSB Sy3 and PSB Sy6 had the highest comparable susceptibility index (Figure 15).
Damage WSI or index base on seed yield recorded for PSB Sy6 was 64.5% relative to
non-stress condition while the PSB Sy3 had 36.3%. PSB Syl seed yield was not reduced
by either of the waterlogging stress and achieved the negative value of -13.1% index.

‘Manchuria’ had the intermediate susceptibility index of 16.4%.

“(4BH) 00'1 01.290 <(ereIpouurayUT) £9°0 09 £€°0 “(MOT) E£°0 01 00'O ‘ABUT JUAIDNJI0D,

‘queoljIUsIs jou —

SU {JaAQ] AjI[Iqeqosd [0'O> Ie JLOIFTUTIS - yy {JOAd| AtIqeqosd ¢o'9 ye wRoTUBIS - 4, ‘JaAo] AipIqeqosd Q]°O Je JUROTFIUIS - ,

ES

b PIa1A PaaS ‘St
=65°0 xepul jseueH “pL —
su@G0r sud’ ‘ MGO P98 001 Eh g < Fi
sub€0-  suQh' = 250 1 Spog paylij abeyusnag ‘Z), 3 ze
9270 sup" 0h b queld Jad spog josequny 4, S g
600 vB = uZS0 oe 980 SEO t @pon Jad spog jo JAquINN ‘O| -
su€0'O- supp s0Z'0- 200 oO OL b PON Buippog wats jesjuad *6 San
sul90 2G 200 =slZ0 BO BOO L'0 ‘ PON Bulppog seyouelg Wa}S JesUaD *g 2 & 3
SLO 050 «90 sh'0 080 G00 8S 96'0 b JOAQUIN YOUeIg WA}S |esUaD “2 3 Fa a
suBE'O-  subS'O — su0h'0 BHD) 660) SEO shBO BO 80 ‘ Joquinn apon ways jeNuaQ’g & FX
60'0  suZEOr seZEO- SEDO os Z8'0 09010 G60 SI's GO 080 b Sdi] JOOy Jo saqUINN *G >
970 = s0S0 890" ZO) GO BOD uh HED SEO LO ESO ‘ SWNJOA JOON “py = ED »
suGh'O-  sEZ'0" eB BED ZL 290 0900 60'S 200" S10 su 5790 b Jajoweigjooy'g 8 eB
suf0'0 EO 970-0 oeZ6'0 910660 690 BSD 9B BED GO 000 b ealy aeyng jooy'z 5 ~
£010 suGEOr e870" ZOD 06'0 600660690 S080 oO = ESO 0's 0F b bua] Jooy "| _

SL bb €L Zt tL OL 6 g Z 9 S v € 4 b SIaOWEIEd

SS

‘sjuiod eyep uoTRIAIUI SIBAI[ND X SIBOK IDA UOTIPUOD (pe8Zo]19}eM-UOU) [eULIOU JopuN Uvaqhos Jo sjusUOduUIOS
PISIA pur plaif “pur syreyy yemmjooytyoue Joos Buowe uoyepasos seaury odrynur Aq ,WuatsyJa09 UOTea1109 S,uosIead “] 292L

£9

“(y31H) 00°T 01 £9°0 {(aretpowtzaqUT) 29°90 01 €€'0 (MOT) £€'0 01 00'0 -9BUEI JUATOD0D,

‘queoljiusis Jou —

SU {JOAgT AtTIqeqoid [Q'O> Je WFTUBIS - x4 “T2A2] Atpiqeqosd ¢o'0 ye ]WedIFIUBIS - 44 “[OA2] Ayyiqeqosd Q] ‘0 3@ yuRoyIUsIS - ,

Leen ee

\ PIAA P22S “SL
x90 | XepulIseneH Ph
uO 0060" mao pees oor’) § _ 3
+60 190 alSO | L Spo pally aBewaned 7, 8 2
28 w6F0 60 lO uejd 10d spog jo sequin}, g
sO HCO NGO EEO TO pon Jad spo Jo JeqUMN 0}
580" 9870 070 ob6'O BED SEO PON BuIppod WAS UBD
wulQ' £8096 G9 EL'D EO EDD apon Buppog seyoueig was emuey'g 3 8 8
s08'0- ELD 08 sbB'O BD ID L'OHO sequinn youeg wars jee) "2 B <a
w2Z60 iGO EV LO EO PVD LEO TOL sequin BPON WeIs JeNUEQ’g a =
s67' 640 910 ssh B'O SHO ODT EET BID Sd Joy jo sequin GS
OE E50 suhE' Zw OWED OTD BOO 670 OGD aunionroou'y _ 3
w97'0 890 BHO EL uO VO 90' SZO HO EO EVO OL sjoueig}oou'€ 3. BS
sO 9200 20° 70-9 9ED BGO HOLD BOO ZVD G60 NGO BLO Bary aoepng joy 2” &
x90 s20'0 9010" h'0- 69°0 870 SSO Hh O G00 EDD ETO ZO yyBue7 1o0y "|

a OL 6 g L 9 g v ¢ z D svajaweled

pA

‘syuiod eyep UOTOBIDIUT SIBATIND X SIBAK J9AO UOTpUCd pasdopiajem {YCOE Jopun uvaqhos Jo sjuouoduroa
plaid pue ppsif ‘pue spre pemyoaytyore joor Suowe uoyepauoo sesur] afdynur Aq ,WuoroyJa09 UONe]PL09 S,uosIead *Z Gel


(481) 00'T 1 £9°0 ‘(ereIpauteyUT) 19° 01 €€°0 “(MOT) £€'0 01 00'0 :28URI JUAIDIJa05,

‘queoyusis jou —

SU {JaAaq] AitTIqeqosd [Q°0> Je JWLOIFTUBIS - 444 JAE] Ad|Iqeqoud ¢O'0 1 JUeOITUBIS - ,4 “[OA] ApTIqeqosd 0] 0 1 JUBDYTUBIS - ,

b PIa!A P22g “SL
sub b0- L X@pu] JSOUEH “pL oP
sbb0 620 i MO P2825 001 CL § - 3
s00'0 = 670 LEO 4 Spod pajii4 abewaned 2, 8 ae
suGS0-  suGE0- su99'0- su 0 ‘ Jue|d ad spog Jo JaqUINN “|| g g
270 600 e600 80990 b PON 4d spog JO JaqUINN “O|
supp su99'0- sub '0- uO" o98D 90 b PON Bulppog wa}s eID "§ oa
Zr ufP'0° SLO" sub" 660 PLO" LO 4 PON Bulppog sayouesg ways |eNU2D °g 3 23
su99'0-  suGE'O- suZ5'0- uO os66O BGO" 98D LEO b seQUNN Youelg Ways jeNUaD "2-3 x a
7 ‘ JaQUINN apoN WaIS jeUED'g &
sugG'0- sub€"O- s65°0-EL'0" os 66°0) 790-080 os 96'D | onB6'O 4 88°0 ‘ dij Joy jo saquiny °g
supp'0- 90 sZEO- 600-97 su GO-GO GZ GTO LOD EO t BUINJOA ION 'p  _ 3 »
sh0'0  subb'O- 69° sub 00" sub L000" ETO" LOO hb EL OL b Jajaweiq joy 3 @ 8
sGL'0- sep supZ0- 50850" BD uC” uGH'OwbL'Oon98'D BSD os B8'D OTD EO b ealy a0epng Joou'z 5 ~
sv9G'0- subZ'0- su2S'0- 620" oO 9S" ZO sZ6'0 SEO 78D G60) PEO LO 60 b yyBua7 yooy “| _
SL i el a be Ob 6 8 Z 9 S v € 4 4 suajaweled

Lae nn el

‘sjuiod eyep uot oRIDIUT SIeATIND X SIBIX I9AO UOIIPUOD padZoj1a}em aBeIs | Y Jopun ueaqdos jo sjuauodwio0s
Plaid pue pyatf ‘pure syres yemnjooytyose joos Suowe uolyEayo0o sour] aduyjnu Aq ,Wa!oyJa09 WoTE[a1I09 S,wOsIvad “€ 242L

$9

(431) 00° I 91 £9°0 ‘(eretpautayUT) 49° 01 €€°0 “(MOT) ££'0 01 00'0 :@BuRI JAaIDYJa0D,

‘queoljIusis jou —

SU {[aAg] AyIqeqosd [9'O> Je TLOTFIUBIS - 44% {[2A2] AipIqeqosd ¢g"Q 3e jUROTpIUTIS - ,, ‘[2Ao] Aipiqeqod Q]'0 Je JuRoITUBIS - ,

Ea

L PIa!A 22S “SL
suf LO" b X@pul SONEH “pL o 2
0070 su9E"0- b MdO P2298 001 EL § ~ 3
1050 = 570-0 L Spoq pajit4 abejuanieg 2} SB ze
60S'0-  su60'0- 4990 BE L Jue|q 4ad spog JO saqUNN *} | 3 g
sv60'0-  suSh'0- LPO 20h 0 L PON 18d spod JO QUINN “O} .
suG'O-  suGL'0- bW'0" 60" 6D - S00 L PON Buippog wa} [UID 6G oo
sbp'0- uh" aah 90" DEO 980 HZ EL 4 pon Buippog sayouerg wa}s [sued °g 3 23
so0V'0- $600 aebSO>  suLEO web 8'0 ZL Z'0n68°0 4 sOQUNN YouRIg WAIS jeUED “ZB = a
wbS'0°  suph 0-80 BE GO LZ BO L090 b JaqUINN BpoN WIS jeUE’g _& oX
seZOO-  suQh'O- subZ0-su97' ws uP0'0 os B'0 B50 ED EL'0 b SdlJ JOoy jo saquiny °¢
s60'0-  GS°0 sBE'O- EO = OHO LO 670 BZ 970 ETD BED b BUNIOA YOON "p  _ a xo
sZb0 GSO" 950 LD 000 ZPD 90D USF sO) POD SOO 290" b JajaWe!d JOO "€ a g Ey
sub€'Q>  so80'0-  suZh'0- 59h BLD SLO onQZ'0wsESO WED oB90ZEO 05D ENO b Pally SOe~NS J00Y Z Fa
supe" 6h" subZ0-  su2Z'0-—oB'O EO oe Z'0 a0 BED web Z'0 BED GED EDO S6'0 t yyBua7 yooy "| _

Sb vl eb ia tL ob 6 8 Z 9 g v £ z L SuaJOWELEG

Es

‘squrod eyep UONSeIOIUT SIBATIIND X SIBOA JBAO SUOTIIPUOD JUoUTJBAN] ssoIDe URAgAOS Jo syuaUOdWIOS
plats puke pyarc ‘pue sre yemmpooytyoue joor Buowe uoweyas09 seaul] afduyjnur Aq ,JWa1oyJa09 UoNe[eLOD S,uosIead ‘pf 421



” OH
Ic
om & ob sa
60 +
4 1
D i
2 404
> i f} |
2B 2. ]
oD |
ey :
eo) +m +
(= i
BS 20 |
5 a |
g 4]
-60
-80
| | ab a a ab be oe 6 a a abo ob b
-100 + ;
gelags ale gle gle ele gle z
i(S Sin om m 5/& B/& Ble Bla Bie B
S822 2 8/6 8/8 sé 88 818 &
ae 213 7218 218 218 2i8 2
i w z | “ fo ~
| PSB Sy! PSBSy3 PSBSy6 Manchuria

Figure 15. Mean soybean waterlogging stability index (or “damage index”; Bouslama and
Schapaugh, 1984) based on the seed yield. A. Comparison of years (across
cultivars and treatments); B Comparison of cultivars (across years and
treatments); C. Comparison of waterlogging treatments (across years and

cultivars); and D. Interaction of cultivars and treatments.

DISCUSSION

Because germplasm evaluation based on seed yield is puzzled because of the potential
that tolerance and recovery mechanisms can partly contribute to the yield after the
waterlogging stress is over (Zhou, 2010). In this study, factors other than the effect of the
waterlogging stress on genotypes and vice versa, especially insect pest was contained to a
feasible extent by routine preventive and control measures implementation. However,
weather condition was field-based and natural. Weather variables especially incident
solar radiation and rainfall contribute the most percentage among the drivers affecting
crop performance. Rainfall was not limiting, and the relatively low yield (0.25 — 1.90 tons
per hectare) across years is essentially attributed to the low incident solar radiation
intercepted which hit the grain filling phase of the crop caused by decreased effective
sunshine duration and high cloud cover (Appendix Figure 1). Further, despite being a
nitrogen-fixing crop, supplemental fertilization was impplemented, and the nitrogen,
phoshorus and potassium was not a limiting environmental input based on the inherent
experimental area properties (Appendix Table 1); experimental soil pH was favorable.
Generally, soybean is characterized as a short-day photoperiod sensitive plant, while our
tested genotypes were grown under the long-day condition in the region, photoperiodic
effect were assumed negligible since annual day-length variation is not that pronounced
owing to the close equatorial proximity of the experimental location. The experimental
area encouraged waterlogging according to its physical features having fine clayey

textured tenacious clay loam surface soil and sticky compact strucutre, consequently the


edaphic features lead to poor drainage, quick and extended waterlogging condition; in
addition, temperature rise (>20°C) which hit throughout the waterlogging stress period
more weighed down the occurrence of the stress — caused by enhanced depletion of
oxygen from the bulk of soil water by overall oxygen consumption of plant roots, soil
fauna and soil microorganism (Taiz and Zeiger, 2002). The observed seed yield was also
ensured to detect utmost effect by waterlogging on the genotypes and vice versa, so that
pest do not cause significant influence by means of applying strict insect pest preventive
and control measures. In pursuit of finding and understanding functional traits for
waterlogging tolerance and tolerant cultivar this study was conducted although the usual
planting calendar of soybean for rainfed environment in the country is towards the dry
months and/or after rice or maize, whereas the evaluation was conducted in opposite
cropping season.

Popular soybean cultivars showed variation for tolerance to waterlogging as also
observed by the team of Vantoai (1994). Within the species and variety, together with the
soil type, timing and duration of the stress are the causal factors of the extent of yield loss
in crops due to waterlogging (Patel et al., 2014). The soil type was conducive to
waterlogging condition and the duration was fixed to a maximum of fourteen (14) days in
reference to Scott ef al., 1989 and Singh and Singh, 1995. In this study, it demonstrate
both the (i) agronomic waterlogging tolerance (Setter and Waters, 2003) which is the
maintenance of comparatively high grain yields and (ii) physiological waterlogging
tolerance as the survival or the sustenance of growth under waterlogging relative to non-

waterlogged condition.


For soybean, yield components which have potential to influence yield are seed
number per area (seed plant’), seed size (weight seed’'), seed per pod (no.), pod number
per area (pod plant’), pod per reproductive node (no.), reproductive node number per
area (reproductive node plant’'), percent reproductive nodes (%; percentage of nodes
becoming reproductive), and node number (node plant) (Board and Kahlon, 2011).
Response of genotypes to waterlogging treatments and effect of waterlogging treatments
were varied on measured seed yield components althought it is legitimate that seed yield
is controlled by seed size and seed per plant; seed per plant is controlled by seed per pod
and pod per plant; pod per plant is controlled by pod per reproductive node and
reproductive node per plant; and reproductive node per plant is controlled by node per
plant and percent reproductive nodes (Board and Kahlon, 2011). Between cultivars across
years and treatments, the highest seed yield which was achieved by PSB Sy6 (Figure 1)
was mainly attributed to its high branching architecture (Figure 3) which promoted
highest number of pod bearing nodes (Figure 4), though it had relatively low pods per
node (Figure 7) promoting medium total pods per plant (Figure 6). The high branching
and its consequent high reproductive pod bearing node compensated its low percentage
filled pods (Figure 8) and intermediate HSW (Figure 9). Similar high seed yield
mechanism was also observed by Kuswantoro (2015). Meanwhile, the landrace
Manchuria’ achieved its comparable high yield in unlike property. Among the yield
components measured, its high yield was stimulated by high pods per node (Figure 7) and
percent filled pods (Figure 8) was the main attribute. This mechanism is noteworthy

where seed number is associated to increased partitioning and greater seed set efficiency


(Rotundo ef al. 2012). The PSB Syl intermediate yield was also induced in different
manner wherein it was its high node (Figure 2) and pod bearing node (Figure 4) from the
central main stem combined with medium contribution from branching habit (Figure 3)
and pods coming from the branches (Figure 5) resulting to highest pods per plant (Figure
6); to it, it compensated its medium percentage filled pods (Figure 8). Meanwhile, the
lowest seed yield recorded from PSB Sy3 were attributed to having fewest central stem
node number (Figure 2) and intermediate branching habit (Figure 3) resulting to
intermediate pod bearing node coming from the central stem (Figure 4) and branches
(Figure 5) and medium total pods per plant (Figure 6), it was also agravated by its few
pods per node (Figure 7) and percent filled pods (Figure 8). Between treatments across
genotypes, highest seed yield was obtained under non-waterlogged stressed plot as a
function of low node number (Figure 2) in the central stem but intermediate branching
habit (Figure 3) and intermediate pod bearing node from both the central stem (Figure 4)
and the branches (Figure 5), though it had the lowest pods per node (Figure 7), pods per
plant (Figure 6) and percent filled pods (Figure 8); its intermediate HSW (Figure 9)
compensated the latter limiting components. On the other hand, the lowest seed yield
promoted by subjecting genotypes to 30DAP WL effected in unlike manner in which it
increased pods per node (Figure 7), pods per plant (Figure 6), percent filled pods (Figure
8) and HSW (Figure 9) but it decreased significantly the number of branches and the pod
bearing node from both the central stem and branches. Kumidini (2010) emphasized that
the final main stem node number and branching influence the canopy structure indicating

that it may help improve crop photosynthetic ability in the canopy level, but it is


noteworthy to mention that it is the percentage of filled pods that weighs more to effect
high seed yield as in the case of PSB Sy1 considering the cultivar-treatment interaction,
and that low central stem node number and branching habit but high percent filled pods
of the PSB Sy6 and the landrace ‘Manchuria’ promoted the relatively high seed yield.
According to Fageria (2009) number of pods is one of the most important yield
components in determining grain yield of dry bean and the yield increase in a quadratic
fashion with increasing number of pods per plant, forthwith, it can be commended that
the extent of seed-filled pods must be considered to presume a high seed yield. Linkemer
et al. (1998) also reported a significant decline in pod number, branch number, pods per
node, and seed size after 7 days of flooding at various vegetative and reproductive stages.
A reduction in pod number in Soybeans was also established by Sullivan et al. (2001).

In the production system, it is interesting to have available cultivars that feature root
systems that develop well under stressful conditions. Considering seed yield performance
in relation to root architectural traits and dry matter partitioning, relative to non-
waterlogged stressed plots, the highly susceptible PSB Sy3 cultivar subjected to 30DAP
WL treatment effected reduction in root length, root surface area, root diameter, root
volume, and root, leaf and pod and seed dry matter partitioning; similarly, decreased root
diameter, and root, pod, and seed dry matter partitioning was also observed under R1
stage WL treatment. Hence flooding stress causes damage of both root length and shoot
dry matter in susceptible soybean cultivar. On the other hand, the tolerant PSB Sy]
cultivar subjected to 30DAP WL treatment were able to increase its root length and root

surface area but reduced its root diameter, and root volume, and was able also to reduce


its root, pod, and seed dry matter partitioning coefficient, yet, was able to increase its leaf
and stem partitioned dry matter indicating a sustained high source capacity for
photosynthetic activity and for photo-assimilate production. Similar adjustment was
observed under R1 stage WL treatment. Similar observations were also observed on
soybeans flooded at the vegetative stage as reported by Griffin and Saxton, 1988 and
Linkemer et al. 1998. The observed root dry weight reductions resulting from
waterlogged condition were consistent with that observed by Shimono et al. (2012).
Decrease in root biomass accumulation rates in flooded soybean has been noted by Pires
et al. (2002) and Sallam and Scott (1987). Dry weight losses are generally attributed to
dieback of the primary root system (Vartapetian and Jackson, 1997, Jackson and Ricard,
2003) and a decrease in the amount of photo-assimilate available for additional root
extension (Trought and Drew, 1980). It is important to note that accumulation of primary
root biomass was reduced for all genotypes under flooded relative to non-flooded
treatments, and this is consistent with the findings of Pires et al. (2002) and Sallam and
Scott (1987). Decreased N>2 fixation (Bacanamwo and Purcell, 1999) due to suppression
of the activities of nodule nitrogenase and leaf nitrate reductase (Sung, 1993) under
waterlogged condition can be attributed to the observed reduction on root architectural
traits resulting from nitrogen deficiency (Jones 1988) and the consequent yellowing of
leaves and abscission (Scott et al., 1989), which were also observed in this study, can be
attributed to the decreased shoot dry matter and seed yield because, accordingly,
approximately 50% of soybean’s leaf N is in RuBisCO, the enzyme involved in CO

carboxylation onto Ribulose bis-Phosphate (Sinclair, 2004). This enzyme is recognized as


the rate-limiting step for photosynthesis. Thus, when N becomes deficient, the entire
photosynthetic cycle declines, hence, stressful condition takes place as an indirect effect.
In accordance with Tewari and Arora (2016), flooded conditions decrease root
development, hence reducing the crop’s ability to absorb water and nutrients. According
to Morita et al. (2004), the consequent reduction in reduced root morphological traits
under waterlogged condition is a result of suppressed growth of taproot and its lateral
roots, consequently, soybean plants often form shallow root system under waterlogging
conditions. Dry matter accumulation is important in yield formation because yield
components recognized as important in controlling yield on the environmental level are
responsive to total dry matter accumulation (Egli and Yu, 1991; Board and Modali, 2005
).

Several workers reported a reduction in soybean yields under waterlogged condition,
ranging in duration from 24 hours to 14 days (Spooner, 1961; Scott et al., 1989; Singh
and Singh, 1995). In this study, we noticed that the response of the popular state
cultivated soybean cultivars to the timing of the waterlogging treatments under similar
duration, i.e. fourteen (14) days, were different on seed yield per se and on its effect on
both the primary and secondary seed yield governing components. The team of Vantoai
(1994) emphasized that seed yield is an essential factor for the evaluation of soybean
tolerance under flooding stress. Although direct selection on grain yield has low
effectiveness since its heritability under waterlogged stress has been reported to be very
low (Collaku and Harrison, 2005) because of environmental variables (Ranalili and

Cubero, 1997), the ability to produce high seed yield in flooded fields is still the ultimate


criterion of flooding tolerance (Zhou, 2010). The team of Henshaw (2007) tried to link
early season waterlogging tolerance at very early V2 stage based on root traits and
morphological responses and seed yield waterlogging tolerance to hasten identification
and selection of tolerant genotypes, but weren’t able to link the gap successfully, as a
consequnece, they inferred that potentially tolerant genotypes can only be screened by
full season trials that go to final yield. Our calculation of a “damage index” was based on
yield of plants in waterlogging treatments expressed as a percentage of yield under
nonwaterlogged conditions, eg. 2. Linkemer ef al. (1998) observed that waterlogging
reduced soybean seed yield by 67% at the R1 physiological stage and in this study, we
observed a reduction of 62.9% on the most susceptible cultivar. Consistent with the result
of Sugimoto et al. (2000), the resultant decrease in the number of pods per plant and the
HSW was also the major reason for the decrease in seed yield of the most susceptible
PSB Sy] cultivar. Several workers reported that the soybean is more sensitive against the
excessive water in soil during the early reproductive stage rather than on the vegetative
stages (Griffin and Saxton, 1988; Kwon and Lee, 1988; Heatherly and Pringle, 1991), in
this study we observed a reciprocal trend, yet, although the yield reduction was generally
greater under 30DAP WL stress treatment at 30.5%, compared to only 21.6% under R1
stage WL stress condition, the two timing of waterlogging treatment were equal in
statistical rank.

Elston and Bunting (1980) have pointed out that an indeterminate growth habit in a
tropical legume should be advantageous to recovery from water stress, whether excess or

deficit. In this study, this classic recommendation was true for the tolerant PSB Sy!


cultivar, because an indeterminate plant would have the potential to continue growing
and produce new pods after the termination of stress (Villalobos-Rodriguez and Shibles,
1985). However, it can be articulated that determinate growth habit can also be
advantageous for waterlogged condition as exemplified by the exhibited tolerance of the
determinate landrace ‘Manchuria’.

Branch number of legume plants is highly variable, and is an important determinant of
grain yield (Ranalili and Cubero, 1997); for the susceptible cultivar PSB Sy3 and PSB
Sy6 were it had the most number of branches among the genotypes, this trait was not an
enhancing component to achieving high seed yield although it may improve canopy
structure (Kumidini, 2010); on the other hand, low branching habit of the tolerant cultivar
‘Manchuria’ were observed to be an advantage to achieving high seed yield, and
management wise, low branching can be compensated by increased plant densities
(Hedley and Ambrose, 1981). Therefore, in a consistent manner, it can be reinforced that
most important factors for bean productivity are the number of pods per plant coupled
with high percentage of seed-filled pods and the total weight of seeds per plant (Matsuo
et al., 2017) because seed yield is commonly expressed as the product of harvested seed
number per unit land area and individual seed weight (Rotundo et al., 2012).

In grain legumes, as in most crops, because yield has a low heritability, a number of
breeders (e.g. De Pace, 1979; Hawtin, 1982) proposed indirect selection using traits or
trait combinations that are related to yield and are correlated. VanToai ef al. (2010)
reported significant correlation between grain yield with number of branches, number of

nodes and number of total grain in flooded soybean plots, while Verma (1992) reported


that yield was positively and significantly correlated with 100 seed-weight, number of
primary branches and plant height. Sallam and Scott (1987) on the other side, reported
significant correlation between root length, surface area, dry weight, and flood tolerance
in soybean crop, where Henshaw ef al. (2007) articulated that maintenance of primary
root extension and accumulation of root biomass may serve as an indicator of soybean
flood tolerance (Henshaw er al., 2007). In this study, . Using treatment means over
replications in years by cultivars interaction data points, multiple linear correlations
analysis relating roots architectural traits and yield components to seed yield revealed that
under normal condition, soybean seed yield has significant high negative correlation to
central stem node number, extent of central stem branching, and central stem podding
node, and number of pods per plant; on the other hand, seed yield has significant high
positive correlation to percentage of filled pods. Under 30DAP WL stress, seed yield has
significant negative correlation to extent of branching only, while in R1 stage WL stress,
seed yield has significant high negative correlation to the root surface area. Across
treatments, seed yield has significant intermediate negative correlation to central stem
node number, branch podding node, and pods per plant, and significant intermediate

positive correlation with percentage of filled pods.

SUMMARY and CONCLUSION

This study was conducted to (i) screen popular cultivated soybean varieties and a
landrace cultivar to waterlogging at two soybean developmental stages, (ii) distinguish
the morpho-associated traits of tolerant and susceptible cultivar/s and (iii) identify traits
that can be used as selection criteria for flooding tolerance. It appeared that the popular
cultivated soybean cultivars showed variation for tolerance to waterlogging. In this study,
we noticed that the response of the popular cultivated soybean cultivars to the timing of
the waterlogging treatments under similar duration, i.e. fourteen (14) days, were different
on seed yield per se and on its effect on both the primary and secondary seed yield
governing components. Across waterlogging treatment, it turned out based on the degree
of seed yield reduction (Figure 15) that PSB Sy] is the most tolerant cultivar followed by
the landrace 'Manchuria’, whereas the cultivar PSB Sy6 was the most susceptible cultivar
under waterlogged condition followed by the PSB Sy3 cultivar. Moreover, considering
the cultivar-treatment interaction in Figure 15, it can be reinforced that the cultivar PSB
Syl is the most tolerant among other genotypes as revealed by its relatively low mean
yield reduction when subjected to 30DAP WL (1.8%) and RI stage WL (-28.0%)
treatment. The landrace 'Manchuria' rank the second wherein mean seed yield reduction
is only 29.4% and 3.39% when subjected to 30DAP WL and R1 stage WL treatment,
respectively. The PSB Sy6 which had the highest yield across treatments and under
Normal condition (Figure 1) were determined to be the most susceptible to waterlogged

condition wherein its yield was reduced by 81.1% and 48.0% when subjected to 30DAP


WL and R1 stage WL, respectively. Meanwhile, the PSB Sy3 which yield the least
among the genotypes across the treatments (Figure 1) and under R1 stage WL treatment
were reinforced also to be the second most susceptible cultivar wherein its yield
reduction under waterloged stress condition were comparable as was observed in PSB
Sy6 (Figure 15).

The high seed yield (across treatments) achieved by the PSB Sy6 were mainly
attributed to its high branching architecture which promoted highest number of pod
bearing nodes; while the landrace ‘Manchuria’ achieved its comparable high yield
differently, wherein its high yield was due to more pods per node and percent filled pods.
It is noteworthy to mention that it is the percentage of filled pods that contributes more to
high seed yield as in the case of PSB Sy1 in cultivar-treatment interaction, and that low
central stem node number and branching habit but high percent filled pods of the PSB
Sy6 and the landrace ‘Manchuria’ promoted relatively high seed yield. Forthwith, it can
be commended that the amount or number of seed-filled pods must be considered to
presume a high seed yield, furthermore, the most important factors for bean productivity
are the number of pods per plant coupled with high percentage of seed-filled pods and the
total weight of seeds per plant. Branch number of legume plants is highly variable, and is
an important determinant of grain yield (Ranalili and Cubero, 1997); for the susceptible
cultivar PSB Sy3 and PSB Sy6 were it had the most number of branches among the
genotypes, this trait was not associated with high seed yield although it may improve
canopy structure (Kumidini, 2010). On the other hand, low branching habit of the tolerant

cultivar ‘Manchuria’ was observed to be an advantage to achieving high seed yield.


Table 5. Seed yield related traits conferring waterlogging tolerance, cultivars showing the
trait, and possible reason how these traits could possibly be responsible for

tolerance of soybean (G. max) cultivars subjected to waterlogging treatments.

. ‘ Possible reason how these
Traits conferring

. Cultivar showing this trait traits could possibly be
waterlogging tolerance :
responsible for tolerance
High percentage of filled PSB Sy 1 Seed yield is controlled by
pods seed size and seed per plant.
More pods per node and ‘Manchuria’ Seed yield is controlled by
percent filled pods seed size and seed per plant;

seed per plant is controlled
by seed per pod and pod per
plant; pod per plant is
controlled by pod per
reproductive node and

reproductive node per plant.

Based on findings in this study, it appears that waterlogging tolerance can occur through
different yield component mechanisms (Table 4).

Decrease in root biomass accumulation rates in flooded soybean has been noted.
Flooding stress causes damage of both root length and shoot dry matter in susceptible
soybean cultivar, on the other hand, the tolerant PSB Sy1 cultivar subjected to 30DAP

WL treatment were able to increase its root length and root surface area but reduced its


root diameter, and root volume, and was able also to reduce its root, pod, and seed dry
matter partitioning coefficient. However, there was an increase in its leaf and stem dry
matter indicating a sustained high source capacity for photosynthetic activity and for
photo-assimilate production.

In this study, the hypothesis of Elston and Bunting (1980) that an indeterminate
growth habit may be advantageous to recovery from water stress, whether excess or
deficit were true for the highly tolerant PSB Syl cultivar, where an indeterminate plant
would have the potential to continue growing and produce new pods after the termination
of stress (Villalobos-Rodriguez and Shibles, 1985). However, it can be articulated that
determinate growth habit can also be advantageous for waterlogged condition as

exemplified by the exhibited tolerance of the determinate landrace ‘Manchuria’.

RECOMMENDATIONS

It appears that the tolerance mechanisms of soybean to waterlogging acts on the
different seed yield component mechanisms . Result suggests testing soybean
waterlogging tolerance based on seed yield response and its relevant component traits is
viable and is the crucial feature, such that, the ability to produce high seed yield in
flooded fields is still the ultimate criterion of flooding tolerance (Zhou, 2010);
meanwhile, other suitable traits which are relevant as an indicator of adaptation is also
useful such as branching habit, growth pattern (determinate vs. determinate), root
achitectural traits, reproductive nodes, pods per node and seed set as determinants of

flooding tolerance.

LITERATURE CITED

ALLEN RD. 1995. Dissection of oxidative stress tolerance using transgenic plants. Plant
Physiology, 107:1049-1054.

AMARANTE L, SODEK, L. 2006. Waterlogging effect on xylem sap glutamine of
nodulated soybean. Biology Plantarum, 50:405-410.

ANDREWS DL, COBB BG, JOHNSON JR, DREW MC. 1993. Hypoxic and anoxic
induction of alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) in roots and shoots of Zea mays.
Transcripts and enzyme activities. Plant Physiology, 101:407-414

ANDREWS CJ, POMEROY MK. 1989. Metabolic acclimation to hypoxia in winter
cereals: low temperature flooding increases adenylates and survival in ice
encasement. Plant Physiology, 91:1063-1068.

ANGSTROM A. 1924. Solar and terrestrial radiation. Quarterly Journal Report on.
Meteorological Society. 50, 121-126.

ARBER A. 1920. Water plants: A study of aquatic angiosperms. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge. 436 pp.

ARMSTRONG W, DREW MC. 2002. Root Growth and Metabolism under Oxygen
Deficiency. In: Waisel, Y., A. Eshel, and U. Kafkafi, (eds). Plant Roots: The
Hidden Half (3 Ed). pp.729-76. Marcel Dekker, New York (USA).

ARMSTRONG W. 1979. Aeration in higher plants. Advances in Botanical Research,
7:225-332.

BACANAMWO M, PURCELL LC. (1999). soybean root morphological and
anatomical traits associated with acclimation to flooding. Crop Science, 39:143-
149.

BAILEY-SERRES J, VOESENEK L. 2008. Flooding stress: acclimations and genetic
diversity. Annual Review of Plant Biology, 59:313-339.

BLOKHINA O. 2000. Anoxia and oxidative stress: lipid peroxidation, antioxidant status
and mitochondrial functions in plants. Academic Dissertation, Department of
Biosciences Division of Plant Physiology, University of Helsinki. pp. 11-34.

BOARD JE, KAHLON CS. 2011. Soybean Yield Formation: What Controls It and How
It Can Be Improved. pp.1-36, In: El-Shemy, H. A. (Ed). Soybean Physiology and
Biochemistry. Publisher: Intech, Rijeka (Croatia). 498 pp.


BOARD JE, MODALI H. 2005. Dry matter accumulation predictors for optimal yield
in soybean. Crop Science, 45:1790-1799.

BOHM W. 1979. Methods of Studying Root Systems, (Ecological Studies Volume 33).
Springer-Verlag Berlin: Heidelberg. ISBN-13:978-3-642-67284-2. 188pp.

BORELLA J, DO AMARANTE L, DE OLIVEIRA DSC, DE OLIVEIRA ACB,
BRAGA EJB. 2014. Waterlogging-induced changes in fermentative metabolism
in roots and nodules of soybean cultivars. Scientia Agricola, 71:499-508.

BOUSLAMA M, SCHAPAUGH WT. 1984. Stress tolerance in soybean. Part 1:
evaluation of three screening techniques for heat and drought tolerance. Crop
Science, 24:933-937.

BRADFORD KJ, HSIAO TC. 1982. Stomatal behavior and water relations of
waterlogged tomato plants. Plant Physiology, 70:1508-1513.

CARATING RB, GALANTA RG, BACATIO CD. 2014. World Soils Book Series:
The Soils of the Philippines. Springer Science and Business Media: Dordrecht,
the Netherlands.

COLLAKU A, HARRISON SA. 2005. Heritability of waterlogging tolerance in wheat.
Crop Science, 45:722-727.

CRAWFORD RMM. 1977. Tolerance of anoxia and ethanol metabolism in germinating
seeds. New Phytologist, 79:511 - 517.

DE OLIVEIRA MF, ARIAS CAA. 2017. Center for Diversity and Genetic Resources.
pp. 29-41. In: da Silva, F. L., A. Borem, T. Sediyama, and W. H. Ludke (eds).
soybean Breeding. Springer International Publishing AG, Switzerland

DE PACE C. 1979. Characteristics with significant correlation to seed yield in broad
bean populations grown in Southern Italy. Jn: D. A. Bond, G. T. Scarascia-
Mugnozza and M. H. Poulsen (eds.), Some Current Research on Vicia faba in
Western Europe, Commiss. Europ. Commun., EUR 6244, pp. 144-167.

[DA-BSWM] DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE — BUREAU OF SOILS and
MANAGEMENT. Soil Map: Province of Laguna. Surveyed by D. Z. Rosell, F.
Bernardo, L. A. Romero, and L. Engie. Retracted from Soil Map dated 1946.

DREW MC. 1997. Oxygen deficiency and root metabolism: Injury and acclimation
under hypoxia and anoxia. Annual Review of Plant Physiology and Plant
Molecular Biology, 48:223-250.

DREW MC, JACKSON MB, GRIFFARD S. 1979. Ethylene—promoted adventitious
rooting and development of cortical air spaces (aerenchyma) may be adoptive
response to flooding in Zea mays (L). Planta, 153:217-224.


EGLI DB, YU ZW. 1991. Crop growth rate and seeds per unit area in soybean. Crop
Science, 31:439-442.

ELSE MA. JACKSON MB. 1998. Transport of 1-aminocyclopropane- 1-carboxylic
acid (ACC) in the transpiration stream of tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) in
relation to foliar ethylene production and petiole epinasty. Australian Journal of
Plant Physiology, 25:453-458.

ELSTON J, BUNTING AH. 1980. Water relations of legume crops. Jn: R. J.
Summerfield and A. H. Bunting (eds), Advances in Legume Science. Royal
Botanic Gardens, Kew, pp. 37--42.

EVERARD JD, DREW MC. 1987. Mechanisms of inhibition of water movement in
anaerobically treated roots of Zea mays L. Journal of Experimental Botany
38:1154-1165.

FAGERIA NK. 2009. Mineral Nutrition versus Yield of Field Crops. pp. 1-29. In: The
Use of Nutrients in Crop Plants. CRC Press Taylor and Francis Group, Florida,
USA

FEHR WR, CAVINESS CE. 1977. Stage of soybean development. Special Report 80.
Coop. Ext. Service Agric. and Home Economic Expt. Sta., Iowa State Univ.
Ames, Iowa.

GERMAIN V, RICARD B, RAYMOND P, SAGLIO PH. 1997. The role of sugars,
hexokinase, and sucrose synthase in the determination of hypoxically induced
tolerance to anoxia in tomato roots. Plant Physiology, 114:167-175

GOMEZ KA, GOMEZ AA. 1984. Statistical Procedures for Agricultural Research (Ohi
Edition). John Wiley and Sons Inc., New York (USA)

GRIFFIN JL, SAXTON AM. 1988. Response of solid-seeded soybean to flood
irrigation. II. Flood duration. Agronomy Journal, 80:885-888.

GUL MS, MUNEER T, KAMBEZIDIS HD. 1998. Models for obtaining solar radiation
from other meteorological data. Solar Energy, 64:99-108.

HAWTIN GC. 1982. The genetic improvement of faba bean. Jn: G. C. Hawtin and C.
Webb (eds.). Faba Bean Improvement. World Crops, Nijhoff, The Hague, pp. 15-
22.

HEATHERLY LG, PRINGLE HC. 1991. soybean cultivars response to flood irrigation
of clay soil. Agronomy Journal 83:23 1-236.

HEDLEY CL, AMBROSE MJ. 1981. Designing ‘leafless’ plants for improving yields
of the dried pea crop. Advanced Agronomy, 34: 225-277.


HELDT HW, PIECHULLA B, HELDT F. 2011. Plant biochemistry. (4th ed).
Academic Press, Massachusetts (USA)

HENSHAW TL, GILBERT RA, SCHOLBERG JMS, SINCLAIR TR. 2007. Soya
Bean (Glycine max L. Merr.) Genotype Response to Early-season Flooding: I.
Root and Nodule Development. Journal of Agronomy and Crop Science, 193:177-
188. doi:10.1111/).1439-037X.2007.00257.x

HOLLINGER SE, ANGEL JR. 2019. Illinois Agronomy Handbook: Weather and
Crops (Chapter 1). pl-12. Crop Science Extension and Outreach, University of
Illinois at Urbana Champaign. Accessed at
http://extension.cropsciences.illinois.edw/handbook/ on 3 April 2019.

HOU FF, THSENG FS. 1991. Studies on the flooding tolerance of soybean seed:
varietal differences. Euphytica, 57:169-173.

IBRD(THE INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION and
DEVELOPMENT)/THE WORLD BANK. 2013. Getting a Grip on Climate
Change in the Philippines, Contributing to the foundation and ensuring the future
for a low carbon, climate resilient society through the Philippine Climate Public
Expenditure and Institutional Review. Extended Technical Report 78798. 279 p.

JACKSON MB, RICARD B. 2003: Physiology, biochemistry and molecular biology of
plant root systems subjected to flooding of the soil. Jn: H. de Kroon, and E. J. W.
Visser, eds. Root Ecology, pp. 193—207. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.

JACKSON MB, COLMER TD. 2005. Response and adaptation by plants to flooding
stress. Annals of Botany(London), 96:501-505.

JAMES EK, SPRENT JI. 1999. Development of N2-fixing nodules on the wetland
legume Lotus uliginosus exposed to conditions of flooding. New Phytologist,
142:219-213.

JONES JB. 1998. Plant nutrition manual. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.

JUSTIN SHFW, ARMSTRONG W. 1987. The anatomical characteristics of roots
and plant responses to soil flooding. New Phytologist, 105:465—495.

KHANNA-CHOPRA R, SELOTE DS. 2007. Acclimation to drought stress generates
oxidative stress tolerance in drought-resistant than-susceptible wheat cultivar
under field conditions. Environmental and Experimental Botany, 60(2):276-283

KASTEN F, CZELPLAK G. 1979. Solar and terrestrial radiation dependent on the
amount and type of cloud. Solar Energy, 24:177-189.

KIMBALL HH. 1919. Variations in total and luminous solar radiation with geographical
position in the United States. Monthly Weather Review, 47:769-793.


KOKUBUN M. 2013. Genetic and cultural improvement f soybean for waterlogged
conditions in Asia. Field Crops Research, 152:3-7.

KUMIDINI S. 2010. soybean Growth and Development. pp. 48-73. Jn: Singh, G. (ed).
The soybean: Botany, Production, and Uses. CAB International. ISBN 978-1-
84593-644-0

KUSWANTORO H. 2015. Agronomical Characters of Some soybean Germplasm under
Waterlogging Condition. Journal of Agronomy [Asian Network for Scientific
Information] 14(2):93-97.

KWON YW, LEE MK. 1988. Physiological responses of soybean plants to flooding at
the vegetative growth and the flowering stages. Research Report RDA, 31:289-
300.

LANDON JR. 1984. Booker tropical soil manual: a handbook for soil survey and
agricultural land evaluation in the tropics and subtropics. New York : Longman

LINKEMER G, BOARD JE, MUSGRAVE ME. 1998. Waterlogging effects on
growth and yield components in late—planted soybean. Crop Science, 38:1579-
1584.

LOGGINI B, SCARTAZZA A, BRUGNOLI E, NAVARI-IZZO F. 1999.
Antioxidative Defense System, Pigment Composition, and Photosynthetic
Efficiency in Two Wheat Cultivars Subjected to Drought. Plant Physiology,
119:1091-1099.

MAKBUL S, GULER NS, DURMUAND N, GUVEN S. 2011. Changes in anatomical
and physiological parameters of soybean under drought stress. Turkish Journal of
Botany, 35:369-377.

MALIK AI, COLMER TD, LAMBERS H, SETTER TL, SCHORTEMEYER M.
2002. Short-term waterlogging has long-term effects on the growth and
physiology of wheat. New Phytologist, 153:225-236.

MARASHI AK, MOJADDAM M. 2014. Adventitious root and aerenchyma
development in wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) subjected to waterlogging.
International Journal of Bioscience, 5:168-173.

MARSHALL DR, BROUE P, PRYOR AJ. 1973. Adaptive significance of alcohol
dehydrogenase isozymes in maize. Nature, 244:16-17.

MATSUO E, DA COSTA FERREIRA S, BOREM A, SEDIYAMA T. 2017.
Vegetative and Reproductive Morphology. pp. 43-54. In: da Silva, F. L., A.
Borem, T. Sediyama, and W. H. Ludke (eds). soybean Breeding. Springer
International Publishing AG, Switzerland


MCMANMON M, CRAWFORD R. 1971. A metabolic theory of flooding tolerance:
the significance of enzyme distribution and behaviour. New Phytologist, 70:299-
306.

MORITA S, ABE J, FURUBAYASHIM S, LUX A, TAJIMA R. 2004. Effects of
waterlogging on root system of soybean. Proceedings of the 4th International
Crop Science Congress, September 26 to October 1, 2004, Australian Society of
Agronomy, Brisbane, Australia

MUSGRAVE ME, DING N. 1998. Evaluating wheat cultivars for waterlogging
tolerance. Crop Science, 38:90-97.

NORMILE D. 2008. Reinventing rice to feed the world. Science, 321, 330-333.

PALLITT KE, YOUNG AJ, ALSEHER RG, HESS JI. 1992. Antioxidants in Higher
Plants. CRC Press, Boca Raton. pp. 59-60.

PARELLE J, DREYER E, BREDEL O. 2010. Genetic variability and determinism of
adaptation of plants to soil waterlogging. pp. 241-265 Jn: Mancuso, S. and S.
Shabala (eds). Waterlogging signalling and tolerance in plants. Springer-Verlag
Heidelberg (Germany). doi 10.1007/978-3-642-10305-6

PARENT C, CAPELLI N, BERGER A, CREVECOEUR M, DAT JF. 2008. An
Overview of Plant Responses to Soil Waterlogging. Plant Stress, 2(1):20-27.

PATEL PK, SINGH AK, TRIPATHI N, YADAV D, HEMANTARANJAN A. 2014.
Flooding: abiotic constraint limiting vegetable productivity. Advances in Plants
and Agricultural Research 1,00016.

PERATA P, ARMSTRONG W, VOESENEK LA. 2011. Plants and flooding stress.
New Phytologist, 190:269-273.

PHILIPPINE ATMOSPHERIC, GEOPHYSICAL and ASTRONOMICAL
SERVICES ADMINISTRATION (PAGASA). 2011. Climate change in the
Philippines. Cited Jn: The International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/THE WORLD BANK. 2013. Getting a Grip on Climate Change in
the Philippines, Contributing to the foundation and ensuring the future for a low
carbon, climate resilient society through the Philippine Climate Public
Expenditure and Institutional Review. Extended Technical Report 78798. 279 p.

PIMENTEL-GOMES F. 2000. Curso de estatistica experimental (14th ed.). Livraria
Nobel: Piracicaba, Sao Paulo (Brazil).

PIRES JF, SOPRANO E, CASSOL B. 2002. Morpho-physiological changes in soybean
in flooded soils. Pesqui. Agropecu. Bras., 37:41-50.


RANALILI P, CUBERO JI. 1997. Bases for genetic improvement of grain legumes.
Field Crops Research 53:69-82

RAO SK, SHRIVASTAVA AN, MISHRA R. 1999. Effect of excess soil moisture on
seed yield, seed size development and quality in commercial varieties of soybean.
Legume Research, 22:259-262

RATHORE TR, WARSI MZK, LOTHROP JE, SINGH NN. 1998. Production of
maize under excess soil moisture (waterlogging) conditions. Jn: Proceedings of
the Second Asian Regional Maize Workshop PACARD. Los Baifios, Philippines.
pp. 23-27.

RECEL M. 1989. Problem soils in the Philippines. Soils and Water Technical Bulletin,
6(1). Bureau of Soils and Water Management, Quezon City (Philippines).

REID DM, BRADFORD KJ. 1984. Effects of flooding on hormone relations. Jn:
Kozlowski T. T. (ed). Flooding and plant growth. Orlando: Academic Press, 195-

RICARD B, VANTOAI T, CHOUREY P, SAGLIO P. 1998. Evidence for the critical
role of sucrose synthase for anoxic tolerance of maize roots using a double
mutant. Plant Physiology, 116:1323-1331.

RICHE CJ. 2004. Identification of soybean cultivars tolerance of waterlogging through
analyses of leaf nitrogen concentration. Unpublished Master’s Thesis, The
Department of Agronomy and Environmental Management, Louisiana State
University, USA.

ROBERTS JKM, CHANG K, WEBSTER C, CALLIS J, WALBOT V. 1989.
Dependence of ethanolic fermentation, cytoplasmic pH regulation and viability on
the activity of alcohol dehydrogenase in hypoxic maize root tips. Plant
Physiology, 89:1275-1278.

ROTUNDO JL, BORRAS L, BRUIN JD, PADERSEN P. 2012. Physiological
strategies for seed number determination in soybean: Biomass accumulation,
partitioning and seed set efficiency. Field Crops Research, 135:58-66

RUSSELL DA, DAPHNE MM, WONG L, SACHS MM. 1990. The anaerobic
response of soybean. Plant Physiology, 92:401-407.

SALLAM A, SCOTT HD. 1987. Effects of prolonged flooding on Soybeans during
vegetative growth. Soil Science, 144, 61-66.

SCOTT HD, DE ANGULO J, WOOD LS, PITTS DJ. 1990. Influence of temporary
flooding at three growth stages on soybean growth on a clayey soil. Journal of
Plant Nutrition, 13:1045-1071.


SCOTT HD, DE ANGULO J, DANIELS MB, WOOD LS. 1989. Flood duration
effects on soybean growth and yield. Agronomy Journal, 81:631-636.

SEONG RC, KIM JG, NELSON CJ. 1999. Dry matter accumulation and leaf mineral
contents as affected by excessive soil water in soybean. Korean Journal of Crop
Science, 44:129-133.

SEONG RC, SOHN JY, SHIM SI. 2000. Responses of soybean cultivars to excessive
soil moisture imposed at different growth stages. Korean Journal of Crop
Science, 45:282-287.

SETTER TL, WATERS I. 2003. Review of prospects for germplasm improvement for
waterlogging tolerance in wheat, barley and oats. Plant and Soil, 253:1-34.

SHIMAMURA S, YAMAMOTO R, NAKAMURA T, SHIMADA S, KOMATSU S.
2010. Stem hypertrophic lenticels and secondary aerenchyma enable oxygen
transport to roots of soybean in flooded soil. Annals of Botany(London), 106:277-
284.

SHIMAMURA S, MOCHIZUKI T, NADA Y, FUKUYAMA M. 2002. Secondary
aerenchyma formation and its relation to nitrogen fixation in root nodules of
soybean plants (Glycine max) grown under flooded conditions. Plant Production
Science, 5:294-300.

SHIMAMURA S, MOCHIZUKI T, NADA Y, FUKUYAMA M. 2003. Formation and
function of secondary aerenchyma in hypocotyl, roots and nodules of soybean
(Glycine max) under flooded conditions. Plant Soil, 251:351-359.

SHIMAMURA S, YOSHIOKA T, YAMAMOTO R, HIRAGA S, NAKAMURA T,
SHIMADA S, KOMATSU S. 2014. Role of Abscisic Acid in Flood Induced
Secondary Aerenchyma Formation in soybean (Glycine max) Hypocotyls. Plant
Production Science, 17(2):131-137.

SHIMONO H, KONNO T, SAKAI H, SAMESHIMA R. 2012. Interactive Effects of
Elevated Atmospheric CO2 and Waterlogging on Vegetative Growth of soybean
(Glycine max (L.) Merr.). Plant Production Science, 15(3):238-245.

SINCLAIR TR. 2004. Improved carbon and nitrogen assimilation for increased yield.
In: Soybeans: Improvement, production, and uses. Boerma, H.R. and Specth, J.E.
(Eds.), pp. 537-568, Amer. Soc. of Agron., Madison, WI.

SINGH G, SHIVAKUMAR BG. 2010. The Role of soybean in Agriculture. pp. 24-47.
In: Singh, G. (ed). The soybean: Botany, Production, and Uses. CAB
International. ISBN 978-1-84593-644-0


SINGH KD, SINGH NP. 1995. Effect of excess soil water and nitrogen on yield,
quality, and N-uptake of soybean (Glycine max (L) Merrill). Annals of
Agricultural Research, 16:151-155.

SOJKA RE. 1985. Soil oxygen effects on two determinate soybean isolines. Soil
Science, 140: 333-343.

SOJKA RE, OOSTERHUIS DM, SCOTT HD. 2005. Root oxygen deprivation and the
reduction of leaf stomatal aperture and gas exchange. Jn: M. Pessarakli (ed.).
Handbook of photosynthesis. pp. 299-314, Taylor and Francis Group, New York,
NY.

SOYBEAN TWG. 2014 Annual soybean Review and Planning Workshop held at Jaro,
Iloilo, the Philippines from February 10 to 14, 2014.

SPOONER AE. 1961. Effects of irrigation timing and length of flooding periods on
soybean yields. Arkansas Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin 644.

SUGIMOTO H, AMEMIYA A, SATOU T, TAKENOUCHI A. 1988. Excess
moisture injury of soybeans cultivated in a upland field converted from paddy. II.
Effects of excessive soil moisture on bleeding, stomatal aperture and mineral
absorption. Japan Journal of Crop Science, 57:77-82.

SUGIMOTO H, SATOU T, NISHIHARA S, NARIMATSU K. 1989. Excess moisture
injury of soybeans cultivated in an upland field converted from paddy. II. Foliar
application of urea as countermeasure against excess moisture injury. Japan
Journal of Crop Science, 58:605-610.

SUGIMOTO H, KOESMARYONO Y, NAKANO R. 2000. Effects of Excess Moisture
in the Soil at Different Stages of Development on the Growth and Seed Yield of
soybean. Pakistan Journal of Biological Sciences, 3(9):1465-1467.

SULLIVAN M, VAN TOAI TT, FAUSEY N, BEUERLEIN J, PARKINSON R,
SOBOYEJO A. 2001. Evaluating on-farm flooding impacts on soybean. Crop
Science, 41:93-100.

SUNG FJM. 1993. Waterlogging effect on nodule nitrogenase and leaf nitrate reductase
activities in soybean. Field Crops Research, 35:183-189.

TAIZ L, ZEIGER E. 2002. Stress Physiology (Chapter 25). Jn: Plant Physiology (3rd
edition). Sinauer Associates, Sunderland (England)

TAMANG BG, FUKAO T. 2015. Plant Adaptation to Multiple Stresses during
Submergence and Following Desubmergence. International Journal Molecular
Science, 16:30164-30180.


TEWARI S, ARORA NK. 2016. soybean production under flodding stress and its
mitigation using plang growth-promoting microbes. pp.24-40 Jn: M. Miransari
(ed). Environmental stresses in soybean production: soybean production qn
Volume). Academic Press (Elsevier Inc.,).

THOMAS AL, SODEK L. 2005. Development of the nodulated soybean plant after
flooding of the root system with different sources of nitrogen. Brazilian Journal
of Plant Physiology, 17:291-297

THOMAS AL, GUERREIRO SMC, SODEK L. 2005. Aerenchyma formation and
recovery from hypoxia of the flooded root system of nodulated soybean. Annals
of Botany(London), 96:1191-1198.

TOUGOU M, HASHIGUCHI A, YUKAWA K, NANJO Y, HIRAGA S,
NAKAMURA T, NISHIZAWA K, KOMATSU S. 2012. Responses to flooding
stress in soybean seedlings with the alcohol dehydrogenase transgene. Plant
Biotechnology, 29:301-305.

TROUGHT MCT, DREW MC. 1980: The development of waterlogging damage in
wheat seedlings (Triticum aestivum L.): 1. Shoot and root growth in relation to
concentrations of dissolved gasses and solutes in the soil solution. Plant Soil,
54:77-94.

VANTOAI TT, BEUERLEIN AF, SCHMITTHENNER SK, ST. MARTIN SK.
1994. Genetic variability for flooding tolerance in Soybeans. Crop Science,
34:1112-1115.

VANTOAI TT, HOA TTC, HUE NN, NGUYEN HT, SHANNON JG, RAHMAN
MA. 2010. Flooding tolerance of soybean [Glycine max (L.) Merr.] germplasm
from southeast asia under field and screen-house environments. Open Agriculture
Journal, 4:38-46.

VARTAPETIAN BB, JACKSON MB. 1997: Plant adaptations to anaerobic stress.
Annals of Botany(London),79:3—20.

VERMA S. 1992. Correlation and path analysis in blackgram (Vigna mungo (L.)
Hepper). Indian Journal of Pulses Research, 5:71-73.

VILLALOBOS-RODRIGUEZ E, SHIBLES R. 1985. Response of Determinate and
Indeterminate Tropical soybean Cultivars to Water Stress. Field Crops Research,
10:269-281.

VOESENEK LA, COLMER CJ, PIERIK TD, MILLENAAR R, PEETERS FF.
2006. How plants cope with complete submergence. New Phytologist, 170:213-
226.


YONG-ZHONG L, BIN T, YONG-LIAN Z, KE-JUN M, SHANG-ZHONG X, FA-
ZHAN Q. 2010. Screening Methods for Waterlogging Tolerance at Maize (Zea
mays L.) Seedling Stage. Agricultural Sciences in China, 9(3):362-369.

ZHANG J, DAVIES WJ. 1987. ABA in roots and leaves of flooded pea plants. Journal
of Experimental Botany, 38:649-659.

ZHOU M. 2010. Improvement of Plant Waterlogging Tolerance. pp. 267-285. In:
Mancuso, S. and S. Shabala (eds). Waterlogging signalling and tolerance in
plants. Springer-Verlag Heidelberg (Germany). doi 10.1007/978-3-642-10305-6

