RERULALUAN DUUSLING 20 Meds nace Sean ince

> pe PR YD

WATERSHED FOREST pa SF pa Vw AN

AY-RAW: HE S
ALBAY, PHILIPPINES

Ce ed

DOST-STII LIBRARY

IU 0 A
STI-19-1858


UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS
Doctor of Philosophy in Forestry

MYLA L. NIRO

CLIMATE AND LAND-USE SENSITIVE NATURAL HAZARD
SIMULATION MODELING FOR MT. MASARAGA
WATERSHED FOREST RESERVE IN
ALBAY, PHILIPPINES

DIOMEDES A. RACELIS, PhD
Adviser

Date: JUNE 2021

| This dissertation can be made available to the general public YES

This dissertation can be accessed only after consultation with the author and
dissertation adviser

This dissertation can be accessed only by those bound by confidentiality

agreement

MYLA L. NIRO

Ipiom@ors A. ens PhD

CLIMATE AND LAND-USE SENSITIVE NATURAL HAZARD
SIMULATION MODELING FOR MT. MASARAGA
WATERSHED FOREST RESERVE
IN ALBAY, PHILIPPINES

MYLA L. NIRO

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF THE GRADUATE SCHOOL
UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE
DEGREE OF

DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY
(Forestry: Forest Resources Management)

JUNE 2021

This dissertation attached hereto, entitled “CLIMATE AND LAND-USE
SENSITIVE NATURAL HAZARD SIMULATION MODELING FOR MT.
MASARAGA WATERSHED FOREST RESERVE IN ALBAY, PHILIPPINES”
prepared and submitted by MYLA L. NIRO in partial fulfillment of the requirements for
the degree of DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY (FORESTRY: FOREST RESOURCES

MANAGEMENT) is hereby accepted.

DR. REX VICTOR O. CRUZ DR. WILFREDG M. CARANDANG

Member, Advisory Committee Member, Advisory Committee
22 June 2021 22 June 2021
Date signed Date signed
DR. Eons DR. AEE aacuss
Member, Advisory Committee Chair, Advisory Committee
22 June 2021 22 June 2021
Date signed Date signed

Accepted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of DOCTOR OF

PHILOSOPHY (FORESTRY: FOREST RESOURCES MANAGEMENT).

DR. VIDA ene
Chair, Institute of Renewable Natural Resources
College of Forestry and Natural Resources
23 June 2021

TE

University of the Philippines Los Bafios
25 June 2021
Date signed


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

The researcher is the fourth among the five children of Mr. Wilfredo O. Llarena
and Amelia D. Llarena. She was born on April 26, 1977 at Pagsawitan, Sta. Cruz, Laguna.

Her first formal education was acquired at the Pagsawitan Elementary School, Sta.
Cruz, Laguna and graduated in 1990. She obtained her secondary education at the Pedro
Guevara Memorial National High School, Sta. Cruz, Laguna in 1994. In 2001, she earned
her Bachelor of Science in Forestry degree major in Forest and Environmental Resources
Management with sub-specialization in Watershed Management at the University of the
Philippines Los Bafios, Laguna. She took and completed her Master of Science degree in
Resource Management major in Environmental Management at the Central Bicol State
University of Agriculture (CBSUA), Pili, Camarines Sur in 2011.

Her first employment as part-time Instructor of the Forestry Department, Bicol
University College of Agriculture and Forestry in Guinobatan, Albay came in 2002. In
February 2004, she was hired as Instructor | and was given a permanent position. After
permanency, she had a string of promotion starting as Instructor ll, Assistant Professor 111,
Assistant Professor 1V and Associate Professor 1 in 2008, 2011, 2015, and 2019,
respectively.

She is gratefully married to John Fitzken Da Vinci M. Niro since 2004. The couple
is blessed with two sons, namely, John Laurence (16 years old) and Fitzken John L. Niro
(12 years old).

MYLA L. NIRO

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

Behind this piece, her gratitude, deepest appreciation and heartfelt thanks are accorded
specifically to the following:

Dr. DIOMEDES A. RACELIS, Adviser and Chairman of the advisory committee, for his
immeasurable support throughout the study, supervision, review, and editing, also for constructive
comments and suggestions, which greatly helped improve and finalize the manuscript;

Dr. REX VICTOR O. CRUZ, Dr. WILFREDO M. CARANDANG, and Dr. ANALYN L.
CODILAN, members of the Advisory Committee, for their valuable suggestions which contributed
to the improvement of the manuscript;

The DOST-ASTHRDP-NSC, for providing her a scholarship grant and generously
supported the Doctoral degree program in Forestry;

The office of the National Mapping and Resource Information Authority (NAMRIA),
Usec. PETER N. TIANGCO, PhD, the Administrator, for the provision of digital copies of land
satellite images, DEM, and IFSAR in shapefile format;

Dr. CEDRIC D. DAEP, APSEMO-PDMO chief, Forester ROSAURO PERILLO,
CDRRM Officer, Forester JOSEPH GUIRIBA, DENR Planning Officer, and Solita Prena, LGU
Ligao Planning Officer, for providing important data, information, and expert’s opinion;

Dr. Amulfo Mascarinas, Bicol University President, for the approval to pursue her doctoral
degree;

Prof. Alberto Gonzales, Prof. Julieta Gonzales, Prof. Alan Adonis Malvar, Prof. Joey
Soniega, Prof. Sevella Tabayag, all colleagues for encouragement and expert’ opinion;

Prof. Elsa P. Santos, Emma Macariola, Garry Marapao, and Mike Gabriel, for extending
their expertise;

Pastors, sisters, and brothers in Christ, friends, family, and relatives, all of them not to
mention their names gave prayers, support, and encouragement. Truly their prayers moved
mountains (Mark 11:23);

JOHN FITZKEN DA VINCI M. NIRO, her husband, for whole-hearted support both
moral, emotional, spiritual; and her son JOHN LAURENCE L. NIRO and FITZKEN JOHN L.
NIRO, for being her inspiration, strength, courage, and love. I dedicate this piece of work; and

Above all, to the ALMIGHTY GOD, Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, for all the strength,
immeasurable blessings, and the miracles He was bestowed upon her for without His power and
grace, this the undertaking will not be finally realized.

CHAPTER

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Title Page

Approval Page

Biographical Sketch

Acknowledgement

Table of Contents

List of Tables

List of Figures

List of Appendices

List of Abbreviation

Abstract

INTRODUCTION
Statement of the Problem
Objectives of the Study
Hypothesis of the Study
Scope and limitations

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

Natural hazards

Philippines’ Exposure to Natural Hazards
Exposure of MMWFR to Natural Disasters

Floods and landslides experienced in Albay

PAGE

xi
xii

xiii

10

11

CHAPTER

IV

Floods

Landslide

Land-use land cover change
Climate change

Importance of hazard maps

GIS MCDA-AHP and Accuracy assessment

METHODOLOGY

Location of the Study
Conceptual Framework

Data collection

Data interpretation and analysis

Research Methodology

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Assessment of the dynamics of LULC Change
Historical Land Cover Change Dynamics
LULC Classification from 2010 to 2020
LULC Classification from 2020 to 2050
LULC Classification for 2050 to 2070

Formulation of Models for Landslide and Flooding

Simulation of Landslide and Flooding Using the Models

Landslide simulation model

vi

PAGE
15
19
25
26
32
33
36
36
39
41
43
44
53
53
53
60
62
64
68
86
88

CHAPTER

Flood simulation model

Integrated Hazard Mapping
Integrated Flood-Landslide Susceptibility Map for
the year 2050

Integrated Flood-Landslide Susceptibility Map for
the year 2070

Reliability of the Climate and Land-Use Sensitive
Natural Hazard Simulation Models for MMWFR

SUMMARY, CONCLUSION AND
RECOMMENDATIONS

Summary

Conclusions

Recommendations

LITERATURE CITED

vii

PAGE
104

122
123

128

133

139

139
143
144

147

TABLE

Ww N

na

LIST OF TABLES

Results of LULC classification for 2010 and 2020 and projected
2050 and 2070

Land Use Change Analysis for 2010-2020

Transition Matrix for 2010 and 2020 of LULC changes in
MMWFR

Land Use Change Analysis for 2020-2050

Transition Matrix for 2020 and 2050 of LULC changes in
MMWFR

Land Use Change Analysis for 2050-2070

Transition Matrix for 2050 and 2070 of LULC changes in
MMWFR

Evaluation criteria and input predictors for landslide and flood
susceptibility map

List of the data used for the study and sources

Description of soil type in MMWFR

Weights of each criterion used in landslide modeling

Weights of each criterion used in flood modeling

Description of landslide susceptibility rating

Description of flood susceptibility rating

Integrated flood and landslide susceptibility for the year 2050
Integrated flood and landslide susceptibility for the year 2070

viii

PAGE
55
60
61
62
63
65
66

70

71
71
84
85
88
104
125
130

10

11

12

LIST OF FIGURES

Location of Mount Masaraga Watershed Forest Reserve
Conceptual framework of the study

Research Methodology

Land use cover maps of MMWER for 2010

Land use/cover maps of MMWFR for 2020

Simulated land use classification for 2050

Simulated land use classification for 2070

Slope map

Aspect map

Soil class

Elevation map

Rainfall map

Input predictors: A. 2050 projected rainfall (RCP 4.5), B.
2050 projected rainfall (RCP 8.5), C. 2070 projected rainfall
(RCP 4.5), D. 2070 projected rainfall (RCP 8.5)

Drainage network

Landslide susceptibility based on 2020 LULC and
WorldClim v2.1 rainfall data

Area extent and percent of total of the landslide susceptibility
classes in 2020

Landslide susceptibility based on simulated 2050 LULC and
2050 rainfall case scenario 4.5

Landslide susceptibility based on simulated 2050 LULC and
rainfall case scenario 8.5

Area extent and percent of total of the landslide
susceptibility classes in 2050

Landslide susceptibility based on simulated 2070 LULC and
2070 rainfall case scenario 4.5

Landslide susceptibility based on simulated 2070 LULC and
2070 rainfall case scenario 8.5

Area extent and percent of total of the landslide
susceptibility classes in 2070

Landslide training and validation points

Sample landslide areas seen from Google Earth Imagery
dated September 29, 2011

Landslide distribution based on 2011 image of Google Earth
ROC-AUC curve of landslide model

Flood susceptibility based on 2020 LULC and WorldClim
v2.1 rainfall data

Area extent and percent of total of the flood susceptibility
classes in 2020

82
90

91

93

94

95

98

99

100
101
102

103
103

109

20

21

22

23

24

25
26
27

28

29

30

Flood susceptibility based on simulated 2050 LULC and
2050 rainfall case scenario 4.5

Flood susceptibility based on simulated 2050 LULC and
2050 rainfall case scenario 8.5

Area extent and percent of total of the flood susceptibility
classes in 2050

Flood susceptibility based on simulated 2070 LULC and
2070 rainfall case scenario 4.5

Flood susceptibility based on simulated 2070 LULC and
2070 rainfall case scenario 8.5

Area extent and percent of total of the flood susceptibility
classes in 2070

ROC-AUC for flood model

Integrated Flood-Landslide Susceptibility Map for 2050
and rainfall case scenario 4.5

Integrated Flood-Landslide Susceptibility Map for 2050
and rainfall case scenario 8.5

Integrated Flood-Landslide Susceptibility Map for 2070
and rainfall case scenario 4.5

Integrated Flood-Landslide Susceptibility Map for 2070
and rainfall case scenario 8.5

113

114

117

118

119
121
126

127

131

132

APPENDIX

A

oer TQOA7AmM FD AQ DB

nw

PO VOZAEO

LIST OF APPENDICES

False color composite (Band 5-4-3) of February
22,2010 Lansat 7TM+satellite image

False color composite (Band 5-4-3) of February
7, 2019 Lansat 8 OLI satellite image

2010 Land Use Land Cover Change confusion
matrix

2020 Land Use Land Cover Change confusion
matrix

2010 Land Use Land Cover Change Map

Land Use Land Cover Change Transistion
Matrix for the year 2010-2020
Pairwise Comparison for landslide

Pairwise Comparison for flooding
AHP for Landslide
AHP for flooding

Weights of classes within each criterion used in
landslide modeling

Weights of classes within each criterion used in
flood modeling

Validation using AUC-ROC for Landslide

Validation using AUC-ROC for Flooding
Landslide Hazard map of MMWFR
Flood Hazard Map of MMWFR

Mt. Masaraga Watershed Forest Reserve and
Barangay Boundaries

Selected Drone pictures of areas susceptible to
landslide and flooding in MMWFR

xi

PAGE

157

157
158

159
160
160

161
162
163
164

165

166

168
170
173
173

174

174

GHG -
GIS-MCDA -
IFSAR -

IPCC -

LGU-

LULC -
NAMRIA -
MGB -

MCE-
MMWFR —
MIROC-ESM -
Project NOAH -
PDCC-

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

Area under the curve

Analytic Hierarchy Process

Artificial Neural Network

Albay Public Safety and Emergency Management Office
Bicol University

Cellular automata

Coupled Model Intercomparison Project phase 5

City Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Office
Digital Elevation Model

Department of Environment and Natural Resources
Forest landscape restoration

Global Climate Model

Greenhouse Gas Concentrations

GIS-based Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis
Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

Local Government of Ligao

Land use land cover change

National Mapping and Resource Information Authority
Mines and Geoscience Bureau

Multi-criteria evaluation

Mt. MasaragaWatershed Forest Reserve

Model for Interdisciplinary Research on Climate
Nationwide Operational Assessment of Hazards
Provincial Disaster Coordinating Council

Provincial Disaster Risk Reduction Management Council
Representative Concentration Pathway

United States Geological Survey

Universal Transverse Mercator

xii

ABSTRACT

NIRO, MYLA L. University of the Philippines Los Bajios, June 2021. Climate and Land-
Use Sensitive Natural Hazard Simulation Modeling for Mt. Masaraga Watershed
Forest Reserve in Albay, Philippines.

Major Professor: Dr. DIOMEDES A. RACELIS

The study was conducted to simulate multi-temporal and scenario-based natural hazards
incorporating the important drivers such as LULC change and climate change. It assessed the
dynamics of land-use change in the area, formulate models of the dynamics of landslide and
flooding events in the area, simulated the models for landslide and flooding at different time-slices
and at different climate scenarios combining the land-use change model results; generated multi-
hazard maps to determine the areas within the watershed prone to natural hazards for the year 2050
and 2070; and recommend strategies for public responsiveness, disaster preparedness, and
preventive disaster management to mitigate the impacts of geophysical and climate-induced
hazards in the area.

The resulting LULC classification has an accuracy of 87% and 80% and Kappa statistics
of 0.83 and 0.73 for the year 2010 and 2020, respectively. Assessment of the landslide susceptibility
model obtained an accuracy based on ROC of 0.80, while the area under the curve is 94% and the
Kappa index is 0.58. The flood susceptibility model ROC-AUC of 98%, Accuracy of 0.95, and
Kappa index of 0.89. This means that the model is consistent in predicting the probability of
occurrence of natural hazards.

GIS-based Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis (GIS-MCDA) and Analytic Hierarchy
Process (AHP) provides powerful techniques for the analysis and prediction of floods and landslide
hazards. Simulated natural hazards for different time periods (2020, 2050, and 2070) and climatic
condition RCP 4.5 (medium case) and RCP 8.5 (worst case scenario) used a raster calculator to
compute in hectare the areas prone to flooding and landslide. Integrated hazards maps were used to
evaluate the condition of MMWFR. Results of integrated hazard in 2050 with the RCP 4.5 scenario
show that areas with low susceptibility to hazards both in flooding and landslide totaled 7,709.98
ha, accounting for 60.26 % of the total area of MMWER. Almost 40% of the total area will fall in
different combinations of moderate to very high susceptibility to landslide and flooding across the
four municipalities covering MMWFR. In the year 2050 and with RCP 8.5, around 52.56 % of the
total area has low susceptibility to flooding and landslide while 47.44 % of the total area is under
moderate to very high susceptibility. For the 2070 results of integrated hazards with RCP 4.5,
almost half of the area or 49.59% will be exposed to moderate, high, and very high susceptibility
classes while 50.41% falls under low landslide and low flooding. However, for the year 2070 and
with RCP 8.5 scenario, 76.68% of the area will experience different combinations of moderate to
very high susceptibility to flooding and landslide since only 23.32% will fall under low landslide
and low flooding.

xiii

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

Natural hazards are naturally occurring physical phenomena caused either by
rapid or slow onset events which can be earthquakes, landslides, tsunamis, and volcanic
activity, floods, extreme temperatures, drought, wildfires, cyclones and storms/wave
surges, or disease epidemics and insect/animal plagues, as defined by the Centre for
Research on Epidemiology and Disasters (CRED). These catastrophic events are
becoming of increasing concern in the community as they pose risk at unprecedented
levels (Montanari and Koutsoyiannis, 2014; cited by Siddayao et a/., 2014). Human
settlements and physical environments are said to be affected in the form of risks and
landscape change which have a domino effect on human health, economic situation, and
others. Flooding and landslide are found to be the most ominous among natural
hazards. Flooding is the most recurring devastating natural hazard affecting low-lying
and near water body proximate communities (Khan ef a/., 2011). Meanwhile, landslide, a
catastrophic movement of the earth’s surface (Alvinlucio et al., 2004) can severely
change the appearance of the soil surface and create utmost havoc on affected
communities. In general, natural hazard alone poses a great risk, not to mention the
amplifying effect of the ensuing climate change. The changing climatic condition as
represented by the statistically significant change in temperature and rainfall levels

(IPCC, 2019) has brought consequential effect on aforementioned natural hazards as

those are part of the main drivers for their occurrences (e.g., rainfall level for flooding
and landslide). Additionally, the rapid conversion of land cover attributed to land-use
decisions contribute to the occurrences of natural hazards. In recent years, many
disasters all around the globe were found to be more lethal and have more devastating

effects, partly also to unpreparedness and unforeseen magnitudes.

In the Philippines, some regions are more heavily affected by disasters than
others, as in the case of the Bicol region. A specific case in point which is within the
Bicol River Basin and vulnerable to natural hazards is Mount Masaraga Watershed Forest
Reserve (MMWFER) in the Province of Albay. Flooding is the most pervasive hydrologic
hazard that threatens the entire Bicol plains, including Mount Masaraga (DENR,
2015). The watershed’s mountainous feature characterized by steep slopes makes the
area susceptible to mass movements such as landslide events. With its varying natural
feature at the steeper slopes and exploitive human settlements. natural hazards also
evolved along with the shift in climatic conditions. MMWFR and the community in its
buffer zone face potential impacts from changes in temperature, precipitation or extreme
weather events, landslide, and flooding. Floods are considered disastrous because of the
magnitude of the hazard and the failure to contain the attendant physical and socio-
economic impacts. This hazard is attributed to the combined effect of the regular passing
of typhoons, high runoff in the surrounding terrain, and the natural low elevation of the
Bicol plains. Most communities are vulnerable to the effects of catastrophic disasters like
typhoons as they had previously suffered from the loss of family members, homes,

infrastructures, and agricultural production destroyed by past typhoons. Apart from the

immediate threat to human life, such natural disasters seriously impede economic growth.
These aggravating factors increase the frequency, complexity, and severity of disasters.

The severity of the devastating impact will shape humanitarian assistance in the future.

With these catastrophic experiences in the Bicol region, there is a need for
empowerment of stakeholders and dynamic adjustment to the environment (Siddayao et
al., 2014). Also, the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) highlighted the importance of adaptation (Smit et a/., 2001) as climate
change is a huge force to reckon with (Siddayao et a/., 2014). In order to effectively
adapt to the changes in the climatic condition and the consequential effect to the natural
hazards, there is a need to account for the magnitude and extent of the hazard. Further, it
is important to create a forecast of the natural hazard occurrences. Mapping the hazard

extent is imperative as this is an important aid in the decision-making process.

Technological advancements allow the use of a Geographic Information System
which can generate accurate maps representing the actual ground. However, most hazard
risk maps are based on ground surveys and aerial observations which can be limiting
when the disaster is widespread (Yalcin and Akyurek, 2002). Hence, simulation
modeling is introduced and used. This tool proves to be more time- and funding- efficient
than the former. One of the best methods in modeling and simulating natural hazards is
the Analytical Hierarchical Process, a multi-criteria decision making in a GIS
environment where different factors can be inputted simultaneously in order to produce

the final guiding risk map.

Statement of the Problem

MMWER is vulnerable to hazards (DENR, 2015), and this may have a considerable
impact on the ecosystems and associated biodiversity resources. A temperature change
may happen in higher elevation; sea-level rise in coastal areas and flooding in low-lying
communities; high risk to rainfall pattern changes which can possibly cause competition to
water resources; and risk to mass movements. The area is also facing rapid land-use change
due to infrastructure developments. As MMWFR was devastated by calamities that
resulted in numerous losses of lives, property, and economy worth billions of pesos, the
damages are likely to persist and even rise. An immediate solution is imminent to protect
the community and deal with the dangers. Awareness and preparedness of every individual
in society is the first step towards building disaster-resilient communities.

In the country in general, preparedness for events of natural calamities such as
flooding and landslide has already been institutionalized. It is reinforced by Republic Act
10121 also known as the Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Framework.
Hazard mappings have been undertaken and still being improved. However, the ensuing
effect of climate change and rapid land-use conversion significantly influenced the
development process of landslides and flooding. Improved understanding and recognition
of the interaction of changes in the environment between global change drivers, which
include changes in climate patterns and land use, will somehow minimize the impacts of
natural hazards. Availability of timely information is of the essence. For disaster risk
reduction and management, there is a need to strengthen the procedure in natural hazard

risk mapping using simulation modeling. More specifically, the biggest task at hand is to

produce risk maps that are sensitive to the changes in the climatic condition as well as the
changes in the land use and land cover dynamics over periods of time in order to provide

scenario-based maps with reference to IPCC data.

Objectives of the Study

The study generally aimed to simulate multi-temporal and scenario-based natural
hazards incorporating the important drivers such as rapid land use and land cover change

and ensuing effects of climate change.

The following are the specific objectives that the study sought to:
(1) assess the dynamics of land-use change in the area, both in historical (2010-2020)

and future perspective (2050 and 2070);

(2) formulate models of the dynamics of landslide and flooding events in the area

considering time factor, land use changes, and climate trends;

(3) simulate the models for landslide and flooding at different time-slices (2020, 2050,
and 2070) and at different climate scenarios (RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5) together with the land-

use change model results;

(4) generate multi-hazard maps to determine the areas within the watershed that are

prone to natural hazards for the year 2050 and 2070; and

(5) recommend strategies for public awareness, disaster preparedness, and preventive
disaster management to mitigate the impacts of geophysical and climate-induced hazards

in the area.

Hypothesis of the study

Hol: The MMWEFR’s Land Use Land Cover change can significantly affect the present

and future conditions of the watershed to the development of the natural hazard.

Ho2: The identified parameters such as rainfall, LULC, slope, aspect, proximity to the

river, soil classification, and elevation are the main contributing factors to natural hazards.

Ho3: The use of GIS Analytic analytical hierarchy process (AHP) as a multi-criteria
decision approach (MCDA) can be used to accurately predict climate-induced natural

hazards.

Scope and Limitations of the study

This study attempted to document and explained climate-and-land use-sensitive
multi-temporal and scenario-based natural hazard simulation modeling for MMWFR. This
was limited to the simulation models that reflect current condition and forecast probabilistic
scenario in different time periods (2020, 2050, and 2070) and multi-scenario (RCP 4.5 and
RCP 8.5). This study was limited only to the municipalities of Ligao, Oas, Polangui, and

Tabacco in the province of Albay, all of which cover the MMWFR.

CHAPTER II

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

Understanding natural hazards, the vulnerability of the country to these hazards,
and the exposure of Mt. Masaraga Watershed Forest Reserve (MMWFR) in Albay, Bicol
region to floods and landslides are attempted in this chapter. Later sections focused on
the need for mapping vulnerable areas and forecasting these hazards in the watershed

through climate modeling which is the subject of this investigation.

Natural Hazards

Natural hazards are a growing concern in the community as they pose risk at
unprecedented levels (Montanari and Koutsoyiannis, 2014). In previous decades, the
frequency of natural hazards has been increasing and the impacts are alarming and
devastating. According to the Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters
(CRED), natural hazards are naturally occurring physical phenomena caused either by
rapid or slow onset events which can be geophysical (earthquakes, landslides, tsunamis,
and volcanic activity), hydrological (avalanches and floods), climatological (extreme
temperatures, drought, and wildfires), meteorological (cyclones and storms/wave surges)
or biological (disease epidemics and insect/animal plagues). Technological or man-made
hazards (complex emergencies/conflicts, famine, displaced populations, industrial

accidents and transport accidents) are events that are caused by humans and occur in or

close to human settlements. This encompasses environmental degradation, pollution, and

accidents.

There are three types of effects of hazards: primary, secondary, and tertiary
effects. Primary effects occur as a result of the process itself, for example, water damage
during a flood or collapse of buildings during an earthquake, landslide, or hurricane.
Secondary effects occur only because a primary effect has caused them; for example,
fires ignited as a result of earthquakes, disruption of electrical power and water service as
a result of an earthquake, flood, or hurricane, or flooding caused by a landslide into a lake
or river. Tertiary effects are long-term effects that are set off as a result of a primary
event. These include things like loss of habitat caused by a flood, permanent changes in
the position of a river channel caused by flood, crop failure caused by a volcanic

eruption, and the like (Nelson, 2018).

Floods and landslides are the most frequently occurring natural disasters (Acosta,
Eugenio, Macandog, and Magcale-Macandog, 2016). Floods and landslides are
associated closely with typhoon events. Typhoon-induced floods and landslides are
caused by heavy rainfalls. These are classified as hydrological or meteorological
disasters. On the other hand, there is a range of challenges that may overwhelm a
country’s capacity to contend, such as climate change, unplanned urbanization, under-
development/poverty as well as the threat of pandemics. These aggravating factors will
result in increased frequency, complexity, and severity of disasters and will shape

humanitarian assistance in the future.

Philippine Typhoon and Disasters

The Philippines’ exposure to hazards and disasters owes to the country’s
geographical and physical characteristics. It lies along the typhoon belt and on the vastness
of warm ocean water in the Western Pacific Ocean. According to the United Nations,
vulnerability to climate change will be greater in developing countries that are located in
warmer latitudes, like The Philippines. The Philippines is highly vulnerable to the impacts
of climate change, including sea-level rise, increased frequency of extreme weather events,
rising temperatures, and extreme rainfall due to high exposure to natural hazards (cyclones,
landslides, floods, and droughts), dependence on climate-sensitive natural resources, and
with vast coastlines where all major cities are located and the majority of the population
resides. To illustrate, the country lies in the world’s most cyclone-prone region, averaging
19-20 cyclones each year, of which seven to nine events make landfall (USAID, 2017).
Sea levels in the Philippines are rising faster than the global average, increasing the hazard
posed by storm surges and threatening permanent inundation of low-lying areas. Typhoons
or cyclonic storms are the dominant risks followed by floods, earthquakes, volcanic
eruptions, droughts, and landslides (UN-ODRR and WB, 2010). Based on several global
warming scenarios, world estimates of sea-level rise range from 28 to 43 cm above base
level by 2100. Climate change is also occurring as evidenced by the increasing mean
temperature observed over time. For instance, from 1951 to 2006, records of the national
weather bureau (PAGASA) show that warming has occurred in the Philippines (Hilario,

2008, as cited by Lasco, et al., 2010).

10

The Philippines ranks second with its 2012 Climate Risk Index, a measure
indicating the country’s level of exposure and vulnerability to extreme events. According
to the German Watch (Eckstein, Hutfils, and Winges, 2019), The Philippines is one of the
countries most affected in the 1998-2017 period with an average weighted ranking (CRI
score) of 19.67. This is attributed to a death toll of 867.40, deaths per 100,000 inhabitants
of 0.971, total losses of US$ 2,932.15 million, losses per unit GDP in % of 0.576, and 307
events from 1998-2017. The index also indicates that the most severe weather-related
catastrophes in 2012 occurred in the Philippines. Countries with high Climate Risk Index
(CRI) experience how destructive extreme precipitation can be, as this cascades into floods
and landslides which have hit many regions. Extreme precipitation is expected to increase

as global warming intensifies affecting the global hydrological cycle.

Exposure of MMWER to Natural Disasters

Bicol region is one of the most disaster-prone areas in the Philippines. Mt.
Masaraga Watershed Forest Reserve (MMWFER) is located in the province of Albay, Bicol
Region. The community along its buffer zone faces potential impacts from changes in
temperature, precipitation or extreme weather events, landslide, and flooding. This river
basin in the Bicol region is viewed to have a high risk of rainfall pattern change which is
expected to have a negative impact on water supply.

The most prevalent hydrologic hazard that poses a threat to the entire Bicol plains
are flooding. This hazard is attributed to the combined effect of the regular passing of

typhoons, high runoff in the surrounding terrains, and the natural low elevation of the Bicol

11

plains. Most Communities are vulnerable to the effects of catastrophic disasters like
typhoons. They suffered from the loss of family members, homes were destroyed, and
infrastructure and agricultural production areas (including farm animals and livestock)
were destroyed by the floods.

Rapid environmental degradation, combined with insufficient livelihood
opportunities in rural areas, has trapped many Bicolanos in a continuous cycle of poverty.
The depletion of natural resources triggers the downward spiral of disadvantages as this
impoverishes them, making their survival more difficult. In addition, human survival and
development are deeply constrained by natural hazards and climate-related challenges.
Other issues complicating poverty condition in the Bicol region are continuing decline of
forest cover, deteriorated irrigation systems, saline water intrusion, a declining fish catch
in the lakes and rivers, and insufficient funding for infrastructural and social projects.
Aggravating the socio-economic condition is the land use cover change manifested by the
conversion of forest lands and the deforestation and degradation of watersheds. This is

largely attributed to rapid urban development and population growth (DENR, 2015).

Floods and Landslides Experienced in Albay

Albay must deal with cyclones, landslides and floods quite regularly. When severe,
these natural disasters have a devastating impact. Apart from the immediate threat to human
life, such natural disasters seriously impede economic growth. Floods experienced in Albay
were either due to increased water level brought by torrential rain from a tropical storm

and the subsequent overflowing of water from Lakes Bato and Buhi in Camarines Sur, or

12

overflowing of rivers due to urban runoff and unsound development of the area. Floods are
considered disastrous because of the magnitude of the hazard and the failure to cope with
the physical and socio-economic impacts.

On December 29, 2018, the storm, locally called Usman, had maximum winds of
55 kilometers, or 34 miles, an hour. Tropical Depression Usman caused floods and
landslides affecting four provinces in Region V including Albay, where most of the victims
of landslides were located, were placed under a state of calamity. Tropical Depression
Usman raised little alarm since its maximum winds were less than 60 km per hour. But it
dumped heavy rains that loosened the saturated soil on mountainsides, setting off
landslides. Many people failed to take necessary precautions because Usman was not
strong enough to be rated as a typhoon under the government’s storm alert system. More
than 680,000 people across 14 provinces have been affected by the storm, of which 55%
in the Bicol Region and 42% in the Eastern Visayan Region. At the peak, some 456,000
people were displaced with 1,600 homes reported totally destroyed and 8,800 damaged.
Estimated agricultural losses reached Php 1 billion (US$ 18 million), with nearly 37,000
farmers and fisherfolk affected (Reliefweb, 2018).

In January 2018, torrential rains brought by Tropical Storm Agaton, aggravated by
the tail-end of the cold front, caused flooding in low-lying areas of Albay province (Barcia,
2019). The estimated that the LPA was 95 kilometers east of Butuan City in Agusan del
Norte. It warned of possible flash floods or landslides that could be triggered by light to

moderate with at times heavy rains over Albay. Residents near the restive Mayon Volcano

13

in Albay were warned of a possible onslaught of lahar as occasional heavy rains loomed
over the Bicol Region.

On December 29, 2010, PAGASA reported that more rain was expected due to the
prevailing northeast monsoon. Excessive rainfall was caused by wind convergence near the
province. A heavy downpour in Bicol triggered landslides and flash floods in several parts.
In Albay, 2,719 people from landslide-prone areas were brought to evacuation centers. The
eastern province of Albay was declared in a state of calamity as thousands of people had
moved to evacuation centers. This increased the danger of landslides and floods and forced
more people to be moved out of their homes. Landslides and floods blocked roads and
destroyed power lines. The risk of flash floods was high, so rescue officials raced to get
people out of the way in time (Carretero et al., 2010).

In February 2008, the tail end of the cold front continued to bring rains to Southern
Luzon and the Visayas for almost a week. The amount of rain that fell on Albay was the
highest in the province without a typhoon. At least 80,000 people were moved out of their
homes and were under pre-emptive evacuation to keep them out of harm’s way as rains
continued to raise flood levels and the likelihood of landslides in Albay. Several villages
were under threat of lahar, floods, and landslides as a result of rains that continued for eight
days (Arguelles ef a/., 2008). The provincial disaster coordinating council (PDCC) stated
that flooding was reported in the province of Albay brought by rains and the overflow from
Lakes Bato and Buhi in Camarines Sur. The unrelenting heavy rains caused 19 landslides
in the province of Albay. The road collapsed due to flash floods. Overall, the excessive

rains in Bicol adversely affected 10,461 families in three provinces. In its aftermath,

14

damage to agriculture and livestock amounted to Php 222.377 million while damage to
infrastructure in Albay and Sorsogon provinces was at Php 293.85 million. At least Php
220 million in roads, bridges, and irrigation systems were damaged during the rains, while
at least 3,000 hectares of rice and corn fields were destroyed (Arguelles et al., 2008).
Among the most recent disastrous flood events that hit Albay badly were those caused by
super typhoon Reming (International name: Durian) in November 2006. This typhoon had
maximum sustained winds of 190 km/hr and gustiness as high as 230 km/hr, delivering
495.8 mm of rain over a period of 36 hours (PAGASA, 2006). This is considered one of
the deadliest natural disasters in history; bringing heavy rain and causing wide-ranging
damages to life, property, and the economy. Heavy rainfall caused rivers and irrigation
canals to exceed their banks. Many creeks and small streams were flooded. The flooding
led to fatalities totaling 1,266, including 740 people missing and presumed dead (Rabonza,
2006). The typhoon also caused widespread power outages. With power and
communication lines down, it took a day for Filipinos to see the full picture of Reming's
aftermath. Aerial surveys of Albay showed complete devastation. Schools, government
structures, hospitals, banks, and many important buildings were destroyed.

It is expected that the impacts of climate change will further exacerbate the region’s
exposure to climate-induced risks. This is proof that the province of Albay is particularly

vulnerable to climate-related hazards.

15

Floods

Floods are the most common and widespread of all weather-related natural
disasters. World Meteorological Organization (2012) defined flooding as the overflowing
of the water of the normal confines of a watercourse or water body and/or the accumulation
of drainage water over areas that are not normally submerged. It is a natural process
occurring at irregular intervals and vary in size, area of extent, and duration. This can
happen during heavy rains, ocean waves come onshore and dams break or walls break. The
source areas of floods are degrading soils, the soil, and the subsoil. It can happen from a
few inches of water or up to the rooftop of a house. This may occur quickly or over a long
period that lasts for days, weeks, or even longer. It is heavily influenced by naturally high
rainfall variability which leads to much higher variability of the amount of water flowing
through waterways.

Types of floods

Floods can be categorized and named in several distinct ways (Floodsite, 2008).
Floods based on geography and physical features of the area can be categorized based on
the source of the floodwater as flooding of the river, flooding from the sea, flooding in
river delta, and urban flooding. On the other hand, floods based on the speed with which
the water flows into the area can be categorized as a flash flood (the water flows in with
great speed); the overflow of major rivers (the water flows over the banks and spreads over

the terrain); and ponding, pluvial flooding, or waterlogging (water forms a layer on the

16

fields or streets because high-intensity rainfall cannot be drained as quickly as it comes
down).

In the past, the occurrence of these floods is notably more frequent and more
vicious. The problem of increased occurrences of floods must be the top priority of the
government because it affects the physical and socio-economic condition of an area.
Problems in relation to hazards, specifically flooding, are complex, real, and should be
based on the evaluation of different expertise. The complexity of the problem could be
minimized by understanding the factors that cause floods. Creating a model is a perfect

representation of a problem and provides an easier way to solve the problem.

Factors that cause floods

The most important factor in determining flood magnitude is rainfall intensity,
human activities, land area, and slope (Simon, 1981). Rainfall is the most important factor
in creating a flood. Long-term climate change and variability may also be having an
influence on rainfall.

Rainfall intensity, as described by Floodsite (2004), is a measure of the amount of
rain that falls over time. It is measured in the height of the water layer covering the ground
in a period of time. For example, it rained 20 millimeters in two hours. The relatively high
or low intensity is based on local circumstances. For instance, the relatively low intensity
is at 2 millimeters of rain a day and for relatively high, it maybe 30 millimeters an hour.
Flash floods will occur on high intensity of rainfall on steep slopes, while on flat areas, it

can lead to ponding, or urban floods when the drainage capacity is insufficient for the

17

intensity of the falling rain. Mankind’s activities affect flooding. Activities such as land
clearing, urban development, and dams can have the impact of a flood on the natural
environment.

In the study of Fazzillah et al. (2007), the three main causes of floods are land,
stream, and rainfall. The first factor is land-use change (land factor). Second factor is due
to the clogging of drains and their capacity to hold a very low volume of water (stream
factor.) For the third factor, heavy rain is the cause of flooding (rainfall factor). This is
either due to natural phenomena or human activities. Flooding is a consequence of
unplanned development resulting to changes in the environment. Floods occur more often
during the monsoon season as the monsoon storms rain heavily on. Another weather factor
that contributes to flooding is the La Nifia effect. As the monsoon storms follow a set
pattern each year, there should be increased ability to manage the weather effects. Of the
three factors, land-use change is the only factor that is governed by man-made laws, subject
to man's activities, and is directly within human control. This makes land use change factor
as the topmost priority in controlling the flood problem because it is within human terms.
Other factors are natural elements beyond human control and are expected to be unwieldy

even to the most sophisticated modelling forecast.

Consequences of flooding

The risk of flooding depends on the probability of a flood and the consequences of
that flood. Hence, flood risk is a product of consequences and probability (Thieken, Apel,

and Merz, 2015). Consequences of flooding will depend on the amount of water that floods

18

the area: size, height, and other physical aspects of the area; the depth of the water in the
area; length of time the water remains in the area; speed that the water flows and if there
are rocks, dirt, debris, trees, cars, or even (parts of) houses carried with it. These depend
on the amount (or quantity) of water, the cause of flooding, and the properties of the flooded

area.

Consequences of flooding also depend on the presence of people, companies,
buildings, monuments, and nature of the flooded area. Consequences may be high risk or
low risk. High risk is determined if the probability of a major flood is high, the consequence
is severe, when a flood generated many victims and when there also a lot of damage to the

area. Low risk if there is a low probability of damage and with minimal consequences.
Flood risk analysis and mitigation

It is necessary to lower the risk of flooding. Flood risk measures should be directed
to reduce the probability of flooding, and measures that reduce the consequences.
Mitigating flooding starts with an analysis of flood risks. Flood risk analyses should contain
scenarios that cover the whole range of possible flood discharges and associated
probabilities, as well as estimates on potential consequences in the region under study
(IPCC, 2007). It is an essential element of an integrated flood risk management approach
and the basis for effective risk mitigation decisions.

It is also very important to mitigate the effects of flooding. The probability of
flooding can be minimized by a warning system. An early warning to the communities in

threatened areas on the oncoming flood can prepare them so that people can bring

19

themselves, their valuables, livestock, and pets to safety. Probabilities can be computed or

calculated using probability statistics.
Landslide

Landslides are destructive natural phenomena that frequently lead to serious
problems in hilly regions (Intarawichian and Dasananda, 2010). Hilly regions such as
mountains are prone to landslides. Varnes (1984) described landslide as a universal term
covering a wide variety of mass movements and processes involved in a downward
movement of masses of rock, earth, or debris under the influence of gravity. It has been a
perennial problem of the hills as with the falling of monsoon seasons. The bulk of soils
gets detached from their original location and flows down the hills. It is not limited either
to the land or to sliding but commonly addresses almost all varieties of mass movements
on the slopes, including debris falls, rock falls, topples and debris flows that involve little
or no true sliding.

Landslide hazards can result in great loss of life and property and severe damage to
natural resources. The risk from landslide is normally defined as the expected number of
lives lost, persons injured, property damages, and disrupted economic activities due to a
particular landslide hazard for a given area and reference period (Varnes, 1984). A
landslide is a major concern in the mountainous regions due to the increasing demand for
the development and expansion of human settlements (Rangali, 2018). Slope failures have
become a major threat to the social, economic, and environmental milieu of human

communities.

20

The landslide and its rate of change depend on both the local climate and the local
vegetation (Varnes ef al., 1996). When the landscape supports new vegetation, landslide
is usually dormant. When drainage extends across a landslide without obvious
discontinuities, the landslide is commonly relict. More so, if the landslide has a measurable
rate of movement, it is either active or reactivated. This state of activity can be used to refer
to conditions before the current movements of the landslide. This landslide can be
described as previously stabilized, moving, or of moderate-velocity landslide. On the other
hand, landslides with no discernible history of the previous movement would be described
as active. Remedial measures should be undertaken on a landslide that is moving with

moderate velocity.
Factors that cause landslide

In the study of Moghaddam (2013), he identified causal factors of a landslide:
aspect, slope, elevation, distance from streams, distance from roads, precipitation, and land
use/land cover. These are the factors that are considered in this study, including land-use
change data and the criterion based on selected expert knowledge or expert opinion on one
factor to another.

One of the factors is precipitation, a variable that has a strong relationship with
landslide occurrence. Accordingly, an area with more than 300 mm precipitation indicates
a high susceptibility area; areas with precipitation less than 300 mm indicates less
susceptibility. Second is slope. Gentle slopes have a low susceptibility to landslide because

of the generally lower shear stresses. A slope of 10° or less could mean a high susceptibility

21

ratio (indicating a low probability of landslide susceptibility). Slopes above 10.1° to 20°
indicate a higher probability of landslide susceptibility. Highest rate of landslide
susceptibility is in slope greater than 40°. Areas with slope steepness greater than 40° are
mostly covered by bedrocks, including volcanic formations such as Tuff, sandstone,
siltstone, and conglomerate, all of which are most prone to landslide. Third factor is aspect.
Slopes facing south indicates a relationship with landslide susceptibility or high
susceptibility. The fourth category is elevation. High susceptibility is expected in elevation
ranging from 1800 to 2500 masl. Fifth is geologic formation and seismicity. Those areas
with Quaternary deposits, sedimentary and volcanic formations that are located within less
than 1000m meter distance to existing faults and which are at the same time located on
slopes steeper than 10°, are potentially highly susceptible to landslides. This geological
formation is a major controlling factor for landslides. Most susceptible groups for landslide
occurrence fall into areas of geological formations. The sixth causal factor is distance from
roads. This may be the result of cutting slopes during road construction and subsequent
erosion processes. It is said that the closer the distance to the road is, the greater the
landslide probability. Seventh causal factor is drainage networks (distance to stream). A
distance class of 0- 50m is considered at high susceptibility while that of 50-100m as
moderate susceptibility.

The important factors identified in the study of Sharma, Patel, and Debnath (2012)
are slope, geomorphologic features, and land use, coupled with triggering factors like
rainfall and a few of the anthropogenic activities. On the other hand, in the study of Walker

and Shiels (2013), rainfall, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and human activities can

22

facilitate landslide occurrence because each of these components alters the balance
between driving and resisting forces on the slope.

Landslides are known to be associated with rains and monsoon season that can
cause widespread damage (Paul er al., 2000). Without the aid of mechanical root support
or vegetation, the soil runs off when it contains too much water. The danger of rainfall-
induced slides tends to be much greater in mountainous regions in the Philippines like those
in the MMWER. Steep terrain, combined with the heavy rains brought by monsoon
seasons, hurricanes, and typhoons can put dense populations at risk. Rainfall is a significant
factor for landslide, particularly intense rainfall. Landslides can occur in sloped areas after
completely saturated by heavy rainfall.

Slope and topography influence soil development and occurrence of landslide.
According to the study of Hong (2006), steep slopes and coarse soil types are more
susceptible to landslides. When land cover has exposed soil, this contributes more to
landslides. Also, in the study of Walker and Shiels (2013) the steepest slopes might be
expected to experience the highest landslide frequency. Slopes that are too steep to form
substantial soil rarely experience landslides involving soil.

Another natural cause of landslide is earthquakes, often called earthquake-induced
landslides. Seismic activities can also be the main cause of landslides. If earthquakes occur
in areas with steep slopes, the soil would slip causing landslides. Further, according to
Keefer (1984), landslide encompasses many phenomena involving the lateral and

downslope movement of earth materials. Earthquake-induced landslides can damage many

23

types of engineering structures and cause a large percentage of the total economic losses
as it poses some hazard to human life and property.

Finally, human actions can cause landslides through a number of land-use practices
such as clear cutting, a method of timber harvesting which completely removes all old-
growth timber from the area. This method is hazardous because it destroys the existing
mechanical root structure in the area. Mining is another human cause of the landslide.
Mining operations that use blasting techniques often cause other areas to undergo landslide

due to vibrations under the soil.
Landslide susceptibility mapping

It is necessary to determine which areas are most prone to landslides. A landslide
susceptibility map is beneficial to reveal terrain and ground properties. Since rainfall can
trigger landslides, ground conditions and other factors could be accounted including
terrain, soil type, and land cover characteristics. The landslide susceptibility map considers
the location, areas, and the causes of landslides (slope, soil type, and the impact of the flow
of water in an area). The purpose of landslide susceptibility mapping is to identify areas
subject to landslides. To generate the map, factors have to be considered such as the extent
of the problem (where do landslides occur), the causes that trigger landslides like elevation,

slope, or soil type, and the trends that answer the question when do landslides occur.

High-risk areas like the Philippines lack the resources to maintain the extensive
weather networks required to successfully observe landslide conditions. The identification

of landslide susceptible areas associated with the terrain is important for ensuring the

24

sustainability of developments while minimizing possible disasters accruing to landslides.
Landslide susceptibility mapping is therefore crucial to determine the spatial probability of
a landslide event, since the country does not have the sophisticated technology to predict
accurately the next landslide event. Landslide susceptibility can be measured from the
correlation between determining factors and the spatial distribution of the movements. It is
the tendency of a landslide to be generated in a specific area in the future (Brabb, 1984).
Landslide susceptibility mapping is used to identify places of landslide occurrence over a

region on the basis of a set of internal causative factors (Rangali, 2018).
Landslide forecasting

Projections on landslides and the cost of damage and fatalities that are based on the
possible effects indicate that these will probably increase over time. To mitigate the risk
from landslide incidences, knowledge of the areas potentially prone to landslide activity is
significantly needed. Damages to the property and lives can be mitigated if the cause and

effect relationships of the events are known.

Landslide forecasting is considered in the prediction of a slope failure in spatial
and/or temporal terms (Intrieri, Carla, & Gigli, 2019). The objective of landslide
forecasting is to give a spatial probability on where instability may occur. Landslide
susceptibility implies classifying, estimating the area or volume, and assessing the spatial
distribution of existing and potential landslides in the study area. It is typically derived

through susceptibility, hazard, or risk maps. Risk maps can assess the potential damage to

25

the elements at risk. The output is the generated hazard maps and is related to the frequency

(i.e., annual probability) of landslides.

Land-Use and Land Cover Change

Rapid replacement of land cover by various land-use patterns is observed globally
(Salghuna er a/., 2018). Land-use change is expected to continue to be a major driver in the
tropics. A landscape is a structural, distinguishable, and functional layout of an area that
results from the complex interaction between its environmental and sociocultural assets
(La Mela Veca et al., 2016). Land cover is the physical and biological cover of the surface
of the land, while land use is the result of human activities such as agriculture, forestry,
and building construction that alter the land surface processes (Ellis et a/., 2017). Hence,
land use involves the management and modification of the natural environment and relates
to the study of human trends and movements.

The general term for the human modification of the earth's terrestrial surface by
modifying land to obtain food and other essentials is known as land use or land cover
change (LULC). Current rates, extents and intensities of LULC are far greater than ever
in history, driving unprecedented changes in ecosystems and environmental processes at
local, regional, and global scales. LULC changes include the expansion of agriculture,
urbanization, and deforestation, which are occurring at an unprecedented pace. These
changes have direct impacts on the environment, including soil, water, and air quality

(Pham ef al. 2015). LULC change is the change in the physical as well as biological

26

characteristics of the land. Therefore, land use land cover of a watershed is a result of
various environmental, natural, and anthropogenic factors (Shah et al., 2017).

Land-use change is driven by factor combinations of resource scarcity leading to
an increase in the pressure of production on resources, changing opportunities created by
markets, outside policy intervention, loss of adaptive capacity, and changes in social
organization and attitudes. The changes in ecosystem goods and services that result from
land-use change feedback on the drivers of land-use change (Lambin et a/., 2003). Land
use or cover and its dynamics are important factors that affect ecosystem conditions and
functions (Sewnet, 2015). LULC dynamics can impact the biogeochemical cycle leading
to modifications in surface atmospheric energy exchanges, carbon and water cycle, soil
quality, biodiversity, the ability of biological systems to support human needs, and,
ultimately the climate at all scales (Overmars & Verburg, 2005). The demographic
dynamics and environmental changes have direct and immediate implications for local
livelihoods by changing the land cover into different land use units (Amare, 2013).
Sherbinin et al. (2007) claim that the conversion of natural lands to croplands, pastures,
urban areas, reservoirs, and other anthropogenic landscapes represents the most visible and

pervasive form of human impact on the environment.

Climate Change

Climate is the average state of the atmosphere and the underlying land or water, on
time scales of seasons and longer (National Research Council, 2001). It is a set of

atmospheric and surface variables, such as temperature, precipitation, wind, humidity,

27

cloudiness, soil moisture, sea surface temperature, and the concentration and thickness of
sea ice. This is encompassing the long-term average as well as other measures such as daily
minimum temperature, length of the growing season, or frequency of floods.

Climate change is a global phenomenon and is particularly evident in the past three
decades. the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), in its Fifth Assessment
Report, reveals an increase of average global land and ocean temperature by 0.85 °C from
1880 to 2012 (Ho & Tang, 2019). Climate change is a natural hazard as most natural
calamities have been associated with climate change. Super typhoons and all those recent
destructive phenomena call for proactive empowerment of the stakeholders, adjustment to
the environment, and integrated consideration of the economic, ecological and social
consequences of disastrous floods (Siddayao, Valdez, and Fernandez, 2014).

Climate sensitivity is the term used by the IPCC to express the relationship between
the human-caused emissions that add to the Earth’s greenhouse effect, such as carbon
dioxide and a variety of other greenhouse gases, and the temperature changes that will
result from these emissions. It is defined as the degree of change that the average global
surface temperature will increase if there is a doubling of greenhouse gases (expressed as
carbon dioxide equivalents) in the air, once the planet has a chance to settle into a new
equilibrium after the increase occurs. Therefore, it is a direct measure of how the Earth’s
climate will respond to that doubling. Climate fluctuates from day to day or daily, and even
in the absence of any change in forcing. Moreover, climate responds in a systematic way
to climate forcing, but the response can be slow because the ocean requires time to warm

(or cool) in response to the forcing.

28

Climate forcing is any influence on climate that originates from outside the climate
system itself. It relates with the amount of energy received from the sun; the amount of
energy that radiates back into space. It is a major cause of climate change. Variances in
climate forcing are determined by physical influences on the atmosphere such as orbital
and axial changes, as well as the amount of greenhouse gas in the atmosphere (Hansen, et
al., 2005).

Forcing can be natural or human-made. Carbon dioxide (CO2) is the most important
climate forcing agent in recent decades. Other important climate forcing include volcanic
aerosols, anthropogenic land use, and solar variability. Land-use changes, especially the
removal of vegetation, can cause substantial regional climate forcing. One effect that has
been evaluated in global climate models is the influence of deforestation. Forests are dark
and tend to mask underlying snow. The replacement of forests by crops or grass yields a
higher albedo surface and thus create a cooling effect (National Research Council, 2001).
Consequences from those forces are often expressed as the change in average global
temperature and the conversion factor from forcing to temperature change is the sensitivity
of the Earth's climate system.

The complexities and uncertainties of the forcing mechanisms vary substantially.
External climate forcing mechanisms are of both natural and anthropogenic origin. Some
of the radiative forcing mechanisms observations of high quality can be used to estimate
those changes, whereas for other components, the change almost entirely relies on model

experiments (Myhre ef a/., 2001).

29

Climate is repeatedly varying on time scales ranging from seasons to the lifetime
(National Research Council, 2001). Climate variability can be generated by processes
operating within the climate system. The best-known example is the periodic rapid
warming trend in the eastern Pacific Ocean known as El Nifio. Each of these different
processes produces climate variability with its own spatial and temporal characteristics.
For example, El Nifio typically brings heavy rainstorms to coastal Ecuador. As
precipitation varies widely, it is more difficult to estimate the natural variability. Hence,

the need for a model to estimate climate variability.
Climate system models

Models for the climate system are an important tool for interpreting observations
and assessing hypothetical futures (National Research Council, 2001). These are
mathematical computer-based expressions of the thermodynamics, fluid motions, chemical
reactions, and radiative transfer of earth’s climate that are as comprehensive as allowed by
computational feasibility and by scientific understanding of their formulation. The models
allow the calculation of the evolving state of the global atmosphere, ocean, land surface,
and sea ice in response to external forcings of both natural causes (such as solar and
volcanic) and human causes (such as emissions and land uses), given certain geography
and initial material compositions. The challenge lies on formulating, constructing, and
using models to facilitate analyzing, assessing, and interpreting climate system models that
can calculate outcomes after taking into account the great number of climate variables and

the complex interactions inherent in the climate system. The very purpose is the creation

30

of a synthetic reality that can be compared with the observed reality, subject to appropriate
averaging of the measurements. Therefore, model solutions can be diagnosed to assess
contributing causes of particular phenomena.

General Circulation Models or (GCMs), as defined by IPCC (2019), represent
physical processes in the atmosphere, ocean, cryosphere, and land surface. They are the
most advanced tools currently available for simulating the response of the global climate
system to increasing greenhouse gas concentrations. GCMs, in conjunction with nested
regional models, have the potential to provide geographically and physically consistent
estimates of regional climate change which are vital in impact analysis. GCMs depict the
climate using a three-dimensional grid over the globe, typically having a horizontal
resolution of between 250 and 600 km, 10 to 20 vertical layers in the atmosphere, and
sometimes as many as 30 layers in the ocean. GCMs are used to study the future climate,
and the climate of the past.

Wayne (2013) defines each representative concentration pathway (RCP), a specific
emissions trajectory, and subsequent radiative forcing. The RCP is used to represent a
broad range of climate outcomes. It is referred to as pathway in order to emphasize that its
primary purpose is to provide time-dependent projections of atmospheric greenhouse gas
(GHG) concentrations. In addition, the term pathway is meant to emphasize that it is not
only a specific long-term concentration or radiative forcing outcome. The RCPs are used
as a common set of historical emissions data to initialize the integrated assessment models.
RCPs refers to the portion of the concentration pathway extending up to 2100, for which

Integrated Assessment Models produce corresponding emission scenarios. Scenarios

31

produced include time series of emissions and concentrations of the full suite of greenhouse
gases (GHGs), aerosols and chemically active gases, as well as land use/land cover (Moss
et al., 2008). The term “Representative” signifies that each RCP provides only one of many
possible scenarios that would lead to the specific radiative forcing characteristics. Pathway
signifies that not only the long-term concentration levels are of interest, but also the
trajectory taken over time to reach that outcome (Moss et al., 2010).

In the study of National Research Council (2001), future climate change depends
on the assumed scenario for future climate forcing, as well as upon climate sensitivity. The
IPCC scenarios include a broad range of forcing. Scenarios usually used the climate model
to include rapid growth rates of annual greenhouse gas emissions when they continue to
accelerate. This scenario is useful to simulate climate response since it provides a warning
of the magnitude of climate change that may be possible if annual greenhouse gas
emissions continue to increase. Future climate change, according to the National Research
Council(2001), is dependent on the expected scenario for future climate forcing as well as
climate sensitivity.

Climate projections will always be far from perfect as it is difficult to predict either
the course of human populations, technology, or societal transitions with any clarity, and
the actual greenhouse gas emissions could be either greater or less than the IPCC scenarios.
Hence, it is necessary to understand the sources and degree of uncertainty to make more

certain climate projections that will lead to ways to deal effectively global warming.

32

Importance of hazard maps

As the Philippines is constantly battered by calamities that result in numerous losses
of lives, heavy damage to property and infrastructures, and economic losses by the billions
worth of pesos, solution is necessary to remove the threats to communities. Awareness of
every individual and society is the first step towards building disaster-resilient
communities. Awareness is important to promote vigilance against natural hazards.

Technologies like remote sensing and GIS generate hazard maps relevant to
community preparedness and development planning. Generated hazard map will be useful
for community awareness and for regional-scale planning. This is the kind of map that
people recognize because they are able to see the exposure of their properties and familiar
places of danger. It is also a computer-assisted map that can build scenarios of possible
hazards; thus, allows understanding of disaster problems. It can be utilized to avoid surprise
and stunning impacts that may catch everyone unprepared by not realizing that such
magnitude of danger can occur. Providing information such as this is crucial for disaster
preparedness and to establish community security. Society must establish a culture of
safety by embracing the government-implemented program for disaster preparedness,
because it still rests on the people on how to use the hazard map wisely (Mahar ef al.,
2017). Without effective mitigation and adaptation measures, the magnitude of impacts on
land, property, ecosystems, and communities will cause irreversible losses that will prevent

a return to normal life (Sharma et al., 2012).

33

GIS MCDA-AHP and Accuracy assessment

Multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA) approach generates a general and
consistent set of criteria for hazard mapping, which can be used in ensuing GIS analysis
(Morales and De Vries, 2021) and adopting a hierarchical process of decision as a method
for MCDA. The Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) is an organized method for organizing
and understanding difficult decisions and turns these evaluations into numerical numbers

that may be processed and compared over the problem's complete range.

All causal factors have to be evaluated as criteria for decision analysis. Multi-
criteria evaluation (MCE) methods and applications have to be applied since most data
used by decision-makers are related geographically. GIS and remote sensing techniques
may provide more and better information about decision-making situations specifically for
hazard and risk areas. This also allows the decision-makers to identify a list of the
predefined set of criteria with the overlay process and the multi-criteria decision analysis
within GIS to develop and evaluate the condition of the area under study.

Accuracy assessment or validation is an important step in processing remote
sensing data. The confusion matrix is a way of validating the accuracy and performance of
the model. A confusion matrixis a table that shows correspondence between the
classification result and reference image. It is also called an error matrix. It can be
investigated between the actual and predicted classes. Accuracy assessments including
percent commission and percent omission can be derived from the confusion matrix. The

percent commission signify the points which are included in the category while they really

34

do not belong to that category while the percent omission reflects the number of points that
are not included in the category while they really belong to the category (Rwanga and

Ndambuki. 2017).

Similarly, the area under the curve (AUC) of the Receiver Operating Characteristic
(ROC) or AUC-ROC curve was described by Feby, Achu, Jimnisha, Ayisha, & Reghunath,
(2020). The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve is a graph that shows the
performance of the model across all possible thresholds. A threshold is a particular value
beyond the point that belongs to a particular class. The classes considered true positive (TP)
and false positive (FP). The true positive rate (TPR) is called sensitivity, whereas the false
positive rate (FPR) is the specificity. Sensitivity is the ratio of positive examples that are
correctly identified and FPR is the ratio of negative examples that are incorrectly classified.
The ROC curve is created by plotting TPR against the FPR where TPR is on the y-axis and
FPR is on the x-axis. ROC curves can be useful in determining the threshold value.
Adjusting the threshold can result in more positive values thus it increases the sensitivity
and decreasing the specificity. Likewise, increasing the threshold can result in negative
values thus the higher specificity and lower sensitivity. Therefore, ROC is a probability
curve and AUC represents the degree or measure of accuracy. The advantage of using
AUC-ROC is selecting the best and the most optimal models by selecting best threshold
level. It can measure the overall performance of the model and aid a powerful tool as a
statistical performance measure in detection, classification theory, and hypothesis testing.
Many studies utilized the use of AUC-ROC for model validation. One of which is Saha,

A., Mandal, S., & Saha, S. (2020), describe and classified categories of AUC such as poor

35

(0.50.6), average (0.6-0.7), good (0.70.8), very good (0.8-0.9), and excellent (0.9-1).
An excellent model has an AUC value near 1.0. For instance, the model can be considered
perfect if the AUC value equivalent to 1.0, whereas a value below 0.5 indicates the

erroneous model.

Moreover, the reliability of the model can be tested using the Kappa index or kappa
variance. Kappa index can be measured to determine between the data collected are correct
representations of the variables measured. Kappa index was first introduced by Cohen
(1960), to account the possibility of the raters or data collectors actually guess on at least
some variables due to uncertainty. It is considered a robust measure of the reliability of the
classifier system since it accounts for the possibility of the agreement occurring by chance.
The Kappa index is derived using a confusion matrix by plotting the predicted (expected)
versus actual (observed). The scale of the kappa value are: as almost perfect (0.8-1.0),
substantial (0.6-0.8), moderate (0.40.6), fair (0.2-0.4), slight (0-0.2), and poor (=0) based

on the scale made by Landis and Koch (1977).

CHAPTER Ill

METHODOLOGY

The methodology of this research included the location of the study, the
conceptual framework, data collection, data interpretation and analysis, and the research
method for developing the climate and land-use sensitive natural hazard modeling.
Overall methodology of the research is summarised in Figure 3. There are five phases of
the research methodology, namely, land-use change dynamics assessment, hazard model
formulation including validation, hazard simulation, multiple-hazards overlay, and
strategy recommendations. Each of the phases describes the process done in achieving
the research objectives. Also, the validation of the model used the confusion matrix, the
area under curve (AUC) of receiver operating characteristics (ROC) and kappa statistics

to determine the accuracy of the output hazard maps.

Location of the Study

Bicol region has 11 Proclaimed Watershed Forest Reserve areas. Mt. Masaraga
Watershed Forest Reserve is among the reserves and considered as one of the priority
watershed areas of Bicol, covering a total area of 810 ha, located in the municipalities of
Polangui, Oas, Ligao City, and Tabaco, in the province of Albay. The mountain lies
approximately between 13° 15’ and 13° 20’ longitude and between 123° 30’ and 123° 32’

latitude. Mt. Masaraga Watershed Forest Reserve (MMWFR) was proclaimed under

37

Presidential Proclamation No. 84 of October 27, 1992 for the purpose of protection,
maintenance, improvement and sustainability. Mt. Masaraga is considered a
stratovolcano that is inactive or with no history of eruptions. Aside from the mountainous
terrain, Mt. Masaraga has plains and valleys but 70% of its terrain constitutes a slope
category of more than 50% which indicates steepness and ruggedness. It has an elevation
of 1,328 meters (4,357 ft) asl.

Mt. Masaraga is part of the Bicol Volcanic Chain and of the Pacific ring of fire
(DENR, 2015). Before, the mountain was surrounded by a thick forest with many
endemic and endangered species. However, due to changes in land cover and conversion
of forest areas to other land use, the forest reserve suffers varied forms of degradation.
The mountain is the primary water source of the communities surrounding the area.
Hundred hectares of irrigated rice lands around the mountain get their much-needed
water from the springs, creeks, and river of the watershed. Water gives economic benefit
to the local farmers and inhabitants of the area since it is used in agriculture, household
and commercial establishments. Collected water from the different tributaries that flows
down eventually drains into Lake Bato. The area is under Type 2 climate, characterized
to have no pronounced dry, with high seasonal variation of rainfall, and with maximum

rainfall from October to January.

SAIOSOY ISOOJ poysioje yy VIeIEsePl JUNOPY JO UONLIO'T ‘| SINSIT

t opbiy |
uohow qUNOW

hit
|
|

; pBpupspwjunow $
pBouosoW \UNOW ah

37 é |
fed  .
iy
|
dV¥W NOILVDO1
aarasay 183104
paysuaiem eSereseyy juno
W861 WaIS{s WNaP0BD POM : i
‘waLaWoTD oDuUI|OW ODUI|DWHUnNOW

’ z C) z - ee r

23


39

Conceptual Framework

Major focus of this study is on the dynamics of land use land cover change, flooding
and landslide hazards simulation modeling and integrated hazards that reflect current
condition and forecast probabilistic scenario in different time periods and multi-scenario.
Assessment of land use and land cover changes is based on temporal images gathered from
satellite images. Classification of changes includes Closed Forest, Open Forest, Annual
Crop, Perennial Crop, Shrub/Grassland, Built-up, Inland Water, and Bare Soil. The
dynamics of land-use change in the area, both in historical (2010-2020) and future
perspective (2050 and 2070) is determined with the end goal of generating multi-temporal
land cover changes with spatial simulation and LULC change maps.

To produce the hazard maps, the relationship between and among the different
factors such as slope, elevation, aspect, soil class, rainfall, proximity to the river, and LULC
are used as input in modelling, facilitated by Saaty’s (1980) pairwise comparison.
Simulation of landslide and flooding at different time-slices (2020, 2050, and 2070) and at
different climate scenarios (RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5) are combined together with the land-
use change model to create the flood hazard maps and landslide hazard maps.

Lastly, the formulation of multi-hazard maps in the areas within the watershed that
are prone to natural hazards for the years 2050 and 2070 was undertaken. This was
facilitated by overlay analysis or simple combination of flood hazard maps and landslide
hazard maps. Integrated hazards maps are the output of the GIS multi-models integration

in hazards simulation.

sprezey
poonpul-oyeuntyo
pue jeoishydoo3
jo syoeduii
paesuiyy

suonsefoig
a7eUll]D poseq
-OLIBUS9g

pue eloduio}
“DIN

Apmys oy} Jo yomourey jenjdsouod *7 amy

juowoseurpy splezey [een pue JoA0D pure]
poysiayem eseseseyy I

aprispuey
poor

sdey] prezeyy

uonejnuis sprezey
Ul UOHeISAIU] S[=POWy

“DIN peseq

SID

SdVW CavZVH

ACITSGNVT
dooTi

O1NT

JOAU 0} AWUWIXOIg
SSPIO [10S

podsy

adols

uoneaaq
Treyurey

($8 BS rdw)
oueusds SRW],

uonenuwig
Spiezey] poseq-oueusss
pue jesodwia}-njnyy

oc syndjno
CO -PPOW
:ynduy
puode]

—J

SdVN
AONVHDO O'1NT

[log o1eg

Joye pueyUy
dn-ying
puejsseip/qniys
dod jeruusisg
doip jenuuy
(uadQ) 1se104
(paso[d) 1S910.J

uonenung jeneds
soduvyd JdA0—d puey

yesodurs}:

A


41

The information generated is vital in drawing up management strategies for a
watershed area, which is a more forward-looking approach in the mitigation of detrimental
natural hazards. Strategies were subsequently recommended for public responsiveness,
disaster preparedness, and preventive disaster management to mitigate the impacts of
expected geophysical and climate-induced hazards in the area. Figure 2 summarizes the

conceptual framework of the study.
Data Collection

Secondary data was gathered from October 2019 to May 2020. Digital copies of
the land cover maps covering MMWFER in shapefile format were projected in Universal
Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 51, with Philippine Reference System (PRS) 1992 as
historical datum. Land cover data in 2010 with 14 categories was also generated from
ALOS/AVNIR2 (10m resolution), SPOT 5 (10m resolution) and Landsat 7 (30m
resolution) taken in 2009-2012, with ground validation. Additional land cover data in 2015
with 12 categories was generated from Landsat 8 (30m resolution) taken in 2015, with
ground validation. These were provided by the office of NAMRIA in Taguig City.

Similarly, coordination with other concerned institutions was done particularly with
APSEMO, CDRRMO, LGU’s, and DENR where some of the relevant secondary data were
sourced out and also to collect the needed expert’s opinion to create Saaty’s pairwise

comparison.

42

Other data gathered include the following:

1. Satellite imagery of study area (MMWFR)

Land satellite imagery of the MMWFR was downloaded from Earth Explorer.
Earth Explorer is an online search, discovery, and ordering tool developed by the United
States Geological Survey (USGS). Land cover and land satellite images were selected
from the years 2010, 2015, and 2019, especially those with the most less clouded land

cover.
2. Rainfall data

Rainfall data was downloaded using the WorldClim versions 1.4 and 2.1. These
versions were provided for past, current, and future climates. WorldClim is a set of global
climate layers (gridded climate data) with a spatial resolution of about 1 km”. This data
was used for mapping and spatial modeling. The downloaded variable for different spatial
resolutions is from 30 seconds. Each download is a "zip" file containing 12 GeoTiff (tif)

files, one for each month of the year.
3. Soil class

Soils and other geologic data were collected or sourced out from the base maps of
the Bureau of Soil and Water Management (BSWM) and accessed through PhilGIS.org,

an open-source repository of digitized GIS data.

43

4. Drainage network

Drainage network was obtained through delineation of the area by GIS
techniques. ArcHydro analysis tool was used to delineate the morphological form of the

drainage system within the watershed.
5. Proximity to river

Proximity to the river was obtained by establishing the buffer, i.e., 100 meters as
the baseline riparian easement zone used as the basis for proximity. This was done by
using the buffer tool to set buffering at the desired interval ranging from 0-100, 100-200,

200-300, 300-400, and greater than 400 meters.
6. Slope, elevation, and aspect

Slope, elevation and aspect were obtained from Interferometric Synthetic Aperture
Radar (IFSAR) data. IFSAR program represents an effort to ingest and process high-
resolution elevation data produced through a technique called radar interferometry. Aspect
is the orientation of the slope with reference to the cardinal directions and with relation to
sun exposure. Aspect was obtained by processing the IFSAR DEM using the aspect

function in ArcGIS.

Data Interpretation and Analysis

Results for LULC were tabulated. Raster calculator was used to determine the rate

of change from one land cover period to another. The area and percentage of the changes

44

from previous to present year and future was analyzed and interpreted to determine a
changes, dynamics and impacts to the watershed.

Causal factors for flooding and landslide were extracted and evaluated with the help
of GIS-AHP. The experts’ opinion was expressed through their own scoring based on their
experiences. The score shows the relative importance of the criteria proposed by the expert.
The respective factor weight and class weight were then assigned to each of the associated
factors and presented in a table for analysis. The weights from both models are used in this
study to generate landslide and flooding susceptibility maps. The resulting maps were then
analyzed based on the susceptibility of the area either as low, moderate, high, and very

high.

Research Methodology

Land use change analysis

The use of Geographic Information System (GIS) revolutionizes the mapping
industry as it considerably makes the workload easier and faster, thus, alleviating financial
constraints. Figure 3 shows the land-use change analysis and modeling process flow. In
the study, the majority of the tasks was done using in GIS software.

For the determination of land-use dynamics in the past and the prediction of future
changes trend, Quantum GIS MOLUSCE plugin was used (Rahman ef al.,
2017). Supervised classification was done in QGIS to determine the land uses and land
cover for the certain time period in the past using readily-available satellite imagery. The

pre-processed land-cover data provided by the central mapping agency of the country,

45

National Mapping and Resource Information Authority (NAMRIA), was
utilized. Prediction of future land-use change was done through Cellular automata (CA)
and Artificial Neural Network (ANN) simplified process using QGIS MOLUSCE Plugin
developed by NEXTGIS. Future land-use changes were predicted following time period
with GCMs predictions for 2020, 2050, 2070.

The contemporary and probable LULC change was analyzed in the different time
period with GCMs predictions such as for 2020, 2050, and 2070. Raster calculator was
used to determine the rate of change from one land cover period to another. This also
includes the identification of land covers such as forest, non-forest, water, built-up areas,
and other non-forest uses of land. Change detection from different periods was overlaid to
determine the changes. The study interpreted the results based on the output of LULC
maps.

Land cover classes were selected based on identified Landsat 7 U.S. Geological
Survey (USGS) Earth explorer. Three satellite images of the study area were downloaded
from USGS Earth Explorer and other spatial variables such as elevation, slope, aspect, and
stream were derived from IFSAR sourced out from NAMRIA. The Landsat image was
downloaded from February 22, 2010 Landsat 7 TM+ satellite image and February 7, 2019
Landsat 8 OLI satellite image (Appendix A &B). These satellite data comprised of multi-
temporal satellite imageries covering the area of MMWFER and surrounding communities
with the corresponding area of interest (001 123°32'14.748" E, 13°21'45.590" N; 002
123°38'46.716" E, 13°21'44.674" N; 003 123°38'45.780" E, 13°15'51.659" Nand 004

123°32'13.992" E, 13°15'52.568” N). This study uses satellite image with 15-meter x 15-

46

meter resolution as suggested by Willayat (2017) for a more suitable and significant LULC
classification having a small scale of error. Other variables such as suitability like road
network, slope, and terrain for predicting future LULC were considered because these are
the factors for change not only in previous years but also in the future. QGIS versions 2.18
and 3.4 were used to prepare the data, analyze the image, and generate maps. Microsoft

Excel was used to produce tables and graphs.
Flood hazard modeling

Flood hazard modeling was done using multi-criteria decision approach and by
integrating factors from the analyzed criterion weights (Figure 3). Weight per factor was
determined using logic developed by Saaty (1980) under analytical hierarchy process

(AHP).

Figure 3 shows the process flow for flood hazard analysis using AHP-
MCDA. Iterations were done across time period and scenarios. As a form of modification,
rainfall values were changed for current (2020), 2050, and 2070 and at different RCPs,
RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5, to analyze flood hazard across time and scenario. The study used
climate models provided free and can be openly accessed through the WorldClim
repository. Specific GCM was chosen in accordance with literature that recommends its

suitability for the country.

Landslide hazard modeling

47

Process flow for landslide in AHP- MCDA in GIS followed the same procedure in

flooding hazard modeling. Similar to flood analysis, land-use and rainfall values were

substituted in accordance with the pre-determined time period and case scenarios in each

modeling run for landslide hazards (Fig. 3).

The following is the pairwise comparison matrix for landslide and flood event:

PAIRWISE COMPARISON FOR FLOODING AND LANDSLIDE EVENT

T

Factors | Slope | Aspect | Soil class |Elevation|Land-use| Rainfall ———s Weight
Slope
Aspect
Soil class |
Elevation |
Land-use | |
Rainfall |
Proximity
ito river
Weight
Intensity oa Definition Explanation
importance
1 Equal importance in Two criteria equally to the objective
a pair
3 Moderate Judgement and experience slightly favor one criterion
importance over another
5 Strong importance Judgement and experience strongly favor one criterion
over another
7 Very strong Judgement and experience very strong favor one
importance criterion over another
A The evidence favoring one criterion over another is of
Extreme importance 1 nest possible validity
2,4,6,8 Intermediate value When compromise is needed
If criterion i had one of the above numbers assigned it
Reciprocals Reciprocal when compared with criterion j, j has the reciprocal value

when compared with i

48

Simulation

Simulated flood and landslide at different time periods and scenarios was done as
illustrated in Figure 3. Analysis for flooding and landslide for different time periods (2020,
2050, and 2070) climatic condition RCP 4.5 (medium case) and RCP 8.5 (worst case
scenario) used a raster calculator to identify areas prone to floods and landslides. A! of the
causal factors served as criteria and were evaluated for decision analysis. Causal factors
include LULC, soil class, rainfall, elevation, slope, proximity to the river, and other
factors. With this, qualitative predictions are possible to predict which areas will have
floods and landslides. In this process, the probabilistic scenario was assisted by GIS and
RS techniques. The probabilistic models was used to determine the floods and landslide
susceptibility zones for the future. Moreover, GIS-based Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis
(GIS-MCDA) provides powerful techniques for the analysis and prediction of floods and
landslide hazards. GIS-MCDA belongs to heuristic analysis that includes the Analytic

Hierarchy Process (AHP).
Validation of the model

Areas were inventoried using landslide and flooding records and were
accomplished through training and testing data. Within the area of study, 70% was applied
as training data to assist AHP weighting and also to assess the validity of the AHP model.
The remaining 30% is for testing. Testing is applied to validate the accuracy of the model.
Validation was done by examining, locating, and mapping landslide areas via high-

resolution aerial imagery from Google Earth. Validation is performed by comparing

49

prediction with the observations in previous hazards. This was done through the calculation
of the area under the curve (AUC) of the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC). The
use of the ROC curve was encouraged by Begueria (2014) for the validation of hazard
predictive models since the ROC curve is used as a measure of performance. As suggested
by Feby, Achu, Jimnisha, Ayisha, and Reghunath (2020), sensitivity, specificity, accuracy,

and Kappa index were calculated using the following equations:

Sensitivity = TP
ensitvity = p> EN
Specificity = T™N
peciicity = TN + EN
TP+TN
Accuracy =

Pops — P.
Kappa index = ae

exp

TP +TN

Pobs = N

= (TP + FN) * (TP + FN) + (FP + TN) * (FN +TN))

exp N
Where :
TP - True positives; are the number of pixels that are correctly classified
T™ -True negatives; are the number of pixels that are correctly classified
FP - False positive, are the number of pixels that are incorrectly
classified

FN - False negative; are the number of pixels that are incorrectly

50

classified
Pobs - is the observed landslide/flood; and
Pexp - is the expected landslide/flood
N -is the number of training pixels.

ROC curve has been prepared by plotting sensitivity against 1-specificity values at
different threshold settings. TP and TN are the sensitivity value while FP and FN are
denoted as 1-specificity. Sensitivity is defined as the proportion of the landslide pixels that
are correctly classified as landslide occurrences whereas specificity is the proportion of the
non-landslide pixels that are correctly classified as non-landslide pixels. The higher
sensitivity value denotes more accuracy, while the higher specificity value reflects the error
prediction of the models (Saha, Mandal, and Saha, 2020). The other function of the ROC
curve is for deciding the threshold value for the landslide susceptibility map. The area
under AUC reflects the accuracy of the model. The AUC values can be classified into five
categories, such as poor (0.5-0.6), average (0.6—0.7), good (0.7-0.8), very good (0.8-0.9)
and excellent (0.9-1). According to Saha et al. (2020), the model is considered perfect if
the AUC value approaches 1.0; values close to 0.5 indicate an erroneous model.

Moreover, the reliability of the model is tested using the Kappa index. It is considered
as a robust measure of the reliability of the classifier system since it accounts for the
possibility of the landslide occurring by chance. The Kappa index is derived using a
confusion matrix by plotting the predicted (expected) versus actual (observed) landslide.

The Kappa index has been calculated using the given equation above. Kappa index values

51

set categories as almost perfect (0.8-1.0), substantial (0.6-0.8), moderate (0.4-0.6), fair

(0.2-0.4), slight (0-0.2), and poor (20).
Integrated Hazard

Following different modeling approaches employed in the study such as land-use
change simulation, flooding, and landslide, with multi-temporal and scenario-based
climate changes, integration of hazards was done following the process described in Figure
3. At the second level of modeling where separate outputs of landslide and flooding were
produced, an integration process was done for the overlay analysis. Landslide and flood
hazard maps were combined to produce integrated hazard maps. Integrated hazards maps
are the output of combining floods and landslides hazard maps. The combined
characteristics of floods and landslides were used to evaluate the condition of the area

under study.
Recommendation on mitigation strategies

Results of the study yielded a clear understanding of the condition of the watershed.
These served as inputs for the recommendation of strategies. Along with assessment of the
existing disaster mitigation of government agencies in Albay, this recommended
intervention lessens the probable impacts of natural hazards. Specific strategies are
recommended for public responsiveness, disaster preparedness, and preventive disaster
management to mitigate the impacts of geophysical and climate-induced hazards in the

area.

52

CLIMATE AND LANDUSE-SENSITIVE HAZARD MAP DEVELOPMENT

raw satellite imageries in GIS

Pre-processing of Supervised Classification ]

Satellite imageries at different
time periods

ond lenduse change and Cellular Automata

Periodic landuse/landcover Artificial Neural Network
historical (future trend)

Elevation k

Experts Rating MCDA LANDSLIDE
Weighted INCEPTION

[__souciass fee Overlay MODELS

Proximity to River - Comparison Analysis (formuta)

[ami nosrnysa Rivera}
Landuse }
L }

Aspect

i= Elevation } .
Rainfalt } ™
~ Expert's Rating MCDA FLOODING

Slope -
seaty’s Weighted INCEPTION

Soil Class eens Pairwise Overlay MODELS

=== Comparison Analysis (Formuta)
Proximity to River

(“tenavse

TANDUSE
(Present 2050, | __

2070) ~ = SIMULATED Loncatide
LANDSUDE INCEPTION
pm Events at Different Time
RAINFALL een MODELS (Formula)
‘Current. RCP 4.5 Periods and Scenarios
RCP BS)

Other Factors}

TANDUSE
(Present, 2050, } _
2070) ~~~ FiGoDase ian ries SIMULATED. fiesaing
- Events ot Different Time
. MODELS (Formuta)
Co RAFAT { ) Penods and Scenarios

RCP BS)

Other Factors } -

LANDSUDE
HAZARD Model
‘across
Periods and
Scenarios
INTEGRATED HAZARD MAPS

STRATEGY RECOMMENDATION

Figure 3. Research methodology

CHAPTER IV
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Assessment on the Dynamics of Land Use and L and Cover Change

This chapter presents the land use and land cover (LULC) change of Mt. Masaraga
Watershed Forest Reserve (MMWFER) and its surroundings from 2010 to 2020 to describe
the historical land cover change. Future land cover for 2050 and 2070 is also projected.
The classified images indicate the different land use and land cover patterns in the area
after pre-processing and supervised classification (Appendix A). Satellite image in
Appendix B was utilized to validate the results of LULC for year 2020.

Remote sensing application revealed that land cover classifications of MMWFR
and its buffer zone include forest (open and closed forest), agricultural areas (for perennials
and annuals), built-up, water bodies (inland water), shrubs/grassland, and bare soil.
Agricultural areas are non-forested land, including grasslands, with annual or perennial
crops or both. Built-up areas, on the other hand, are non-forested lands, such as urban areas,
industrial and commercial land, human settlements, and road networks. Further, inland

water or water bodies pertain to rivers, lakes, and water reservoirs.
Historical land cover change dynamics

There are seven identified land uses: closed forest, open forest, perennial croplands,
annual croplands, shrubs/grassland, built-up areas, inland water, and bare soil. The

resulting LULC classification maps of the two periods, 2010 and 2020, shown in Figures

54

4a and 4b, have an overall map accuracy of 87% and 80% for both images using an
error/confusion matrix. Kappa index was measured to determine whether the data collected
are correct representations of the variables measured. Moreover, the Kappa statistics/index
was computed for each classified map to measure the accuracy of the results. The LULC
classification maps of the two periods have Kappa statistics of 0.83 and 0.73 for the year
2010 and 2020, respectively (Appendix C and D). These Kappa values are considered
substantially accurate based on the scale value for kappa index made by Landis and Koch
(1977).

As illustrated in Figure 4a-d, in general, the area under perennial crops is the
dominant LULC class in terms of spatial distribution. Accordingly, areas under perennial
crops accounts for about 43.59%, 45%, 45.62%, and 45.63% of the total area in 2010, 2020,
2050, and 2070, respectively. The closed forest area has a slightly declining trend and
accounts for about 19.97%, 19.64%, 19.54% and 19.58% of the total area in 2010, 2020,
2050, and 2070, respectively. For the open forest area, this occupied 12.55 % of the total
area in 2010 and increased to 15.16 % in 2020. When projected for the year 2050 and 2070,
the total area of open forest yields almost the same, at 14.82 % and 14.81 %, respectively.
Land cover classes of open forest, perennial croplands, shrubs/grassland, and built-up areas
have generally increased from 2010 to 2070. Specifically, the change that occurred for
open forest is from 12.55% to 14.81%, from 43.59% to 45.63% for perennial croplands,
shrubs/grasslands, from 0.11% to 1.75%, and for built up areas, from 1.03% to 1.74%.

Meanwhile, surface water body or inland water shows a decline, from 0.27% in 2010 to

55

0.16 % in 2020 and predicted to occupy 0.17% of the total area by 2050 and 2070. As

shown in Table 1, the decline will be constant after 2050 onwards to 2070.

Table 1. Results of LULC classification for 2010 and 2020 and projected for 2050 and

2070
Area

pang 2010 2020 2050 2070
class

(ha) % (ha) % (ha) % (ha) %
Forest

2552.81 19.97 2511.16 19.64 2504.14 19.54 2503.94 19.58
(Closed)
Forest

1604.453 12.55 1939028 15.16 1894.54 1482 1894.1 14.81
(Open)
ST 2752.81 21.53 1977.03 15.46 1968.53 154 1967.94 15.39
Croplands
Perennial 5574.06 43.59 575321 45 +«—«5833.69 45.62 5834.84 45.63
Croplands
hrub/
Shrub; 13.59 O11 24068 188 22331 1.75 2234 1.75
Grassland
oe 131.18 103 22417 1.75 22284 1.74 22284 1.74
intend 34.74 0.27 2111 0.17 2084 016 2081 0.16
Water
Bare Soil 122.63 096 119.88 0.94 11837 093 1184 0.93

The transition matrix of the LULC was produced by comparing the area in hectares

of the LULC classes between years or the transition from a determined period to another

(Appendix E). Transition matrix is used as input for the artificial neural network to obtain

the transition probability for every input and to produce the LULC output layer. Transition

matrixes of LULC in MMWFR were created in three interval periods: 2010-2020, 2020-

2050, and 2050-2070. Appendix F shows the transition matrix with the replacement of land

use to other land use for the year 2010-2020.

OL0Z JO} WAM JO sdew 19A09 asn pue’y] ‘ep omsi.

Nosei0g -@

(uedo) 180105 -Z
(Paso[D) 1se104- | ET
4@AOD PUD] SSN PUPT OLOZ

@AJOSEY |SE104 POUSIOIOM
pBoiosow junow ZZ

AI AVN

NIS 8U0Z WIN - >BEL SOM


07Z0Z 40F WAM JO sdeur soa09/asn pur] ‘gp omaty

woseiog -
140M -
din-ying -
usrug/ssoig -
IDIUUBIOd -

dap jonuuy -
(uedo) 1se105 -
(PesoID) s@104 -

BAIESAY {SEIOJ POYSIOJOM
pBouvsow sunow FZ

NIS 8U0Z WN - 7B6LSOM

wy e z t o

v


OS0Z Joy UoHEOYIsse[O asn pur] poremuUNIS “op amr

wosei0g
100M
n-ne

ysmig/ssa

jojuueied
doi jonuuy

4sa10j UsdO [i

488104 PESCID EE

4@AOD PUDT

Sf PUD] PeIOINWIS OSOZ
@AIESEY JSQIO4

paysiejom OBoivsoy ZZ

Aa dV


0L0Z 10y UoNeoYIssepo asn purl payeInUNg ‘Py anSty

lloseiog Ga

1810M
din-41ng
Usnug/sso1d

loluUe1eg
doid jonuuy

48104 UedO il

488104 PesolD HE

J@A0D PUD]

8/1 ud} Peyoinwis 0£0z
@AIASEY |S@IO4

pPeysie;om OBoinsow ZZ2

Aan dVW


60

LULC classification from 2010 to 2020

Table 2 shows the land use classes, area distribution in hectares, and the percentage
of LULC from 2010 to 2020. For some land uses, the change between two periods is
positive (increase) while for others, negative (decrease). The trend shows that agricultural
areas dominated the MMWER while closed forest declined. This could only mean that
some areas of closed forest were converted to open forest and other land uses.

Table 2. Land use change analysis for 2010-2020

Land Class 2010 2020 Change
Hectare % Hectare % Hectare %
Forest (Closed) 2552.81 19.97 2511.16 19.64 -41.65 -0.33
Forest (Open) 1604.4525 12.55 1939.0275 15.16 334.58 2.62

Annual Croplands 2752.81 21.53 1977.03 15.46 -775.78 = -6.07

pee 5574.06 43.59 5753.21 45.00 179.15 1.40
Shrub/Grassland 13.59 O11 24068 188 22709 1.78
Built-up areas 131.18 103 22417 175 9299 0.73
Inland Water 34.74 0.27 21.11 0.17 = -13.64 0.11

Bare Soil 122.63 0.96 119.88 0.94 -2.75 -0.02

Perennial croplands registered the largest area in 2010 at 43.59 % of total area
(5,574.06 ha) and increased further to 45% (5753.21 ha) in 2020. Annual croplands ranked
second with an area of 2,752.81 ha (21.53% of total) in 2010 but decreased to 1,977.03 ha
(15.46%) in 2020. Closed forest came third with 19.97 % of total area (2,552.81 ha) in
2010 but decreased to 19.64 % (2,511.16 ha) in 2020. Highest gain in land area is in open
forest, at 2.62% (from 1,604.45 ha to 1,939.02 ha or a total increase of 334.58 ha), followed

by shrubland/grassland at 1.78% (from 13.59 ha to 240.68 ha or an addition of 227.09 ha),

61

perennial croplands at 1.40% (from 5,574.06 ha to 5,753.21 ha or an increase of 179.15
ha), and built-up area at 0.73% (from 131.18 ha to 224.17 ha or a net gain of 92.99 ha).

In Table 3, the transition matrix shows that the highest probability of change is
exhibited by the annual croplands, at -6.07% change or a decline of 775.78 ha (from 2,846
ha to 2,049.93 ha). Areas for annual crops were converted to perennial croplands,
grassland/shrubs, built-up and other land uses. Areas cultivated to annual crops came from
1.58 ha of closed forest, 16.85 ha of open forest, 359.03 ha of perennial croplands, 3.31 ha
of built-up areas, 5.26 inland water, and 22.64 of bare soil. Meanwhile, the lowest

probability is observed on bare soil at -0.02%, from 128.05 ha to 121.1 ha.

Table 3. Transition matrix for 2010 and 2020 of LULC changes in MMWFR in hectares

2010
Land Class
FO AC Pc S/GR- BU Iw BS Total
FCL 1,753.88 608.58 1.58 18347 446 000 000 086 2,552.81
1,604.4
FO 50564 67831 1685 39555 509 000 000 302 5
AC 3299 11835 1,554.26 82186 113.74 5393 437 5333 2,752.81
5,574.0
PC 21778 525.74 359.03 429199 8127 7448 245 2133 6
& s/cr 009 86518 331 403 090 000 000 009 1359
& Bu 014 «(nT 1382 2198 «93.200 88166 257 131.18
Iw 0.00 000 556 128 365 1.33 301 46992 34.74
BS 065 1 22.64 3305 2840 628 113 28.78 122.63
Total 251.16 1,939.03 1,977.03 5,753.21 24068 22417 210 119.88
cc 757.28 1,260.72 422.78 1,461.22 239.78 136.01 8.10 9110
IM 4165 33458 -775.78 17915 227.09 9299 -1364 -275

Note: FCL - Closed Forest, FO - Open Forest, AC - Annual Croplands, PC - Perennial Croplands; S/GR -
Shrub/Grassland; BU - Built-up areas; IW - Inland Water; BS - Bare Soil, and CCI - Class change; IM- Image Difference

62

Of the total 2,552.81 ha of closed forest, 1,753.88 ha remained; other areas were
converted to open forest (505.64 ha), annual croplands (32.99 ha), perennial croplands
(217.78 ha), shrubs/grassland (0.09 ha), built-up areas (0.14 ha), and bare soil (0.65 ha).
Meanwhile, 608.58 ha of closed forest, 118.35 ha of annual croplands, 525.74 ha of
perennial croplands, 5.18 ha of shrubgrassland,1.17 ha of built-up areas, and 1.71 ha of

bare soil became part of the open forest between 2010 to 2020 (Table 3).

LULC classification from 2020 to 2050

Using simulation from 2020 to 2050, perennial croplands still dominate the area.
Perennial croplands show a significant increase over time. However, the area for the closed
forest, open forest, shrubs and grasslands, annual croplands, built-up areas, inland water,

and bare soil decreased over time (Table 4).

Table 4. Land use change analysis for 2020-2050 in hectares

2020 2050 Change
Land Class
Hectare % Hectare % Hectare %
Forest (Closed) 2511.16 19.64 2504.14 19.58 -7.02 -0.05
Forest (Open) 1939.0275 15.16 1894.54 14.82 -44.48 -0.35

Annual Croplands 1977.03 15.46 = 1968.53 15.40 -8.50 -0.07

Perenttias 5753.21 45.00 5833.69 45.62 80.48 0.63

Croplands

Shrub/Grassland 240.68 1.88 223.31 1.75 -1737 = -0.14
Built-up areas 224.17 1.75 222.84 1.74 -1.33 -0.01
Inland Water 21.11 0.17 20.84 0.16 -0.27 -0.01

Bare Soil 119.88 0.94 118.37 0.93 -1.51 -0.01


63

Decrease in open forest does not necessarily mean an increase in closed forest since
there is a possibility of conversion of open forests to perennial croplands. About 44.48 ha
of open forest is planted to perennial crops. Closed forests decreased by as much as -0.05%,
from 2,511.16 has in 2020 to 2,504.14 has in 2050, a difference of -7.02 has. Annual
croplands decreased by -0.07%, from 1,977.03 ha in 2020 to 1,968.53 in 2050. The area is
cultivated for perennial crops. The decrease in forest area and increase in agricultural areas
can be attributed to the policy and programs of the government (ITTO, 2002). This may
significantly impact the overall condition of the watershed. Government interventions

should consider not only maintaining the forest cover but also expanding the forest area.

Table 5. Transition matrix for 2020 and 2050 of LULC changes in MMWFER in hectares

2020
Land Class
FCL FO AC PC S/GR BU Iw BS Total
FCL 2504.14 0 0 7.02 0 0 0 0 2511.16
FO 0 1894.54 0 44.48 0 0 0 0 1939.0275
AC 0 0 1968.53 8.51 ) 0 0 0 1977.03
PC 0 0 0 5753.21 0 0 0 0 5753.21
S/GR 0 0 0 1737223310 0 0 240.68
z BU 0 0 0 1.33 0 222.84 0 0 224.17
Sw 0 0 ) 0.27 0 0 2084 0 21.11
BS 0 0 0 151 0 0 0 118.37 119.88
Total 2504.14 1894.55 1968.53 5633.69 223.31 222.84 20.84 «118,37
cc 0 0 0 80.48 0 0 0 0
IM -7.02 44.48 8.51 80.48 17.37 -17.37 -0.27 -151

Note: FCL - Closed Forest; FO - Open Forest; AC - Annual Croplands; PC - Perennial Croplands; S/GR -
Shrub/Grassland; BU - Built-up areas; IW - Inland Water; BS - Bare Soil, and CC - Class change; IM- image Difference

A change matrix for the period between 2020 and 2050 was produced by post-
classification comparison from the classification results. As seen in Table 5, most of the

areas changed in favor of the expansion of perennial croplands. The transition matrix

64

shows, as projected, that 7.02 ha of closed forest, 44.48 ha of open forest, 8.51 ha of the
annual croplands, 17.37 ha of shrubs/grassland, 1.33 ha of built-up areas, 0.27 ha of inland
water, and 1.51 ha of bare soil will be converted to perennial croplands. A total of 2,504.14
ha of closed forest, 1,894.54 ha of open forest, 1,968.53 ha of annual croplands, 5,753.21
ha of perennial croplands, 223.31 ha of shrub and grassland, 222.84 ha of built-up areas,
20.84 ha of inland water, and 118.37 ha of bare soil remained unchanged since the values
along the class change is zero (0). The transition shows that activities in perennial croplands
are high manifested by a class change of 80.48 ha, while there is no significant change in
other land uses. Image difference is the change in area in hectare between two periods, or
the difference of the area between 2020 and 2050. The image difference for all land uses

has a negative value except for perennial croplands.
LULC classification for 2050 to 2070

As projected, almost all land use classes will be the same or in almost the same size,
except for the area under perennial crops from 2050 to 2070. Perennial croplands are
projected to increase by approximately 0.01%, from 5,833.69 ha to 5,834.69 ha. For other
land uses, the change is also just one hectare, indicating a slow rate of change (Table 6).

In Table 7, the transition matrix indicates that some of the areas of open forest are
to be planted to perennial crops at about 5.74 ha, while 5.29 ha of the area under perennial
crops will become part of the open areas and that around 1.40 ha of perennial croplands
shall be converted to a closed forest. It means that there is no significant increase in the

area of perennial crops and other LULC areas. Transition shows that the cultivation of

65

perennial crops is still high. Cultivation of areas for perennial crops shows great demand
since agriculture is the primary industry in the area of study. Agriculture activities are
considered more valuable and with higher profitability to the farmers and landowners in

MMWFR.

Table 6. Land use change analysis for 2050 — 2070

2050 2070 Change
Land Class

Hectare % Hectare % Hectare %
Forest (Closed) 2504.14 19.58 2503.94 19.58 -0.20 0
Forest (Open) 1894.54 1482 189409 14.81 -0.45 0
Annual Croplands 1968.53 15.40 1967.94 15.39 -0.59 0
Perennial Croplands 5833.69 45.62 5834.84 45.63 1.15 0.01
Shrub/Grassland 223.31 1.75 223.40 1.75 0.09 0
Built-up areas 222.84 1.74 222.84 1.74 0 0
Inland Water 20.84 0.16 20.81 0.16 -0.02 0
Bare Soil 118.37 0.93 118.4 0.93 0.02 0

In general, the overall condition of MMWFR in terms of LULC changes is alarming
and can threaten certain species in the forest. There should be adaptation measures to
maintain a sizable area for the forests. A measure to expand forest area and to bring back
the forested area is through restoration effort. This requires maintaining forest cover and
allowing tree species to survive through natural and artificial regenerations. These tree
species can act as protection against strong wind and aid to conserve soil and water.

To conclude, this study reveals that from a historical perspective, from 2010 to

2020, that there is a 2.62 % increase in open forest, 0.33 % decrease in closed forest, and

66

0.73% increase in built-up areas. Inland water covering 34.74 ha in 2010 decreased to 21.11

ha in 2020. Grassland and shrubs increased from 13.59 ha in 2010 to 240.68 ha in 2020.

Table 7. Transition matrix for 2050 and 2070 of LULC changes in MMWFR in hectares

2050
Land Class
FO AC Pc s/GR BU Iw BS Total
FCL 2502.54 0 0 1.60 0 0 0 0 2504.14
FO 0 1888.81 0 5.74 0 0 0 0 1894.55
AC 0 ) 1967.78 0.74 0 tt) 0 0 1968.53
PC 1.40 5.29 0.16 5825.07 1.31 0.11 0.02 0.34 5833.69
S/GR 0 0 ) 1.22 22210 «0 0 0 223.31
— BU 0 0 0 0.11 ) 222.73 0 0 222.84
“iw 0 0 0 0.05 0 0 20.79 0 20.64
BS 0 0 0 0.32 0 0 ) 118.06 118.37
Total: 2503.94 1894.10 1967.94 5834.84 223.40 222.84 20.81 118.40
cc 1.34 5.29 0.16 9.76 1.31 0.11 0.02 0.34
IM -0.20 -0.45 -0.59 1.15 0.09 0 -0.02 0.02

Note: FCL - Closed Forest; FO - Open Forest; AC - Annual Croplands; PC - Perennial Croplands; S/GR -
Shrub/Grassland; BU - Built-up areas; IW - Inland Water; BS - Bare Soil, and CCI - Class change; IM- Image Difference

Agricultural production and expansion of area for perennial crops show a positive
trend over time. This is because agriculture continues to play a major role in the economy
of Albay. Perennial crops such as coconut, abaca, mango, and banana are considered major
crops in the province. Continuous increase of agricultural areas for the production of
perennial crops led to deforestation. Only a nineteenth (19.64%) of the total area of
MMWEFER remained intact, while 15.16% of the area was converted to open forest,
indicating accelerated deforestation. Closed forest conversion, opening up the forest, and
building up residential, commercial, or industrial areas have become a common sight in the

watershed. Conversion of dense forest to agricultural land and settlement was also observed

67

alongside deforestation. Deforestation was due to an increase in agricultural use of land
and conversion to non-forest purposes.

Increase of built-up areas by as much as 0.74% between 2010 and 2020 is an
indicator of increasing population and high demand for settlement and commercial space.
Total change for built-up areas in the period 2010 to 2020 is 92.99 ha or 0.73%. According
to (Pujol-Mesalles and Molina, 2013), increase in population has a positive correlation to
new built-up area or establishment of buildings and infrastructure. As the population
continues to grow, additional buildings are established. Therefore, it can be surmised that
an increase in population leads to an increase in the built-up area and consequently a
decrease in the vegetation. Population growth and increasing number of housing facilities
are adversely affecting water supply coming from inland water sources. An increase in
population does not necessarily force the conversion of forests to non-forest areas.
However, it may lead to high dependency on forests and this often leads to forest
degradation. This implies that the watershed is confronted with problems of deforestation
resulting in gradual land-use change. Also, there is no intensive commercial logging
causing large-scale forest breakdowns but rather, incremental agricultural land expansion
and small-scale forest conversion which drive forest and land-use changes in MMWFR.

Forested land, including closed and open forest areas, is estimated at 4,157.26 ha.
Since then, as projected, forested land has decreased over the past years, which means that
forest has changed to other land uses and will continue to be so until 2070. If forests

continually decline, negative impacts are bound to hit the watershed and the community as

68

a whole, either directly or indirectly. This impels immediate attention and adjustment in

current thinking in government policies for forest management.

Formulation of Models for Landslide and Flooding

This section details the process of generating the formula for the landslide and
flooding susceptibility map of MMWFR. Multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA)
approach generates a general and consistent set of criteria for hazard mapping, which can
be used in ensuing GIS analysis (Morales and De Vries, 2021). Specifically, the study
applied the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP); that means adopting a hierarchical process
of decision as a method for MCDA. It can convert personal preferences and judgements
to weights through a mathematical structure together with matrices and auto vectors
(Dalanhol and Tabalipa, 2020). It can used to convert subjective assessment of relative
importance into a set of weights. In the study of Ouma& Tateishi, 2014, AHP as an
organized methodology used for dealing with complex decisions to determine the one that
best fits the needs and understanding of the problem, the integration of these methods
proved to be efficient. Similar in the study of Kavzoglu, Sahin, & Colkesen, (2014)
comparing with other methods, MCDA outperformed other methods in terms of overall
accuracy considering ground reference map, statistics and success rate curves and they
found it to be effective in modeling natural hazards specifically landslide susceptibility.

The inputs obtained from experts in carrying out the pairwise comparison among
different input predictors were used to calculate the weight of each criterion. This was done

through interviews and discussion with the experts. The experts provided their own scores

69

based on their knowledge and experiences. A new AHP excel template by Goepel version
9-15-2018 was utilized by this study. Experts as describe by Goepel, 2013, experts are
usually limited to a few, thus a common number would be between 3 to 10 and all depends
on how to define what qualifies someone as an expert. This study has taken the judgment
of five experts in the field of hydrology, soil science, forestry and disaster management.
They are expert based on degree obtained and experiences gained in relation to the hazards
susceptibility. The experts from the offices of the Department of Environment and Natural
Resources (DENR), Bicol University (BU), Albay Public Safety and Emergency
Management Office - Provincial Disaster Risk Reduction Management Council
(APSEMO-PDRRMO) and Local Government of Ligao.

Tables were prepared (Appendix G and H) based on the judgment of experts as
reflected in the pairwise comparison. The AHP was generated and the weights or value
based on expert’s opinion was used to generate a flood and landslide modeling formula or
a susceptibility index (Appendix I and J). AHP creates comparisons between possible pairs
in a matrix to provide a weight for each factor, hence, allows inconsistent relationship
among input predictors or factors while at the same time providing a consistency ratio as
an indicator of the degree of consistency or inconsistency (Feizizadeh et al., 2013).

The score matrix was normalized to obtain the corresponding weight of each
parameter. The weight of each parameter was calculated by taking the mean value of the
corresponding row in the normalized matrix (Appendix K and L). Since individual
judgment will never be consistently perfect, the degree of consistency should be in the form

of ratings measured by computed consistency ratio. A consistency ratio less than or equal

70

to 0.10 signifies that the reciprocal matrix is acceptable (Lawal et al., 2012). Consistency
ratio of less than one (1) indicates that the experts’ comparison of characteristics is
perfectly consistent and that the relative weights are appropriate to be used in the flood and
landslide susceptibility model. Moreover, the consistency ratio was determined to improve
the prediction accuracy of the landslide and floods susceptibility map.

The weight of each criterion used in the landslide model and the pairwise
comparison matrix, weights, and consistency ratio of classes within each criterion or within
the data layers were used in the landslide model (Appendix K). On the other hand,
Appendix L shows the weight of each criterion used in the flood model and the pairwise
comparison matrix, factor weights, and consistency ratio of the data layers used in the flood
model. There are five (5) evaluation criteria considered - topography, climate, human
factors, geology and time factors for the selection of the seven parameters in this study

(Table 8).

Table 8. Evaluation criteria and input predictors for landslide and flood susceptibility map

Criteria Input
Topography Elevation, Slope and Aspect
Distance to river
Human factors Land use, land cover
Geology Soil class
Climate Rainfall (mm)

Time factor (Year) 2020, 2050, and 2070


71

The areas were scrutinized and analyzed by employing interpretation from Google

images. Seven landslide input predictors or factors of hazards were taken into

consideration. These include elevation, rainfall, slope, soil class, aspects, proximity to the

river, and land use/land cover. For flood predictors, six factors were included as follows:

elevation, rainfall, slope, soil class, proximity to the river, and land use/land cover. These

predictors were extracted, calculated, and evaluated from the database available (Table 9).

Table 9. List of data used for the study and sources

LULC
Data Criteria Simulation) Year Description Sources Data Format
hazard
modeling
Digital Slope Explanatory 2013 IFSAR Sm NAMRIA GeoTiff
Elevation map resolution AXA
Model 3D 30meter
(DEM)
DEM Elevation Explanatory 2013 IFSAR NAMRIA GeoTiff
map
DEM Aspect Explanatory 2013 IFSAR NAMRIA GeoTiff
map
DEM Drainage Explanatory 2013 IFSAR Open street Shapefile
network map map
Rainfall Rainfall Rainfall map —‘1970- CMIPS WorldClim Shapefile
(mm) 2000,

2050,

2070
Soil Type Soil type Input map 2014 Soil type BSWM Shapefile

Inventory basemap

Land use Land use Input map 2010 Derivation from USGS Earth GeoTiff
land cover land cover 2015 Landsat 7 and 8 explorer
change change 2019 NAMRIA

map


72

All predictors were compared against each other based on expert’s opinion and
preferences. The weights of each flood and landslide input predictors were assigned to each
of the associated factors in a raster calculator. Raster calculator calculates the required
weights associated with input map layers with the help of a matrix. Results were validated
by comparing with recorded landslide occurrence in 2011 and flood record from the Mines
and Geoscience Bureau (MGB) of the DENR.

The following are the predictors that were used as input for modeling the landslide

and flooding.
a) Slope

Slope is the ratio of the vertical change between two points or the rise, to the
horizontal change between the same two points called the run. Slope angle in degrees is
one of the most important factors controlling the stability of slopes affecting flooding or
landslide.

The slope map in Figure 5a was used as the input in deriving the susceptibility map.
A slope angle map was produced from a digital elevation model (DEM) and IFSAR with a
5-meter resolution. Slope angle ranges from less than 10 to greater than 40 degrees. The
slope map of the study area was categorized into 10° intervals. This study applied equal
intervals and formed five subclasses (<10, 10-20, 20-30, 30-40, >40). MMWFER is a
mountainous and steep slope while the surrounding communities are nestled in less steep
slopes. This was the driving force for the inclusion of the slope factor in determining

flooding in lower gradient/slope and landslide-prone areas in the study area.

Figure 5a. Slope map

1D. Bevaton (meters) €&  Rainkat (mm)

GB x0
(2 20.20
GB 00-00
GB so. 20
BE > x0

WB 0-270
Ga 200-200
TD x0 -x00
GB x0 - 3:00
EBs

F
— Drcinage Lines

73


74

b) Aspect

The aspect map can be seen in Figure 5b. Aspect map was derived from DEM and
Geotiff data format. Kavzoglu et al. (2013) defines aspect as the orientation or direction of
slope that is measured clockwise in degrees from 0° to 360°; where 0° is north-facing, 90°
is east-facing, 180° is south-facing, and 270° is west-facing. Aspect was categorized in this
study as flat, facing North, South, East, West, Northwest, Northeast, Southwest or
Southeast. This can be associated to parameters such as exposure to sunlight, drying winds,
rainfall (degree of saturation), and discontinuities that are influential factors in triggering
landslides. The DEM image was used instead to calculate the aspect values for each pixel
to construct the aspect image. However, expert’s opinion did not include aspect as a factor

of flooding.

c) Soil Classification

Soil class is one of the main factors having a direct effect on the occurrence of
floods or landslides since variations in its structure and composition often lead to changes
in strength and permeability of soils. Hence, this is considered an input parameter to
determine floods or landslide susceptibility. The soil map can be seen in Figure Sc. In Table
10, soil class includes Mountain soil, Ligao loam, Guionobatan sandy loam, Mocolod-Pili
complex, Libon silty clay, and Tigaon clay. Carating et al. (2014) describe the

characteristics of these soils.

Figure 5b. Aspect map

©. ovation (meters) Rains (mm)

<0
0.00
GB o-«0
2B x0 - 1200
E> ix

BBo.20

1S 20-200
5) 2800 - 3000
(x00. 100

75


Figure Sc.

10. Bevaton (meters) €  Raintat (mm)

GB Mouton Sot-unanerentates | [i <- 800

. Soil class

Go. 270
a 200. 200
70-0
BBB 3000-3100
MB s100

Fe
— Owrage tines

76


77

Table 10. Description of soil type in MMWFR

Soil type

Description (Carating, Galanta & Bicatio 2014)

Mountain soil

Ligao loam

Guinobatan
sandy loam

Macolod-Pili

complex

Libon silty clay

Tigaon clay

Soils found in the mountains. Most mountain soils form on very steep
slopes where, as a result of denudation processes, their shallowness,
gravel-like quality, and wealth of primary minerals may be observed.

These soils are classified as Typic Eutrudepts; loam; grayish brown,
light gray to dark gray; structureless to fine granular, mellow and
friable; free from coarse skeleton.

The surface soil with depth extending down to 40 cm from the surface
is gravelly sandy loam; reddish brown to dark grayish brown;
columnar to blocky; slightly compact; numerous dark brown rounded
and angular concretions present.

The distinguishing features of Macolod series are the presence of
boulders of a mixture of fine rounded and sharp angular weathered
andesites on the surface and the dark brown color of the surface soil.

Libon is affected by eruptions of Mayon. Soils of the lowland Volcano
are geologically younger to develop even a pronounced soil profile.
Libon series is a deep alluvial soil occupying the lowland and nearly
level areas.

Tigaon series was first mapped between Mount Isarog and Lake Baao
in Camarines Sur.Tigaon series has good moisture retentivity; water
easily percolates through the soil layers.

d) Elevation

Elevation is the distance above sea level or it is the height above the sea level

measured in meters. Elevation affects slope stability. The higher the slope, the higher is the

probability for an occurrence of landslide while land in lower elevation is more prone to

floods. The elevation map of this study was derived from the DEM and IFSAR as input for

floods and landslide susceptibility modeling (Figure 5d). Elevations ranging from less than

300 m up to greater than 1200 m were categorized by 300-m equal intervals to come up

with five elevation classes: <300, 300-600, 600-900, 900-1200 and <1200.

78

MAP KEYS:

{BB Mounton Sot - narerentated
GB "G00 Cray

3
v

B Aspect

Bie

{ZZ Mowt Mosrogo

T Gunctaton Saray Loom

is

BB Mocoiod - A Complex
GB Lem Sy Coy
GBB ug00 Loom

hea
El Nomoar
TD sourraont
£3 wow
GER Noreen?
BB vom

Woterhed Forest eserve

Figure 5d. Elevation map

79

e) Rainfall

Meteorological data, specifically precipitation data for a 30-year period (1970-
2000) downloaded from WORLDCLIM version 2.1, was used to create a rainfall map.
Rainfall is considered in this study as one of the major factors for floods and landslide
occurrence and an important factor for flood and landslide analysis. The rainfall map is

shown in Figure Se.

Data for climate projections were calibrated using WorldClim 1.4. The study
selected two Representative Concentration Pathways, the RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5 in
GeoTIFF format and the covered time periods are 2050 and 2070. Model for
Interdisciplinary Research on Climate (MIROC-ESM) was downloaded and used for
CMIP5 data. MIROC-ESM was selected because it is near Japan and nearest to the
Philippines. Figure Se’ shows rainfall as an input predictor to (a) 2050 projected rainfall
(RCP 4.5); (b) 2050 projected rainfall (RCP 8.5); (c) 2070 projected rainfall (RCP 4.5);
and (d) 2070 projected rainfall (RCP 8.5). The selection of rainfall data for historical and
future climate data was based on its availability and to format its resolution in the GIS
process. Rainfall data from phase 5 of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project
(CMIPS5) was downscaled to total monthly precipitation in millimetres. This was gathered
from 30-seconds of 900-meter longitude/latitude spatial resolution down sampled to 30

meters.

Figure Se. Rainfall map

81

WGS 1984 Zone SIN

MAP KEYS:
Rainfall (mm)
GB 0-2700

2050 Rainfall RCP 8.5 Scenario

3000-3100 7% Mount Masaraga
(2800-2900 Ml > 3100 Watershed Forest Reserve
(2900 - 3000

Figure Se’. Input predictors. A. 2050 projected rainfall (RCP 4.5), B. 2050 projected
rainfall (RCP 8.5). C. 2070 projected rainfall (RCP 4.5), D. 2070 projected rainfall

(RCP 8.5)

82

J) Proximity to a river
Proximity to a river or drainage network map can be seen in Figure Sf. Drainage
density is the total length of all streams and rivers in a drainage basin divided by the total

area of the drainage basin. Drainage density provides an indirect measure of groundwater

conditions which influence landslide and flood activities.

Figure 5f. Drainage network

83

The drainage density of the study area was produced from the DEM using an
appropriate algorithm in QGIS software. Resulting map was reclassified into different

classes with equal intervals to be used in floods and landslide analyses.

g. LULC change map

The land use land cover maps from 2010, 2020, 2050, and 2070 derived earlier
were also used as input for modeling and simulating flood and landslide hazards in
MMWER. LULC classes are closed forest, open forest, perennial croplands, annual

croplands, built-up areas, inland water, bare soil, and shrubs/grassland.
Formula for modeling

The susceptibility map was classified into four susceptibility areas: low, moderate,
high, and very high. In order to produce a landslide susceptibility map, the Landslide
Susceptibility Index (LSI) was calculated by the following formula:

Formula for landslide model:

LSI = slp(0.132) + asp(0.059) + sc(0.166) + elev(0.069) + lulc(0.262) +

rf(0.248) + pr(0.064) (a)

where:

slp = slope

asp = aspect

sc = soil classification

elev = elevation

lulc = land use land cover

rf = rainfall

pr = proximity to river

Summarized weights for each landslide factor are shown in Table 11. Calculated
weight reveals that LULC, rainfall, soil class, and slope are the most important factors for
landslide, whereas elevation, proximity to the river, and aspect are the least important. The
degree of importance for landslide is as follows: 26.2% for land use land cover change,
24.8% for rainfall, 16.6% for soil class, 13.2% for slope, 6.9% for elevation, 6.4% for
proximity to the river, and 5.6% for aspect.

Results in Table 11 show that the major controlling factors for landslide in
MMWFR are land use, rainfall, and slope. The highest weights are from Land use (26.2%),
rainfall (24.8%), and slope (13.2%). It can be deduced that the most susceptible groups for
landslide occurrence fall in areas of particular LULC. Bare soil, shrubs/grassland, and
open forests have very high susceptibility to landslide. As reflected in the susceptibility
map and land use, the most hazard-prone categories are the bare soil with a weight of

37.3%, shrubs/grassland with 34.3%, and open forest at 10.2 % (Appendix K).

Table 11. Weight of each criterion used in landslide modeling

Factors 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Weight
(1) Slope 1 1.476 1.227. 2.071 1.052. 0.408 1.451 0.132
(2) Aspect 0.678 1 0.678 0.351 0.136 0.281 1,185 0.059
(3) Soil Class 0.815 1.476 1 1.380 0.803 1.780 3.005 0.166
(4) Elevation 0.483 «2.853 0.725 1 0.166 0.136 0.644 0.069
(5) Land Use 0.951 7.361 1.246 6.015 1 1.780 2.627 0.262
(6) Rainfall 2450 3.554 0562 7.361 0.562 1 6.434 0.248
(7) Pro ty to 0.689 0.844 0333 1552 0.381 0.155 1 0.064

River

Consistency ratio 0.106


85

For the flood model, the susceptibility map was classified into four susceptibility
areas: low, moderate, high, and very high. In order to produce a flood susceptibility map,

the Flood Susceptibility Index (FSI) was calculated by the following formula:

Formula for flood model:
FSI = slp(0.142) + sc(0.063) + elev(0.130) + lulc(0.081) + rf(0.310) +
pr(0.274) (b)

where:

slp = slope

sc = soil classification

elev = elevation

lulc = land use land cover

rf = rainfall

pr = proximity to river

Rainfall, proximity to a river and slope have a high degree of importance for
flooding while elevation, LULC, and soil class have a low degree of importance (Table
12). For their importance to flooding, rainfall has 31%, 27.4% for proximity to the river,

14.2% for slope, 13% for elevation, 8.1% for land use land cover, and 6.3% for soil class.

Table 12. Weight of each criterion used in flood modeling

Factors 1 2 3 4 5 6 Weight
(1) Slope 1 4.988 0.467 1635 0.762 = 0.316 0.142
(2) Soil Class 0.200 1 0.700 1.108 0.229 0.316 0.063
(3) Elevation 2.141 1.429 1 0.775 0.678 0.316 0.130
(4) Land Use 0.612 0.903 1.290 1 0.356 0.181 0.081
(5) Rainfall 1,312 4.360 1.476 2.809 1 3.380 0.310
(6) Proximity to River 3.160 3.160 3.160 5.524 0.296 1 0.274

Consistency Ratio 0.132


86

The above formulae were used to assess the relationship between factors for
flooding simulation in different time periods and scenarios. It is imperative to determine
the relation between input predictors in assessing the reliability of the model because these

input predictors vary in time, area, and climate.

To determine the landslide and flood susceptibility index, the weighted sum vector
was determined by multiplying the matrix by the vector of the criterion weights. Every
parameter in the column was multiplied by the corresponding criterion weights and the
products were summed over the rows (Lawal ef al., 2012). Saaty (1980) suggests that if the
ratio exceeds 0.1, the set of judgments may be too inconsistent to be reliable. In practice,
CRs of more than 0.1 sometimes have to be accepted. If CR equals 0 then this implies that
the judgments are perfectly consistent. In this study, the CR value 0.106 (Table 11) for the
seven parameters for landslide and 0.132 (Table 12) for the six parameters in flooding

denote that the weights assigned for each parameter are acceptable.

Simulation of Landslide and Flooding Using the Models

To simulate landslide and flood hazards, susceptibility maps were created from the
generated formula and through the generated landslide and flood susceptibility index made
through GIS MCDA-AHP. Maps of future landslide and flood occurrence were constructed
by incorporating future LULC and climate variables (RCP 4.5 and 8.5 scenarios). RCPs
represent the range of GHG emissions: intermediate scenarios or moderate emission (RCP
4.5) and scenarios with very high GHG emissions (RCP8.5). Climate scenario predicts

climate under the assumption that the present level of carbon dioxide emissions is

87

maintained at RCP 4.5, a medium case scenario, while RCP 8.5 scenario predicts a worst-
case scenario where the present level of carbon dioxide emissions changes drastically, (Gul
et al., 2014). The probability of flooding and landslide occurrence was predicted based on
the model derived from the formula and on weather variables extracted from the RCP 4.5
and 8.5 scenarios.

Given the uncertainties inherent in such climate change scenarios, landslide
occurrence, and MGB flood report were overlaid in order to evaluate the extent of
uncertainty in the study area. The influences of factors on the flood and landslide
susceptibility map were evaluated qualitatively using a selection of positive factors to
improve the prediction accuracy of the landslide susceptibility map. The influence of each
input predictor on the floods and landslide susceptibility map was qualitatively evaluated.
The landslide and flooding susceptibility classes in different time periods and scenarios
were simulated and validated by applying threshold values of the model. The simulation
models were considered threshold-dependent methods. The threshold value was needed to
categorize the area for hazards. It was based on the calculation of the area under the curve
(AUC) of the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) and Kappa index. The threshold
was adjusted to minimize the false positive and maximize the true positive points for better
results. Threshold values for flooding model are as follows: for None to Low- <0.26,
Moderate- 0.26-0.30, High- 0.30 — 0.34, Very high >0.34; while the threshold values for
landslide model, None to Low- <0.19, Moderate- 0.19-0.20, High- 0.20-0,21, Very high -

>0.21.

88

Landslide simulation model
Landslide model for the year 2020

A landslide simulation model result for the year 2020 is illustrated in Figure 6.
Landslide susceptibility was classified in terms of its susceptibility or the tendency to be
affected by events at risk. Map of landslide based on its susceptibility can be described as
very high susceptibility if it has the most landslide weight value. High, moderate, and low
susceptibility applies if it has high, mid, or lower landslide weight value, respectively. The

landslide susceptibility rating (as to value or weight) is described in Table 13.

Table 13. Description of landslide susceptibility rating

Classification Description

Very high Areas that are critical to landslide, usually with steep to very steep
slopes. Landslide occurrence is triggered by weak soil materials.

High Areas that are highly susceptible to landslide, usually with steep to
very steep slopes.

Moderate Areas that are moderately susceptible to landslide are with moderately
steep slopes. Landslide occurrences are present at moderate degree.

None to Low Gently sloping areas with generally low or no identified landslides.
Non-landslide are areas that are safe from landslide.

The corresponding estimated area and percentage of total land of MMWFR of the
landslide susceptibility classes in 2020 is shown in Figure 7. MMWFR was subjected to

different landslide values varying from low to very high susceptibility. Based on the result,

89

none to low susceptible zones cover about 47.72% (6,105.74 ha.) of the total area, 16.62
% (2,127.13 ha.) is classified as being a moderate risk zone and 12.5 % (1,599.09 ha) for
high-risk zone. Twenty-three percent (23.16%) or 2,963.28 ha of the study area is classified
as having very high risk for a landslide.

Rainfall has a strong relationship with landslide occurrence: areas with 3000-3100
mm precipitation carry 32% weight. This means that when the rainfall amount is higher
than 3000 mm, landslide can possibly happen. There is also a positive relationship between
landslide occurrence and slope. Steep slopes or slopes higher than 40° are considered with
high susceptibility while gentle slopes have a low susceptibility to landslide. At a slope of
0-10°, the weight is 2.9 %, indicating a low probability of landslide. For slopes above
10.1°-20°, the weight is 4.7%, indicating a probability of landslide. Highest rate of
landslide susceptibility is in slope greater than 40°, at weight of 53.8 %. Therefore,
landslide will likely occur if the slope angle of the land is more than 40 degrees, having a
rainfall amount of greater than 3000 mm, and with bare soil, grassland/ shrublands, and
open forest land usage. Rainfall, modifications of the natural environment through
opening up of forest or removal of forest cover, production of perennial crops, and
prolonged heavy rain and frequent typhoons are the reasons for landslide in MMWFR. The
increasing number of incidences of landslide and prolonged rainfall in the area is due to its
geographic location (Espinas, 2013). Hence, Domingo, 2017 articulates that it is crucial to
prepare an integrative disaster and mitigation plan with multi-sectoral participation to
increase the MMWFR’s surrounding communities’ readiness and safeguard their life and

property.

“eyep |TFULEI [ZA WIPLOM PUe DN 0Z0Z UO paseg Anyiqudsosns epispuey “9 amBl4

UBIH Alon

6H

SIDIEPOW [ll
M07 0} BUON

UZOM HOWIOY DIN OZOx UO

Peso Aupqudedsns epyspul)
BAIBSAY |SOIOJ POYSIOJOM,

OBoi0so~ junow FZ)

Aa dV

NUS 2UOZ WN - 7B6L SOM

une z L oO L

Vv


0ZOTZ UT SassED AITIqudoosns oprjspuE] ay) Jo [2303 Jo JUa0IOd pue yUa}xo valy “L ONBI]

yBiy Alay, y6IH ayesapoyy MO" 0} BUON

60'66S'1

ad
87967

S|
vL'SOL'9

sasseps Aypqudassns
SPl[Spuey qove Jo 918}99Y OF BIAE Jo J09)XT

YBiIH Aan, yBiy a}esapoyy MO" 0} BUON

cL le

sassep> Ayqiqudessns
apHspueyl ay) Jo wore [8)0} JO UIIIIg

92

Landslide simulation model for 2050

The simulated 2050 LULC and case scenario RCP 4.5 and 8.5 (under worst and
medium case scenario) also shows the trend of landslide susceptibility. Figure 8 under RCP
4.5 simulation, areas of low landslide susceptibility cover 89.61%, those of moderate
susceptibility 2.8 %, 2.32% with high, and 5.28 % with very high landslide susceptibility.
Areas with very high landslide susceptibility value account for 675.20 ha, those with high
category total 296.60 ha, 357.864 ha for areas with moderate values, and 11,465.87 ha
appear to have low landslide susceptibility value.

Figure 9, under RCP 8.5 simulation, the values are quite different. Areas with low
landslide susceptibility register 80.21 % (10,262.83 ha) of the total area, 6.48 % (828.58
ha) for those with moderate, 4.48% (573.50 ha) for high susceptibility, and 8.83%
(1,130.36 ha) for areas with very high landslide susceptibility (Figure 10). Figure 11
shows the extent of potential landslide areas for the year 2050, expressed in terms of total
area in hectare and percentage of landslide susceptibility.

Results show that the landslide hazard area increases from low to moderate
susceptibility. Low susceptibility zones are expected to decline while zones under
moderate to very high susceptibility will increase. It has to increase almost double in area
extent or percentage from RCP 4.5 to RCP 8.5. In the study of Bernardie and Vandromme,
2021, compared to the current period, the percentage of landslide prone areas will be higher

in the future.

$'p OLIUDOS ased TTEJUTEI OSOZ PU DIN'T 0S0Z Pare|nuns uo peseq Ayfiqudoosns apyispue’y] -g omsty

YOIH AeA

usiH Se
aO1EP0/ |
MO] 0} BUON

@AIBSEY {SBIO4 POUSIEIOM,
PBosow junoEW) 724

AD VW

NIS ®U0Z WLM - 7961 SOM

z LS o

v


"S°g OIBUDOS aseO |[BFUIEI OSOT PUB DIN] OSOT PareINuAIs uo paseq Aytyiqudsosns eprispueT “6 NIy

UB Alon

Uu6iH
eo1epow
0} 0} BUON
$'9 onoue:
pub 91m
pesog
BAIBSAY |SBIO { POYSIOJIDNA
DBouosoy junow ©

AD dw

NiS 2U0Z WLM - YB6LSOM

t o

v


“0502 UI Sasse[o AyTIqudassns opr[spue] ay} Jo [e10} Jo jUSOINd pue JUs)Xo BOY ‘OT OINSIA

yBIH ue; y6iH @}eJepoW) MOT 0} sUON, yBiH Aen a}esepo-, MO 0} SUON

a
18°S9p'bL ac
Sg OLRUAdS ]]esUIeY pue D117 OST: ¢'8 Ol4euads |jeyuIeEYy PUe D717 OSOZ i
Sp OLUADdS |[eJUIeY pue D1 OSOT G'p olseuads |JeyuIeEY Pue D171 OSOZ
sasseyo Ayyiqudeosns sasseyo Apiiqudeosns

apl{spuey aq} Jo 9.1j9e99q Ul are JO 3U9}Xq aPl[spue] 243 Jo vase 230) Jo adeyUSII0d ay],

96

Landslide simulation model for 2070

Figure 11 shows the landslide susceptibility map for a medium case scenario (RCP
4.5) projected for the year 2070. Simulated landslide indicates that about 5.9 % or 755.41
ha will have moderate landslide susceptibility, 4.13 % or 528.398 ha will have high
landslide susceptibility, 8.16% or 1,043.67 ha with very high landslide susceptibility, and
more than 81% of the total area of the watershed (about 10,467.76 ha) will have a low
probability of landslide occurrence. For the worst-case scenario (RCP 8.5), 58.11 % of the
total watershed area (7,435.17 ha) has a low probability of landslide occurrence. About
16.18 % or 2,070.25 ha has moderate landslide susceptibility, 10.28 % or 1,315.98 ha falls
under the high susceptibility class and 15.43% or 1,973.84 ha is projected to have a very
high landslide susceptibility (Figure 12).

Landslide occurrence is expected to increase in the worst-case scenario. RCP 8.5
simulation illustrates that more than half of the area (58.11 %) falls under low landslide
susceptibility while the rest of the watershed (41.89%) has moderate, high, and very high
susceptibility in 2070 (Fig. 13). Similar to the results made by Ciabatta, and Camici,
(2016), the expected rise in the occurrence of landslides in the year 2070 was determined
to be mostly connected to rainfall amount in relation to rainfall intensity, which was an
unexpected increase in the number of landslides, with an average of 45 percent. A warming
atmosphere translates to higher air moisture content, which may increase the frequency and
intensity of heavy precipitation events as a result of the thermodynamic effect (Ciabatta
and Camici, 2016). Therefore, for RCP 8.5 scenario an increase in rainfall intensity may

provide significant change in landslide occurrence.

97

Moreover, with the said percentage, the figure for areas with moderate to very high
landslide susceptibility remains alarming as this translates to 5,360.07 ha. Sloping terrain
and high elevations in the southeast and northern portions should be given priority for
intervention to prevent landslide impacts. Landslides are most common in the middle and
steep slope or upper altitude of this study area. In the lower part of the study area, landslides
are found along the riverside. In both scenarios (RCP 4.5 and 8.5) there is a probability that
the area will be exposed to natural hazards given the interplay of factors for its occurrence,

notwithstanding the degree and magnitude of each event.

Validation of landslide susceptibility areas in MMWFR

Prior to simulation modeling of a landslide, areas were inventoried using landslide
records and accomplished through training and testing data (Figure 14). Validation of the
landslide susceptibility map of MMWFR was done by examining, locating, and mapping
landslide areas via high-resolution aerial imagery from Google Earth. Validation is
performed by comparing prediction with the observations in a previous landslide
occurrence (Saha and Mandal, 2020). Observed landslide occurrence and its specific
locations were recognized using the GPS coordination system. Landslide location was
drawn using Google Earth images. Landslide locations were identified by analysis of

Google Earth images.

“Sp oLBUDOS aseO [TBJUIEI 0L0Z PU DIN’ OLO Pare|nutts uo paseq Aypiqndeosns apr{spue’y] 1] 2m3t4

UBIH AoA BS

USlH
ejO1epow
07 0} BUON

BAIOSEY {SBIOJ PEUSIOJOM
oBoinsDW junoCw & 24
AD dV

NIS 24U0Z WLM - 786L SOM

v


"$°§ OlIeUadS ased [TeyUIE OLOZ PU DINT OLOZ Pare|nuNIs uo paseq Ayfiqudeosns eplspue’] “Z| emsiy

UBIH Aen Si

UH Ge
a1O1EPOy [i
07 0} BUON
¢°8 OpDUEDs [1OJUIOY 0/02

puo 31m 0402 uo

pesoq Titewdessns @plispudy
eniesay |89104 PEYSIEJOM

eBoivsow junoy 4

A dv

NIS 8U0Z WIN - 7861 SOM


0L0Z Ur sesse[o AVI[IQudaosns apr{spue] By} Jo [e101 Jo JUsdIEd puke jUa}Xo BalY “¢] SINS!

yBIH Aue, UBIH a}eJOPOW) MO] 0} SUON YBIH Jue, yBIH ayesapo|| M07 0} SUON

ber
~ 19°¢ 0's

86E°87S

bOv'ssz

91199 01
¢ 8 OliBUDDg |[ejuIeY puke DTT OLOT Gg OLIRUDIE |[RJUIeEY puke OTN OLOT#
Sp OMBUDDS [[esUIeY pue DTNT OLOT Sp OUBUDdDEg [[ejUIeY puke DIN OLOT#
sassejo Aqijiqudazsns ssassey> Ajifiqudossns

Splispuey ay yo asezay Ul eae JO 9UIIXT| apyspuey 243 Jo vase [e}0) 9q} Jo yU9d10g

101

MAP KEY
e Za
Landslide
°
@

Figure 14. Landslide training and validation points

Shown in Figure 15 are the samples of landslide areas seen from Google Earth
imagery dated September 29, 2011. The landslide data of Project NOAH (Nationwide
Operational Assessment of Hazards) served as the reference point for non-landslide areas
(Appendix O). A total of 27 landslide points based on the 2011 images of Google Earth
(Figure 16) and 23 non-landslide points were randomly generated based on project
NOAH’: landslide data.

Furthermore, confusion matrix-based measures such as sensitivity, specificity, and
accuracy, and Kappa index were employed to test the predicted models. The resulting

landslide susceptibility models obtained a sensitivity value of 96% and specific value of

102

39% (Appendix M). This has 0.80 accuracy based on ROC and the area under the curve is
94%, which means the model is acceptable (Figure 17). The model has a Kappa index of
0.58 which is again an acceptable value based on the scale made by Landis and Koch, 1977.
This means that the model is consistent in predicting landslide areas that have the
probability of landslide occurrence in the future. Therefore, the derived value for the model
is considered accurate and acceptable. Same with the results made by Saha, Mandal, and.
Saha. 2020, the area under curve (AUC) of receiver operating characteristics (ROC) and
kappa statistics were used to assess the accuracy of landslide maps, the AUC values of the
created maps between 70-80 with overall kappa statistics of between 70-80 percent,
indicating that the models were accurate. As a result, land-use planning and future landslide
hazard mitigation methods will benefit from the mapping of landslide susceptibility zones

(Mahar et al., 2017).

Figure 15, Sample landslide areas seen from Google Earth Imagery dated September 29, 2011

103

Figure 16. Landslide distribution based on 2011 image of Google Earth

Sensitivity

Landslide
f. ROC

ROC Curve of Landslide Model

—— Reference Line|

Figure 17. ROC-AUC curve of landslide model

104

Flood simulation model

Flood simulation model for 2020

The flood susceptibility map generated from the model is shown in Figure 18. It is

classified into four categories: low, moderate, high, and very high susceptibility. Flood

susceptibility map has a very high susceptibility if it has the most flood weight value; high,

moderate, and of low susceptibility if it has high, mid, and lower landslide weight values,

respectively. The flood susceptibility rating is shown in Table 14.

Table 14. Description of flood susceptibility rating

Classification

Description

Very high

High

Moderate

None to low

Areas along water bodies and are immediately flooded during heavy
rains; likely to experience flood heights of greater than 1.5 meter and
flood duration of more than a week. These areas are subject to
widespread inundation during prolonged and extensive heavy rainfall
or extreme weather condition. These areas are the canals, tidal creek
beds, mangrove, coastal areas, lagoons, lakes, river channels and other
water bodies.

Areas along river channels immediately flooded during heavy rains;
experience flood heights of greater than 1.0 to 1.5 meter and flood
duration of several days to one week. These areas are the swamps, lake,
rivers, floodplain, and beach.

Areas likely to experience flood heights less than 0.5 to 1.0 meter and
flood duration of from several hours to a few days. Areas affected are
flood plains, valley, and rice field.

Areas found in steep slopes, sparse drainage density, experience low or
no identified flood heights. Low susceptibility to flood in areas likely
to be inundated by floods with depths less than 0.5 m from several
hours to a few days.


105

In year 2020, the extent of areas characterized as moderate, high, and with very
high flood susceptibility totaled 3,125.36 ha, 2,202.78 ha, and 2,179.14 ha, respectively.
Areas along the river networks were found to be in zones of high and very high
susceptibility to flooding. Relative importance analysis of factors affecting floods was
carried out using pairwise comparison as shown in Appendix L.

A flood simulation model result for the year 2020 is shown in Figure 18, while the
estimated area and percent of total can be seen in Figure 19. The weight of each class of
variables was determined based on the analyses of relationships between the locations of
past floods in 2011 by MGB (Appendix P).

In Table 12, Rainfall (with a value of 0.310) and proximity to the river (0.274) are
the most important factors to flooding as they registered the highest values. Other factors
are slope (0.142), elevation (0.139), soil class (0.063), and land use (0.081). These results
indicate that the variable proximity to river yielded the highest weight since most of the
flood-related weights were located at 0-100 m class. The rainfall class 3000-3100 mm has
the highest weight among other classes. This class of rainfall signals the threshold value
for flood occurrence. Any additional rainfall above this value can cause flooding,
especially when in considerable duration and in combination with other factors.

Land use classes of the annual crops, bare soil, open forest, and built-up areas, plus
proximity to the main river and having gentle slopes have the highest weighting factor
compared to other land uses. For soils, the soil class indicates that the weights of the Ligao

loam (36.2%) and Libon silty clay (24.9%) soils are higher than those of other soil class,

106

implying their greater susceptibility to flooding. In addition, areas with elevation of less
than 300 meter above sea level are vulnerable to flood occurrence.

For slope, areas with 0-10 degrees show the highest weight. Results reveal that
areas close to the river and with intense rainfall are more likely to be affected by floods.
Slope is influences surface runoff, volume, and velocity of flow. During a torrential rain
in the area, more rainwater accumulated compared to the outflow due to the gentle
topography. This resulted in the rapid rise of floodwater level within a short time. Hence,
slope should be considered an influential factor in the flood modeling. At higher elevations,
slope accounts for higher velocity and runoff, thus draining the water rapidly towards lower
levels. Other factors, namely soil, land use, and aspect are also important factors for
modeling floods although their weight value varies. Soil class is the least important factor
in flood occurrence and modeling and thereby it has a very small contribution to the
performance of the model.

The area is almost regularly affected by rainfall and tropical cyclones. The Weather
system greatly influences the occurrence of landslide and its greater impact is expressed in
terms of rainfall and typhoon. Weather system includes the northeast monsoon which is
prevalent during the months of October to March; the southwest monsoon, occurring at the
end of May to the middle of September; and the north pacific tradewinds (easterlies) which
are dominant during April to early May. Weather systems that can also affect the region
all year round is the tail end of the cold front which is prevalent during the months of
November to January; and the intertropical convergence zone (ITCZ) which is affecting

MMWER from May to the latter part of October. Long disturbances in the region's climate

107

also occur in the form of land, sea, valley, and mountain breezes. These phenomena dump
a large amount of rainfall in the area (DENR, 2015).

Meanwhile, barangays with high population densities are mostly found in low-lying
areas near the shoreline and rivers; these areas are at high to very high risk. The moderate
and low classes are those areas at high elevations with smaller population densities. The
most susceptible areas are in the Municipality of Tabaco covering barangays Oras and Sua-
Igot and a portion of barangays Buang and Tabiguian. In Polangui, areas susceptible to
flooding are the barangays of Anopol, Balinad, Cotmon, Maysua and portion of barangays
Amoguis, Balaba, Danao, and Pinagdapugan. In the municipality of Ligao, barangays
Amtic, Barayong, Basag, Busay, Herrera, and a portion of barangays Baligang and Mahaba
are areas susceptible to flooding. In the municipality of Oas, barangay Balogo and a portion
of San Ramon are the areas susceptible to flooding. These areas are considered of moderate
to very high hazard class due to their geophysical location, low elevation, low-lying
condition, and being easily flooded. Barangay boundaries and municipalities considered
susceptible to flooding were validated (Appendix Q). Determination of every variable
affecting flood occurrences was considered to validate the results. It was also validated by

the drone videos and pictures of CDRRM (Appendix R).

1
WGS 1984 - UTM Zone SIN

g
3

8
i
g
S

a
Watershed Forest Reserve
Flood Suscey Model based
on 2020 TGte Raintan wC2.1

Ne

Figure 18. Flood susceptibility based on 2020 LULC and WorldClim v2.1 rainfall data

0Z0Z UI sesse]o ATIqndeosns pooy ayy Jo 7230} Jo udoIOd puke yus}xa wa “6] ONBIT

yBiH Aue, uBiH S}EJ9pOW) MO} 0} BUON YyBIH Aue, yBIH a}esapow MO7] 0} SUON

PELL? 82°200'7

9ESZLe

4
68°L87'S

sassepd Ajijqudoosns sasseyo Ayqudeosns
pooy a4) Jo 91¥}99q UI BITE JO 9UIIXY Pooyy 24) Jo va1e [e309 Jo JUIIIIG

110

Flood simulation model for 2050

The potential climate and land-use change impacts on floods in MMWFR were
validated with reference to the flood hazard map of MGB. The future climate change was
projected under a set of Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) greenhouse gas
scenarios (RCPs 4.5 and 8.5) from the CMIP5 model simulations, MIRROC ESM.

Using simulation, flood susceptibility of the watershed based on simulated 2050
LULC and 2050 rainfall case scenario RCP 4.5, as reflected in the flood susceptibility map,
33.80% of the total area will experience flooding in various ways, from moderate to very
high flood susceptibility (Figure 20). Results show that 66.20% or 8,470.01 ha of the entire
area falls under none to low susceptibility class, 17.43% or 2,230.34 ha of moderate,
11.38% or 1,455.67 ha in high, and 4.99% or 638.71 ha in very high susceptibility category.
Projecting further using a worst-case scenario (RCP 8.5) in Figure 21, flood susceptibility
(based on simulated 2050 LULC and 2050 rainfall) yields the same trend, with the none to
low flood susceptibility class accounting for more than half of the watershed, i.e., 57.07%
or 7,302.40 ha, with the remainder (42.93%) of the total area accruing to areas of moderate
to very high susceptibility. Specifically, 2,273.50 ha or 17.77% are with moderate
susceptibility, 1,925.68 ha or 15.05% with high susceptibility, and 1,293.15 ha or 10.11%
with very high flood susceptibility (Figure 22). High flood susceptible areas are those near
the river, having flat terrain, of lower elevation, and near a river network. Areas not at risk
to flooding or of low susceptibility are found in higher elevation, steep slopes, and forested
areas. Simulation results revealed that flooded areas are found to have moderate, high, and

very high flood susceptibility. Communities and other settlements have been observed in

111

areas with low to very high flood susceptibility. The Municipality of Tabaco, Ligao and
Polangui are of high susceptibility. Municipalities and barangays that are susceptible to
flooding are listed in Appendix Q.

For both scenarios, around 17% of the area will be at moderate risk. However, the
extent is larger in RCP 8.5 for zones of high and very high susceptibility compared to RCP
4.5. The hazard maps show changes in the distribution pattern of weather variables as they
change through time. The flood hazard area based on RCP 8.5 is much larger than that
generated by RCP 4.5. For the latter scenario (RCP 4.5), the concentration of flood-prone
areas is the south and southwest portion of MMWFR while in RCP 8.5 scenario, areas
prone to flooding are in northeast, south, and southwest. The intensity of floods is expected
to increase for both scenarios. Damage due to flood is projected to increase and is likely to
be serious in the RCP 8.5 scenario rather than the RCP 4.5 scenario. The projected flood
damage will likely be affecting the economy of the four municipalities in MMWFR during
prolonged and heavy rainfall and typhoons, especially the areas for agriculture,
commercial, residential, and built-up zones.

As agreed in the study of Kim, Lee, Park, (2019), flood risk increased as the RCP
scenarios of the watershed, future flood hazards owing to hydrological risk should be
addressed, and as the flood risk is expected to increase in the future compared to the
present, comprehensive flood control plans and methods for hydraulic structural stability
should be adopted (Espinas, 2013). Future climate change, according to the National
Research Council (2001), is dependent on the expected scenario for future climate forcing

as well as climate sensitivity.

“S"p OUBUDOs aseo [TBFUTEI QSOZ PUP D'INT OSOZ Pare|nuNs uo poseq Arpiqudessns poo}. ‘07 ant


“$°g oMeUads aseo [JeJUIEI OSOZ PUB DIN’ 0SOZ Pare|nuns uo paseq AyIqndaosns poor [Z an31y

U6IH Non
ub
aDIapOW
SUON 0} MOT
pub Sint 1 os0z uo
Pesng [Epo Ajiiiqudessns pools
AIOSOY [SBIOJ POYSIGIOM

oBoosoy junow & 24
AD dvw

NIS ®U0Z WIN - 786 SOM


OSOZ Ul Sasse]D AyITIQudeosns poor sy} Jo [210) Jo JUDOIOd pue yua}xe var “ZZ SINSI

YBIH Kuen 4BIH SIEJ@POW =—-—- MO] 0} SUON. uBIy Kan, u6IH aeJepOW MO] 0} BUON

SLE67 1b

89'S76 4

oselz'z ve Oeee SOo'st LLY EYL

Ov Z0E'2

O'0L9'8
02°99
$'g OlBUaDS [eyureY pue DINT 0so7

Sp ObRUaDg |[eJUIeY pue 91NT 0S07a $'g OlBUADS |[eUIEY pue DTNT 0S07B

Sp OLeUaDS [feyuIeY puke DIN 0Ss07B
sassepd Apyiqudassns
poop 243 Jo 21¥}99Y UI vate JO 3UIIXT sasse[ Aqyiqidadsns
pooy 24) Jo Bare [e303 Jo JUIDI9g


115

Flood simulation model for 2070

Simulating the RCP 4.5 scenario, results show that 9.06% (1,159.20 ha) and 14.64%
(1,873.70 ha) of the total area will be under very high and high flood susceptibility,
respectively (Figure 23). For those with moderate and low susceptibility, the zones will
extend up to 17.36% (2,221.65 ha) and 58.93% (7,540.19 ha), respectively. Results of RCP
8.5 scenario simulation is shown in Figure 24. Areas of very high to high flood
susceptibility accounted for 14.29% (1,828.66 ha) and 16.71% (2,138.70 ha) of the total
area, respectively. Meanwhile, those with low and moderate flood susceptibility cover
about 43.93% (5,620.28ha) and 25.07% (3,207.47ha), respectively. Figure 25 show that
for RCP 4.5 scenario, less than half (41.07%) of the total area are of moderate, high, and
very high flood susceptibility, while for RCP 8.5 scenario, these susceptibility classes
account for more than half (56.07%) of the total area. Agricultural areas are more
susceptible to flooding than other land-use types. Future problems will most likely hit the
agriculture sector as these are areas vulnerable to floods. More than half of the total area
of MMWFR is in agriculture dominated by perennial crops (coconut, cacao, pili, and
others) and followed by areas planted to annual crops, vegetables, and rice. Increasing
susceptibility to flooding will inundate rice fields, agricultural and residential areas. Crops
will continue to suffer damage due to floodwaters. Floods can inundate farmlands and
cause major damage to crop. Soil health will also be affected. Damage to farms from a
single flood can last multiple seasons. Subsequently, this will lead to lower yield, if not

losses.

116

The increased flood occurrences must be a major priority of the government because
they have an impact on an area's physical and socioeconomic conditions (Acosta, et al.,
2016). Problems relating to risks, particularly flooding, are complicated and genuine, and
should be assessed using a variety of expertise. Siddayao, et al. 2014, emphasized that the
natural hazard actions require the expertise of hydrologists, meteorologists, geologists, and
science professionals and experts. Having such professionals on board ensures that the
inputs, processes, and outputs are scientifically sound, dependable, and sustainable.

Also, there’s a need for government intervention to develop strategies for flood
protection for the province of Albay and the communities within MMWFR. This is in
accordance to the study of Siddayao, et al. 2014, local governments can develop land-use
regulations that are well-suited with natural hazard risk and fit within the timeframe of
natural processes. Hence, local governments and other stakeholders can utilize the flood
susceptibility maps as a reference to prepare for probable floods for future scenario, or
better yet, support suitable land-use policy that will reduce the threat of flooding to people's
lives. Mitigating the effects of flooding is highly important. A flood warning system can
reduce the likelihood of flooding. Early notice of an impending flood to communities in

flood-prone locations can help people prepare to bring themselves and properties to safety.

$"p OlreUsos aseo [TEFUTEI LOZ PU D'INT OLOZ PareInuNs uo paseq AypIqndaosns poopy “Ez ENB

UBIH Alon
u6iH
@jD1@POW
@UON 0} M07
S'v ONbUeDS joa 0202

DBowsow junow FZ
AD dVN

NIS 2U0Z WN - 786L SOM


$'8 OLeUOS aseO [TFT 0Z0Z PUB DIN'T OLOT Parejnuns uo paseq Aypiqudeosns poly ‘pz 2MB1J

UO AoA

SiH
aEpoW
‘@UON O} M07

pejselold uo

pesoa pan Amtaudessns Bool
BAIESEY {SA/IO4 PEYSIOJONM

pBaiDsO- suNow FZ
ADI dvWW

NIS 8U0Z WIN - 7861 SOM.


OLOT UI Sasse]o AjTIQndoosns poor aU) JO [210 Jo JWOOJEd pue JUd}Xe waIY ‘SZ SINT]

UBIH Aap, u6IH @JEJOPO|WY ~—- MO] 0} BUEN, y6iH Aen, uBIH @YeLapOW —«- MO]. 0} BUON,

82°029'S
6 09S‘L =
£6°8S
$8 OMBUDDS [[esjuIeY puke DTNT OLOTO $8 OWBUDDS [[eyUIeY pue OTNT 0S07o
Sp OMBUADS ]eyuIeY puke DINT OLO7S Sp ORUADg |[eyueY pue DTNT 0S07
sasse[s Aq1qudaosns Sasseyo

Poor 943 Jo a18399q UT Bare Jo 300)Xq Ayqudaosns pooy ay} Jo ease [e40} Jo 3U9940q

120

Validation of flood susceptibility areas in MMWFR

The flood model was calibrated through adjustment of the thresholds by computing
ROC-AUC and other parameters. It was assessed using the confusion matrix and the Kappa
statistics to determine if it has met an overall satisfactory performance. The calibrated
model, the 100 years return period from the output map of MGB and data from project
NOAH all served as a reference to simulate flood susceptibility. Flood susceptibility maps
were generated using GIS-AHP. Next, the generated map was validated based on ROC-
AUC and Confusion matrix. The process of computing AUC-ROC and confusion matrix
is the same as the validation for landslides. The only difference is that in flood validation,
it uses a 100-year return period using MGB asa baseline. To provide a flood susceptibility
map, the collected data were randomly divided into two groups: one for model training
(70%) and one for model validation (30%). In order to quantitatively evaluate the accuracy
of the models in the training and validation steps, threshold-independent and -dependent
methods were applied. Among threshold-dependent methods, AUC ROC and Kappa index
were selected because they are useful evaluation metric for assessing the accuracy of the
model. AUC ROC curve is calculated based on Sensitivity and Specificity. Validation of
the models was done by the ROC-AUC (Figure 26). The training and validation data set
were sampled from flooded and non-flooded areas. Performance of the flood model was
measured using the corresponding test data set and by creating a confusion matrix. The
accuracy of the model was used to manually compute the predicted probability of each case
of the test data set. A cut-off value of 0.5 was used for the predicted probability. In turn,

the predicted probability of each case was then compared to the observed outcome of the

121

flood occurrence. The correctly predicted and wrongly predicted cases of occurrence and
non-occurrence of floods were tabulated (Appendix N) to compute for the overall correct
percentage of the flood model. Data to check and cross-validate the flooding event were
obtained from the MGB (Appendix P).

Results indicate a very high AUC value in both the training and testing phases. This
implies high reliability of the models. Assessment of flood susceptibility model in ROC-
AUC yielded a very satisfactory rating at 98% AUC, 0.95 accuracy based and with a Kappa
index of 0.89. The values denote a very acceptable prediction accuracy of the AHP model
for both cases. In assessing model accuracy, the use of AHP MCDA provided accurate
models (Appendix N). An AUC value of 98% and a Kappa index of 0.89 signify a strong

classification and confirm the accuracy and acceptability of the model.

ROC Curve of Flood Model

Figure 26. ROC-AUC for flood model

122

Integrated Hazard Mapping

Mountainous areas like MMWFR are prone to landslide and flood hazards. This
section evaluates the spatial distribution of risk from multiple hazards. Identification of
highly susceptible areas to landslide and flooding is an important concern for management
intervention. The multi-hazard risk map is shown in Figure 27 using RCP 4.5. Figure 28,
on the other hand, uses RCP 8.5 based on a combination of the two hazard risk maps (a
combination of flooding and landslide susceptibility maps). Extent of area of each
susceptibility class in a multi-hazard susceptibility map for the two natural hazards in the
area has been estimated. The combination of two hazards using two scenarios, RCP 4.5
and RCP 8.5, resulted in 16 different susceptibility classes (Table 15), ranging from low
landslide and low flooding to a very high landslide and very high flooding susceptibility.

To create an integrated multi-hazard map, the results of individual assessment of
hazards were combined. The combined hazard or integrated multi-hazard map is used to
aid forecasting of areas susceptible to various hazards in a particular setting. As it interacts
with other hazards in one particular area, a hazard may intensify in frequency, distribution,
and duration such as when there is a prolonged and heavy rain. Hence, combining the
relationships and interactions between hazards poses a big challenge to the management.
Once accomplished, the multi-hazard map could be useful in controlling the interactions
of hazards in MMWFR. Likewise, the information generated from an integrated hazard
map can be a key input for effective planning and management of people and their
activities. Understanding the relationship between hazards that may occur in one area may

lead to proactive management and hazard mitigation (Nelson, 2018).

123

Integrated flood-landslide susceptibility map for 2050

With the RCP 4.5 scenario, the results of the multi-hazard susceptibility are
reflected in Figure 27. Areas with low susceptibility to hazards both in flooding and
landslide totaled 7,709.98 ha, accounting for 60.26 % of the total area of MMWFR. The
rest of the areas (40%) falls in different combinations of moderate to very high
susceptibility to landslide and flooding spread over the four municipalities covering the
MMWER. In specific values, 45 ha are predicted to be susceptible to very high landslide
and very high flooding, 10.85 ha are into high flooding and high landslide, 20.87 ha for
very high landslide and high flooding, and 26.50 ha are susceptible to high landslide and
very high flooding (Table 15).

Almost the same trend can be seen with the results of multi-hazard with RCP 8.5
scenario (Figure 28), where areas with low susceptibility to flooding and landslide
constitute 6,725.70 ha or 52.56 % of the total area. Less than half (47.44 %) of the total
area predicted to be in moderate, high and very high susceptibility classes (Table 15).
Breakdown are as follows: 422.621 ha are susceptible to very high landslide and very high
flooding, 198.07 ha for high landslide and high flooding, 133.698 ha for high landslide and
very high flooding, and 53.689 ha for very high landslide and high flooding.

The generated multi-hazards maps in MMWFER in both scenarios indicate that the
two hazards may intersect and can occur simultaneously. Multi-hazard map results were
validated in the office of CDRRM together with the susceptibility map of MGB. With the
analysis of multi-hazard maps using AHP in MMWFR, the result gives enough

representation of the actual situation in the field and with existing disaster events that

124

happened based on flooding documents from the MGB and the landslide from the Noah
project. It can be concluded that the multi-hazard class generated from the AHP-MCDA
method can provide a close semblance to the actual conditions in the field. Based on the
results, floods may overlap landslides and vice versa. This signifies that there’s an increase
in the number of disasters, resulting in a greater susceptibility and a greater frequency of
dangerous events. Natural disasters are becoming more powerful because, as stated by Van
Westen, (2013), the main reasons for this increase are a higher frequency of intense hydro-
meteorological events, which are most likely linked to climate change and land use land

cover change.

This result alerts the management to the possibility of experiencing both flood and
landslide hazards in one area. Further, climate events and climate-induced slow-onset
changes have a significant impact on the living conditions of people and communities in
disaster-prone areas. As the climate system has warmed, the observed frequency, intensity,
and duration of some extreme weather events have changed (Eckstein, et al., 2017).
Therefore, mitigation and adaptation should be the main concern, a forward-looking
adaptation and mitigation strategy on climate change adaptation in line with the Sustainable
Development Goals are utmost important to be effectively put into action in an orderly and
regular manner. The important responsibilities of the government are to increase public
resources for adaptation, as well as to address the disparity in financial support provided

for mitigation and adaptation.

a EE EEN

oce 1797 seo 9L0'Sb Smpoog ysrq AroA pue epyspue] ysty A1oA,
wo 689'€S 910 ZL8'07 Smpoog yary pue opyspue] ysry Aro,
9v'0 8158s 610 LIE'bZ Surpooy, ayesopour pu oprispuey ysry Az2A,
9b 87S°S6S Lusty 9€6'p8S Surpoog Moy pue apyspuey ysry AA
v0'l 869°€E1 170 10S'97 Surpoog ySry AzoA pue opyspuey YStH
ssl 1L0°861 80°0 zs8'°01 Surpooy y8ry pue opyspue] YstH
70 LOTTE +10 seal Sarpoog oyesopour pur spyspuel YStH
sol 1ZS'01Z 88'1 968 0bZ Surpooy mo] pue epryspuey Yat
660 69T-LZ1 1€0 £46 6€ Surpoog yay A1aA pur apr|spue] ayes9po|
slo Lsv'96 €'0 rS691 Surpoog y8ty pue epyspuel oes7poW]
€6'1 LLO'LbZ vr'0 ysT'9s Surpooy syes9pour pue opr[spuey oy29poW,
08'z SLELSE 161 E18 bbz Supooy Mo] pue epr[spuey se39po]
£16 ZO LOTT 7) 8SS°798 Smpoog ystq A19a pue opyispue] MOT
S06 97'8SI‘T ses 19° TLOT Surpooy y8ry pue spryspuel MoT
Lv'6 OV IZT €7'bl O€ 178'T SuTpoog eye1apour pur opr[spuey MoT
957s OL'SZL‘9 9709 86°60L°L SuIpooy Mo] pur spr[spue] MOT
% $918}99}H % $07e}00H
$8 dou Sp dou Aygiqudassng
vauv

i

0S0z 289K su 103 AuIqudeosns aprspue] pue pooy poressow] “ST 91921

S'p Olleuads ased [[eUTeI pue Q¢OZ Jo} deur AyTIqudeosns apy|spue|-Poog payeiTouy “LZ 9314

Bujpools YB} AeA - eplispUoT UBIH Aon
Bu;pools YBIH - eplispuc) YBIH Alen Bie
Bu|poo|s ex0,0POW - ePIsPUDT YBIH AJEA
‘Bujpools YBIH Aue, - epjispuo7 UGH
Bupoo|s uBIH - epyspuo) UB ey

Bujpoors erosepow - epyspuol YBIH ll
Bulpoo| UBIH Aue, - epiispuD) eO1ePON NT

Bujpoo)y UBIH - epjispuo) e:osepoW |"
Burpoo4 eyo1apo; - epyspuo) e1D/epOW,
Bulpoojy mo1 - epuspun7 YBIH AeA ER
Bujpools mo} - epspuoT UEIH
Sulpools mo} - epiispuoy e10JEPOW fill
Bujpool4 yBjH AeA -epyispuo1mo7 Be
Bulpoois UBIH - ePIIsPUDT M07 [ill
Gulpoo)4 eyo1epoW - epyspuD] Mor
Burpoo|y mo} -epyspuD)] MoT
S'V OUDUEGDS [1DJUIDY OSOT
Uo pesng Ay)!Gndeosns epyispuD7
Pun poojs peyos6equ) 0907
OEWENICS TY
@AJOEOY 1S0104 POYSIAIOM
eBoinso~ now 77]

AD dW

NIS 2U0Z WN - ¥BELSOM


$°g oLreuads aszo |]eJUTe pue O¢OZ 10} deus Ayijiqudeosns aprspuel-pooy payed] -gz omd1y

Bujpoo1s UBIH Aue, - epyspUDT UBIH Aen BEE
Buipoors UBIH - epispuo7 YBIH Aen
Bujpools eysepow - epyspud UBIH Alen lili
Bujpoo) yBIH Ae, - epiispucy UBIH
Bupools uBIH - apyspuo7 UBIH
Buypooly exosepow - epiispudT YBIH |i)
Burpoots uBIH Aiea - ep}jspud1 e1D1epOW EN
Bujpools UBIH - epjispuD) e1018POW il)
Burpoo)s eyD18POW - eplspUD] e;01EPON,
Burpoo|s mo} - epyspudT YBIH Aion
Buypooly mo} - epjispuo1 UBIH
Bujpoojj Mo} - apijspuo) e1DJepoW [ily
Burpooly YB Aen -epiispuD1 Mo}
Burpools YBIH - epyspuo1 MO1 NT
Bulpoo)s e10,PoW - eplispuD] MoT
Bujpools mo} -eplispuD] Mo
9°B OFDUEDS 110)UIDY OGOZ
Ue pespg Ayiiqndeosns epijspuny
Pup poo|s peyo16equ1 0s0z
WEWENES LY
ONOSEY 130104 PEYSIOIOM
pBoisow wunow OZ

A dV

NIS 24U0Z WAN - 78ELSOM


128

Integrated flood-landslide susceptibility map for 2070

Susceptibility map for the year 2070 showing the combination of landslide and
flooding hazards is shown in Figure 29. In both RCP 4.5 and 8.5 scenarios, the map
demonstrates the hazard potential in every susceptibility class (Table 16), distributed in
four municipalities covering the MMWFR. Considering LULC and RCP 4.5 and 8.5
scenarios, by the end of 2070, the area will highly experience both hazards simultaneously
as projected. Almost half of the area (49.59%) will be exposed to different susceptibility
classes while 50.41% will fall under low landslide and low flooding in RCP 4.5 (Figure
29). For the RCP 8.5 scenario, however, 76.68% of the area will experience different
combinations of moderate to very high susceptibility to flooding and landslide, while the
rest (23.32%) will have low landslide and low flooding possibility (Figure 30).

Results also show that some of the slopes and valleys have high multi-hazard
potential. Therefore, to prevent problems caused by landslides and flooding, the high multi-
hazard susceptibility zones must be investigated carefully. Necessary actions or measures
must be applied. Some settlement areas are highly susceptible to both flooding and
landslide and these two hazards can occur simultaneously. Determination of areas
susceptible to landslide and flooding and the settlements that are at risk of very high
susceptibility must be done expeditiously. The portions of MMWFR have very high
susceptibility that means it is prone to combined flood and landslide hazards. It must be
given immediate attention. This action is distinguished from the action needed to intervene

in low lying places with very high susceptibility to both landslide and flooding. The multi-

129

hazard map is important since this provides valuable information that will help meet the
goal which is to reduce flooding and landslide in a particular area.

It is important to determine which among the contributory factors are influencing
floods and landslides. This may include proper methods for analyzing the effect of these
factors on the occurrence of landslides and floods. The major contributors to flooding are
not only climate-related but also anthropogenic activities that adversely affect watersheds.
One of the main socio-economic drivers for flooding and landslides are changes in land
use. Changes from arable farming systems to grassland, field drainage, and changes in
forest covers, can all increase runoff and incidences of flooding and landslide. Decrease in
vegetation or forest cover can increase subsurface and surface runoff, hence, may result in
flooding, landslide activity, and soil loss.

Furthermore, the spatial combination of multiple hazards can be used as a form of
prevention, property protection, public education and awareness, natural resource
protection, and emergency services (DMA, 2000). It can also be used as an effective guide
in prioritizing rehabilitation and restoration efforts of concerned agencies as well as the
determination of relevant and necessary environment-related initiatives in the area. The
nature of inter-connectivity of terrestrial and hydrologic feature of the watershed unit
means the connectedness of upstream and downstream areas. In this matter, the
determination of the integrated hazard in the upstream area will have significant impact to
the amelioration of hazard impact in the downstream communities. In general,
determination of multiple hazards will have important implication on policy, the

safeguarding of the human lives, and the conservation of the environment.

a a

el 619 9ST 190 685° LL Burpooy y3ty Alon pure sprispuey ysty A10A,

Isl Zre'€61 Lv'0 L8€'09 Suipooy yy pue spryspuey ysty Aro,
c1Lé C67 ILE vs'°0 11069 Zurpooy syeropoul pue opyispuey ysty A190,
LS 01 6S TSET Us) 89°98 Surpooy Mo] pue spyspuey ys1y Aro\,
18'T EIT LEZ 860 ZLLSZL Surpoog ySry AA pue aplispuel YStH
760 eLil ve0 6S EF Surpooy yary pue aprspuey Yst}
y9'l L6E 607 ££'0 708 7 Zuipooyy aye19poul pue splispue] YSIH
76S LYGLSL Lz €€T9LE Surpooy Moy pue oprjspuey YstH
S87 £6€ V9E +60 67L 071 Surpooy Yy8ty AJoA pur opl[spue] a}2J9poyy
60° ve0'6EI 1L0 89°06 Surpooy ysty pue oprspuel se9poyy
eT S186 160 106911 ZuIpooy syeJopoul pue spl[spue] o}eJopoy|
766 L9°897'I vee 72 Le Suipooyy Mo] pue apryspuey] aes9poyy
08°21 96: LE9‘T IL8 revit Surpooy ysty AoA pure opl[spue] MOT
18°8 6€LZI'T v6 01 76'66€'T SuIpooyy ysty pue opljspuey] MoT
sel 09891 SLi 69°€0S‘T Zurpooy se1opour pue opl|spue] MoT
7E EZ LE E867 1v'0S €8'6bb'9 SuIpooy Mo] pue apr[spue] MOT
% sorejooH % sore}ooH
$8 dou Sr dou Aqiqudassng
Vauav

a ne

0L0Z 2804 ayy 10} ATIQndeosns pooy pue epr|spuEy poyersow] “9] 2192L

Sp OlBUaNS aseo [[eJUTeI pue 0/07 J0j deur AyrIQudeosns apr{spue|-pooy payday] “67 oMdIY

Bujpooys uBIH Aue - epiispu0 BIH en BD
Burpoors uBIH - eplispud7 UEIH AeA
Burpooly ayosepo; - aprsPUo) UBIH Alon NY
Bupoois UBIH Aue, - eplispuD] UB
Bujpoois BIH - epyisPuoT YBIH Be
Bujpoojs e1.epo; - eP{sPUd) UBIH [Hl
Bulpools UBIH Ae, - epyspUud] eyD/ePOW ENT
Buypoots uBIH - epyspUD) e,018POW |)
Buipools e10s8poW - ep||sPUD] e10;8PON

Bupoo}y mo} - epispuD UBIH
Bujpoo)4 mo} - epyjspUud] e}0/ePOW [iy
Burpooty UBIH Ale, -eplispuo1 Mo) ER

Burpools YBIH - eplispuD1 MO? [lll
Burpoo}y erDs2po; - epIispUdT Moy
Bupools Mo1 -eplispuo7 MoT
SP ONDUADS |/0jUIDY 0407
uo pespg Ayiqndeosns epjispuD7
Pub poo}4 peyosBe3ul 0407
juEWENeS TY
BAIOS9BY 1S8J04 POYSIEIOM
pBosnsow yunow FZ

AD dVN
NIS 2U0Z WL - 7BEL SOM

z t 0

v


“¢'g oLTBUaas aseo j[esUTeI PUR QL OZ 10 deus AyyIgndeosns apy{spuel-pooy paredaqu] “OE am31y

Buypoo)s YBIH son - epspUCT UBIH AOA HE
Burpools yBIH - epispuD1 UBIH Aen Se
Burpoojs a10/2P0N - ep}IsPUD] YBIH Aan
Bujpoo}y YBiH Aen - epyspuo1 UEIH
Bujpooty UBIH - eplispUoT UBIH ey
Buypoo)4 exosepo; - epyspUuo) UBH ill)
Bujpools YBIH AeA - epiispud] e:OePOW NT
Burpoo)s UBIH - apyispUuo) e1D/2pOW jy)
Bulpoo}y eyouePoW - epyispud] eroJePON
Bupooly mo] - epiispuoy UBH AeA Ba
Bulpoojs Mo} - epyispuo) UBIH
Bujpoo)4 mo) - epiispUd] a1DJePON
Burpool YBIH Ae, -epyspuo1 Mo7
Burpoots u6IH - epyspUuo) Mo7 [TT
Buypoos eyos9poN - epyspUo) Mo)
Sujpools mot -epyispud1 Mo7
9°8 OMDUSDS |IDJUIPY 0L07
uo pesog Ayiqndessns epiispuny
Pup pools peyos6equ} 0207

WWEWENES JY
@AIOSOY 190104 PEYSIOIOM
oBouosow wunow 74

AD dvw
NIS 8U0Z WIN - YB6L SOM

ume z Lt o L

v


133

Reliability of the Climate and Land-Use Sensitive Natural Hazard
Simulation Models for MMWFR

This study embarked on explaining the dynamics of land use and land cover change,
susceptibility of the MMWFR to landslide and flooding, and the generation of simulation
models with seven input factors that can influence landslide and flooding. These models
were tested and found to be accurate, sensitive, and specific enough to be used to forecast
change in MMWFER and prevent heavy damages on downstream communities, commercial
establishments, infrastructures, and production systems.

The hypotheses of this study (Box 1) were also proved. The main findings support
the hypotheses that LULC of the watershed influenced the development of the landslide
and flooding susceptibility of MMWFR and that the identified seven parameters (rainfall,
LULC, slope, aspect, proximity to the river, soil classification, and elevation) positively
affect the occurrence of natural hazards of the MMWFR and can therefore be considered
as inputs in the generation of simulation models to determine susceptibility to landslide
and flooding in various periods using different rainfall scenarios. Finally, this study
successfully used a GIS-based Analytic analytical hierarchy process (AHP) using multi-

criteria decision approach (MCDA) to accurately predict climate-induced natural hazards.

Box 1. Hypotheses of the study

Hol: The MMWFR’s Land Use Land Cover change can significantly affect the present and future
conditions of the watershed to the development of the natural hazard.

Ho2: The identified parameters such as rainfall, LULC, slope, aspect, proximity to the river, soil
classification, and elevation are the main contributing factors to natural hazards.

Ho3: The use of GIS Analytic analytical hierarchy process (AHP) as a multi-criteria decision
approach (MCDA) can be used to accurately predict climate-induced natural hazards.


134

1. Implication of LULC to natural hazards

Agricultural areas dominate the MMWFR, accounting for approximately 64% of the
total area, with perennial crops contributing 43% while annual crops 21% of the total
watershed area in 2010. This trend continues in 2020, 2050, and 2070. Over time,
agricultural production continued to expand, along with the conversion of other land uses
because Albay’s economy is dependent on agriculture. Perennial crops such as coconut,
abaca, mango, and banana are the major perennials, while rice is the most important annual
crop in Albay province.

Forest consists of 33% of the total area of MMWFER, with closed forests accounting
for almost 20% and open forest at around 13% of the total area in 2010. Open forest
increased in area up to 15 % while closed forest declined slightly to19.64% in 2020. A
small portion of the closed forest was converted for agricultural purposes, became an open
forest, or simply changed to other land uses such as for perennial crops, shubs/grassland,
built-up and bare soil. Nearly 15% of the total area is predicted to become an open forest
by the year 2050 and 2070. Built-up areas account for 1% and 1.75% of the total area of
MMWEFER in 2010 and 2020, respectively. This implies a continued increase in areas
intended for commercial, industrial and residential purposes in the last10 years.

LULC changes include the expansion of agriculture and built-up areas, and a
significant trend towards deforestation. Conversion of closed forest and increase in built
up areas are contributing to the occurrence and greater impacts of natural hazards. The
modifications of LULC towards declining forest cover, expansion of agricultural

production and increasing development on built-up areas such as commercial, industrial

135

and residential have a direct and indirect impact on landslide occurrence. The impact of the
changes in LULC on landslide was observed by Forbes ef al. (2013). The authors claimed
that the incidence of landslides has increased above the natural level as human development
spread into hilly and mountainous areas. Landslides can be caused by human activities such
as road and building development. Slopes are vulnerable to collapse as a result of changes
in land use such as removal of forest cover and other forms of LULC modification.

In the study of Apollonio et al. (2016), LULC was seen as one of the many factors
to be considered in the assessment of flooded areas. Land use practices influence flooding,
and the most notable changes are found in land covers affected by agricultural expansion,
development of built-up areas, declining forest cover, and other LULC modifications.
There is a correlation between flooding and areas where urbanization and agricultural
practices are high; flooding increase with an increase in this two-land usage. Also, in this
watershed, flooding can be extremely harmful when the forest cover changes abruptly.
Water can penetrate the soil in vegetation-covered areas, making them less prone to
flooding. Conversely, declining forest cover could mean greater surface runoff due to less
water absorption (by the vegetation), thus, increasing flooding.

Furthermore, the increasing trend of expanded agricultural areas (approximately
64%) and shrinking forest area (at 19 % closed forest and 15% open forest) bears much on
flooding. It is therefore justified to carry out restoration efforts to mitigate the probable

impacts of natural hazards.

136

2. Correlation of causative factors to natural hazards

Landslide and flood simulation modeling is critical in determining the relationship
between the defined input predictor and other components in the study area.
The relationship between a natural hazard and its input predictors varies across time,
LULC, and climate. In creating a model, the different characteristics of each factor were
weighed and the corresponding weights were normalized to determine the consistency
ratio. The normalized values were used in the development of simulation models under
the analytic hierarchy process which served as basis for deriving the susceptibility index.

Degree of importance of causative factors are as follows: for landslide, 26% of land
use land cover change, 25% of rainfall, 17% of soil class, 13% of slope, 7% of elevation,
6% of proximity to the river, and 6% of aspect. In the study of Saha et al. (2020), the slope
has the highest AHP weight value, while aspect has the lowest. Rainfall, soil class, and
distance from the river all contributed to the occurrence landslide. In this study, the same
trend is observed, with slope and rainfall contributing more to the occurrence of landslide
as indicated by a high AHP weight value, while aspect is the least contributing factor. But
the highest value is attributed to LULC. Also, as reflected in the flood and landslide hazard
map for the year 2050 and 2070 in the RCP 4.5 and 8.5 scenarios, the agricultural areas
coincided with the areas susceptible to natural hazards. It was projected those hazardous
areas are under moderate to very high risk in 2050 and 2070. Under the RCP 8.5 scenario,
the land-use types most likely to be susceptible to landslide hazards are open forest
(moderate susceptibility), shrubs/grassland (high), and bare soil (very high risk). It is

expected that there will be a considerable increase in areas under high and very high-risk

137

classes from the present period to the future. In other words, the casualties from landslides
will likely increase in the future.

For flooding, the AHP weight value are as follows: 31% of rainfall, 27% of
proximity to the river, 14% of slope, 13% of elevation, 8% of land use land cover, and 6%
of soil class. In a study by Rahmati et a/. (2016), flooding factors with the highest values
are distance to a river, elevation, and slope. In this research, the main contributing element
to flooding is rainfall. This may be so because of Albay’s geographic location which is
along the typhoon belt. Restoration of open forests is a necessary action towards mitigation.
Local government units of Albay should be aware of the role of trees in abating flooding.
3. Use of GIS analytical hierarchy process (AHP) using multi-criteria decision

approach (MCDA) to accurately predict climate-induced natural hazards.

Natural hazard susceptibility map of the MMWFR was generated using a GIS-based
MCDA approach with application of the AHP method. The simulation models to predict
the major flood and landslide susceptibility zones for 2050 and 2070, using RCP 4.5 and
8.5 scenarios. The extent of flood and landslide hazard areas are larger when the RCP 8.5
scenario is applied than with the RCP 4.5 scenario. The uncertainty of climate change
scenarios was also considered by considering the rainfall amount from Worldclim.

For the landslide susceptibility map, the output map was compared with reference
map produced by Project Noah while for the flood susceptibility map, the output was
compared to the existing map of the MGB. While the approach of this study differed from
the methods applied to develop the reference maps of the DENR and the DOST, the outputs

are comparable. This implies that the landslide-flood hazard zoning map produced through

138

the process of MCDA is reliable. The MCDA and GIS techniques appear to be capable of
providing credible hazards susceptibility predictions and can be recommended for
assessing hazard potential, particularly in the absence of physical data (Rahmati ef al.,
2016). Also, in the study of Kavzoglu,et al , (2014), comparing different approaches and
accuracy assessment, both gave acceptable results, while the GIS-based MCDA method

produced slightly better results than the other method.

Finally, the AHP and GIS methodologies are recommended for assessing hazard
potential. Findings revealed that the AHP approach has the potential to produce high-
quality results, that means, natural hazards may be predicted with accuracy and reliability.
Findings on the model evaluation were satisfactory, thus, MCDA AHP model can be used
in landslide and flooding hazard susceptibility assessment and in predicting future
incidents. Furthermore, the multiple hazards overlay that produced the integrated flooding
and landslide maps can be a basis for policy recommendation for land cover and natural

hazard management in MMWFR.

CHAPTER V

SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Summary

The study was conducted to simulate multi-temporal and scenario-based natural
hazards incorporating the important drivers such as land use, land cover change and
climate change. It assessed the dynamics of land-use change in the area, both historically
(2010-2020) and predictively (for year 2050 and 2070); formulated models on landslide
and flooding events in the area considering time factor, land-use changes and, climate
trends; simulated the models for landslide and flooding at different time-slices (2020,
2050, and 2070) and at different climate scenarios (RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5) together with
the land-use change model results; generated multi-hazard maps to determine the areas
within the watershed prone to natural hazards for the year 2050 and 2070;
and recommended strategies for public responsiveness, disaster preparedness, and
preventive disaster management to mitigate the impacts of geophysical and climate-
induced hazards in the MMWFR.

Data used in generating the models were obtained from institutions such as the
NAMRIA, LGU’s, APSEMO, and DENR. This pertains to data on rainfall, slope,
elevation, aspect, soil class, and other useful parameters. Experts were also sought out to
generate opinions on the parameters that influence natural hazards such as landslide and

flooding, as these were needed for pairwise comparison. Land satellite imagery was

140

downloaded from Earth Explorer for the years 2010, 2015, and 2019. The Rainfall data
was downloaded using WorldClim versions 1.4 and 2.1. Soils, and other geologic data
were sourced out from the base maps of the Bureau of Soils and Water Management
(BSW).

The study assessed the LULC dynamics in the past and forecasted future changes
through QGIS MOLUSCE plugin. Supervised classification was done in QGIS to
determine the LULC using satellite imagery from the office of NAMRIA. Prediction of
future LULC change was done through Cellular automata (CA) and Artificial Neural
Network (ANN) simplified process. Raster calculator was used to determine the rate of
change of land cover from one period to another. The land uses include closed forest,
open forest, annual croplands, perennial croplands, shrub/grassland, built-up area, inland
water, and bare soil.

Landslide and flood hazard model was developed using the multi-criteria decision
approach. The formula for the model was derived based on causal factors LULC (output
from the first objective of the study), soil class, rainfall, elevation, slope, proximity to the
river. All causal factors served as criteria and were evaluated for decision analysis.
Weight per factor was determined using logic developed by Saaty (1980) under analytical
hierarchy process (AHP). The weights, consistency ratio and the causal factors as criteria
were evaluated for decision analysis. The formula was based on criterion weights and by
integrating factors as susceptibility index. Landslide susceptibility index weights for
slope is 13.2%; aspect is 5.9%; soil class is 16.6%; elevation is 6.9%; LULC is 26.2 %;

rainfall is 24.8%; and proximity to river is 6.4%. The resulting model generated a

141

formula for the landslide model: LSI =  slp(0.132) + asp(0.059) + sc(0.166) +
elev(0.069) + lulc(0.262) + rf(0.248) + pr(0.064). For flood susceptibility index,
weights for slope is 14.2%; soil class is 6.3%; elevation is 13.0%; LULC is 8.1 %;
rainfall is 31.0%; and proximity to river is 27.4%. The Formula for flood model becomes:
FSI = slp(0.142) + sc(0.063) + elev(0.130) + lulc(0.081) + rf(0.310) + pr(0.274).
Iterations were done across time-period and scenarios. As a form of modification, rainfall
values were changed for current (2020), 2050, and 2070 and at different RCPs (RCP 4.5,
and RCP 8.5).

Confusion matrix-based measures such as sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, and
Kappa index were employed to test the models. The resulting LULC classification has an
accuracy of 87% and 80% and Kappa statistics of 0.83 and 0.73 for the year 2010 and
2020, respectively. Assessment of the landslide susceptibility model obtained a
sensitivity value of 96%, specify value of 39%, and accuracy based on ROC of 0.80;
while the area under the curve is 94% and the Kappa index is 0.58 (considered an
acceptable value). The flood susceptibility model in ROC-AUC was assessed to have a
very satisfactory rating at 98% AUC, Accuracy of 0.95 and Kappa index of 0.89.
Therefore, the derived value for accuracy based on assessment is definitely accurate and
acceptable. This means that the model is consistent in predicting the probability of
occurrence of natural hazards.

The GIS-based Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis (GIS-MCDA) provides powerful
techniques for the analysis and prediction of floods and landslide hazards. Simulated

natural hazards for different time periods (2020, 2050, and 2070) and climatic condition

142

RCP 4.5 (medium case) and RCP 8.5 (worst case scenario) used a raster calculator to
compute in hectares the areas prone to flooding and landslide. The flooding and landslide
occurrence in MMWER has been classified into four susceptibility classes, namely, very
high, high, moderate, and none to low. Landslides considered to be hazardous fall under
moderate to very high susceptibility classes, if these conditions also appear: slope angle
of more than 40 degrees, rainfall amount of greater than 3000 mm, and the land use/land
cover is bare soil, grassland/shrublands, and open forest. Rainfall and proximity to
the river are the most important factors for flooding. The rainfall class 3000-3100 mm
and being near the river can render the area to be highly susceptible to flooding.

Another output of the study is the integrated hazard map which was derived by
combining flood and landslide hazard maps. The combined characteristics of flood and
landslide susceptibility were used to evaluate the condition of MMWFR. Results of
integrated hazard in the year 2050 with the RCP 4.5 scenario indicate that areas with low
susceptibility to hazards both in flooding and landslide totaled 7,709.98 ha, accounting
for 60% of the total area of MMWFR; the other 40% will fall in different combinations of
moderate to very high susceptibility to landslide and flooding spread over the four
municipalities covering the MMWFR. But for year 2050 and RCP 8.5, almost 53% of the
total area are of low susceptibility to flooding and landslide; the rest, 47 % of the total
area, will likely be under moderate to very high susceptibility. Meanwhile, in 2070 results
of integrated hazards with RCP 4.5, about half of the area will be exposed to moderate,
high, and very susceptibility while the other half will most likely have low landslide and

low flooding. Finally, for the year 2070, with RCP 8.5 scenario, approximately 77% of

143

the area will experience different combinations of moderate to very high susceptibility to

flooding and landslide.

Conclusion

Based on the general and significant findings of this study, the following
conclusions were drawn:

Existing land use and land cover in MMWFR, where there is a larger area devoted
to agriculture than the proportion covered with forest, renders the watershed prone to
landslide and flooding. It is imperative to increase the forest cover of the watershed to
mitigate the probable impacts of natural hazards.

Landslide and flood simulation modeling is critical in determining the relationship
between the input predictor and other components in the study area. Relationship
between a natural hazard and its input predictors vary depending on time, LULC, and
climate. In creating a model, the different characteristics of each factor can be given
weights; then the weights are converted to a normalized value to determine the
consistency ratio. The evaluated value of the major factors will be used as important
information in the development of the model under the analytical hierarchy process
which will then serve as basis for susceptibility index.

As a result, the AHP and GIS methods are recommended for assessing hazard
potential. The AHP approach has the potential to produce high-quality results, i.e.,
natural hazards may be predicted with accuracy and reliability. Evaluation of the model

indicates that it is satisfactory, which means that the MCDA AHP model can be used in

144

evidence-based landslide and flooding hazard assessment and prediction of future
incidents. Given the physical parameters present in the area, the model can accurately
anticipate flood and landslide occurrence.

Further, the generated multiple hazards overlay and the integrated flooding and
landslide maps can be used as a basis for policy recommendation for land cover and
natural hazard management in MMWFR. Working towards the mitigation of the impacts
of geophysical and climate-induced hazards will lead to land cover and natural hazard

management in Mt. Masaraga Watershed.

Recommendations

Based on the findings of the study, the following are recommended:

1. Decision making of local and national governments should incorporate the hazard
susceptibility map and the integrated multi-hazard maps for a better analysis and action
planning, and determining management regimes that are environmentally sound, socially
and economically acceptable, and sustainable. Through these maps, the government will
be able to provide information in addressing a social problem imposed by a natural event.
Aided by new information brought by these hazard maps, every individual will come to
embrace a culture of safety and heed the government-implemented policy and program
for disaster preparedness. Landslide and flood susceptibility maps can be considered as
an effective tool for risk reduction particularly in the future scenario and RCP 8.5

scenario, where the risk is highest. Understanding the LULC and the hazards (flooding

145

and landslide) of present and future conditions can lead to informed choices and rational
management as information becomes accessible to the public for public awareness,
disaster preparedness, and disaster prevention. This in turn will minimize the impacts of
geophysical and climate-induced hazards to communities.

2. The communities of MMWFR should be made fully aware of the dangers of the
present settlement and how their current land use practices expose them to natural
hazards. Local government should prepare them to relocate to areas free from hazards.

3. Albay's policymakers, planners, and managers must formulate more relevant
policies for MMWFR, taking into consideration the potential hazards both current and
forecasted. Existing policies should always be reviewed periodically and if necessary,
policy interventions and an adaptive management approach shall be considered. They
must be keen on implementing a new policy that will lead to pathways toward
sustainability. For instance, government managers may adopt continuous landscape
improvement or ecological restoration to mitigate flooding and landslide in the area.
These are policies that allow society to capture the benefits of maintaining forests.
Aiming for environmental protection and quality, taking action at degraded primary
forests, management of secondary forests, and the rehabilitation of degraded forest.
Forest landscape restoration is a holistic approach incorporating the social, economic,
institutional, and ecological dimensions. This would strengthen the resiliency of the
community to natural disasters, therefore, reducing the negative impacts of natural
disasters to individuals living within MMWFR. Strategies that include adaptive

management shall focus on recovery through technologies whenever resources permit.

146

4. Government managers should consider formulating an adaptation plan for the
development of built-up areas for residential, commercial and industrial purposes. It
should not create conditions that contribute to risk, such as disturbing protective
environmental systems. The adaptation plan can include an optimal land-use plan, which
is an approach or process by which optimum forms of land use involving the biophysical,
technological, social, economic, and political conditions of a particular territory are
carefully considered and subjected to management. This considers the areas' potential for
development of land while minimizing hazard areas. Minimizing hazard areas should
consider the alteration of the present land use system in a way that inhibits floods or
landslides while uplifting the socio-economic condition of the communities in MMWFR.

5. Generate a comprehensive Floodplain and Comprehensive Land Use Management
plan in accordance with the CLUP Guidebook 2013 made by the Housing and Land Use
Regulatory Board (HLURB). The guidebook was made in recognition of the need to
mainstream climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction vis-a-vis the growing
demand for housing. It also requires planning for critical resources such as the upland,
coastal, ancestral domain, biodiversity areas, heritage, and urban green space. The
guidebook has adopted the ridge-to-reef or integrated watershed ecosystems management
framework to emphasize the interrelationship between the upland, lowland, and coastal
ecosystems. One regulation introduced by the CLUP guidebook is the zone ordinance.
Zoning Ordinance promotes safety and resilience by ensuring that regulations reduce or
prevent risk in areas that fall under moderate, high, and very high susceptibility to natural

hazards.

LITERATURE CITED

ACOSTA, L. A., E. A. EUGENIO, P. B. M. MACANDOG, and D. B. MAGCALE-
MACANDOG. (2016). Loss and damage from typhoon-induced floods and
landslides in the Philippines: community perceptions on climate impacts and
adaptation options.

ALAWAMY, J. S., BALASUNDRAM, S. K., & BOON SUNG, C. T. (2020). Detecting
and analyzing land use and land cover changes in the region of Al-Jabal Al-
Akhdar, Libya using time-series landsat data from 1985 to
2017. Sustainability, 12(11), 4490.

ALVINLUCIO M.F., M.C. GODOFREDO, B.L. SALVIO, and A.M. JUANITO. (2004).
Geo-hazard assessment report of Panaon Island. Lands Geological Survey
Division, Mines and Geosciences Bureau, Diliman, Quezon City, Philippines.

AMARE, S. (2013). Population and Environment Interaction: The Case of Gilgel Abbay
Catchment, Northwestern Ethiopia. E3 Journal of Environmental Research and
Management,  4(1):153-162. Retrieved April 17, 2019, from
http://www.e3journals.org

APOLLONIO, C., BALACCO, G., NOVELLI, A., TARANTINO, E., & PICCINNI, A. F.
(2016). Land use change impact on flooding areas: The case study of Cervaro
Basin (Italy). Sustainability, 8(10), 996.

ARGUELLES, M.S., C.T. AMO, L.S. MACATANGAY, M.A. LOTERTE, and B.A.
RECIBIDO. (2008). Philippines: Quake and floods hit Bicol.
https://reliefweb.int/report/philippines/philippines-quake-and-floods-hit-bicol

BARCIA, R. (2019). Flooding hits Albay due to heavy rain. Albay Governor Al Francis
Bichara orders evacuation of families living in areas vulnerable to landslides and
flooding. Rappler.com. Published 9:44 PM, January 03, 2018.

BEGUERIA, S. (2006). Validation and evaluation of predictive models in hazard
assessment and risk management. Natural Hazards, 37(3), 315-329.

148

BERNARDIE, S., VANDROMME, R., THIERY, Y., HOUET, T., GREMONT, M.,
MASSON, F., & BOUROULLEC, I. (2021). Modelling landslide hazards under
global changes: the case of a Pyrenean valley. Natural Hazards and Earth System
Sciences, 21(1), 147-169.

BRABB, E.E. (1985). Innovative approaches to landslide hazard and risk mapping.
In International Landslide Symposium Proceedings, Toronto, Canada (Vol. 1, pp.
17-22).

CARATING, R. B., GALANTA, R. G., & BACATIO, C. D. (2014). The soils of the
Philippines. Springer Science & Business.

CARRETERO, J., OMELAN, T. AND NIEBLA, L,(2010). ABS-CBN Bicol. Continuous
rains cause landslide, flood in parts of Albay. ABS-CBN News. Posted at Dec 29
2010 05:56 PM | Updated as of Dec 31 2010 12:10 AM. https://news.abs-
cbn.com/nation/regions/12/29/10/continuous-rains-cause-landslide-flood-parts-
albay

CIABATTA, L., CAMICTI, S., BROCCA, L., PONZIANTI, F., STELLUTI, M., BERNI, N.,
& MORAMARCO, T. J. J. O. H. (2016). Assessing the impact of climate-change
scenarios on landslide occurrence in Umbria Region, Italy. Journal of
Hydrology, 541, 285-295.

COHEN, J. (1960). A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales. Educational and
psychological measurement, 20(1), 37-46.

CRED, CENTRE FOR RESEARCH ON THE EPIDEMIOLOGY OF DISASTERS.
EM/DAT. Types of disasters: Definition of hazard. https://www.ifre.org/en/what-
we-do/disaster-management/about-disasters/definition-of-hazard/

DALANHOL, I., TABALIPA, N. L., & SILVA, F. C. M. (2020). Future Land-use and
Land-cover Scenarios for Mapping Flood-prone Areas in Pato Branco City,
Brazil. KnE Engineering, 314-323.

DENR. (2015). Integrated Bicol River Basin Management and Development Master Plan.
Diliman, Quezon City, Philippines.

149

DOMINGO, S. N. (2017). Institutional issues on disaster risk reduction and
management (No. 2017-50). PIDS Discussion Paper Series.

DMA. (2000). House of Philippine Congress H.R.707 - Disaster Mitigation Act of
2000. 106th Congress (1999-2000).

ELLIS, E. A., MONTERO, J. A. R., GOMEZ, I. U. H., PORTER-BOLLAND, L., &
ELLIS, P. W. (2017). Private property and Mennonites are major drivers of forest
cover loss in central Yucatan Peninsula, Mexico. Land Use Policy, 69, 474-484.

ECKSTEIN, D., HUTFILS, M. L., & WINGES, M. (2017). Global Climate Risk Index
2019: Who suffers most from extreme weather events. Weather-related loss events
in, 1998-2017.

ECKSTEIN, D., KUNZEL, V., SCHAFER, L., & WINGES, M. (2019). Global climate
risk index 2020. Bonn: Germanwatch.

ESPINAS, A. (2013). Geography and public planning: Albay and disaster risk
management. Manila: Human Development Network.

FAZZILLAH, N., NOORDIN, M., ABDULLAH, A., NUR, M., & SHAHBUDIN, A.
(2007). Multicriteria analysis of flood causes in, 1, 17-42.

FEBY, B., ACHU, A. L., JIMNISHA, K., AYISHA, V. A., & REGHUNATH, R. (2020).
Landslide susceptibility modelling using integrated evidential belief function based
logistic regression method: A study from Southern Western Ghats, India. Remote
Sensing Applications: Society and Environment, 20, 100411.

FEIZIZADEH, B., BLASCHKE, T., NAZMFAR, H., & REZAEI MOGHADDAM, M. H.
(2013). Landslide susceptibility mapping for the Unmia Lake basin, Iran: a multi-
criteria evaluation approach using GIS. International Journal of Environmental
Research, 7(2), 319-336.

FLOOD SITE. (2004). Intensity of rainfall was supported by the European Community's
Sixth Framework Programme through the grant to the budget of the integrated

150

FORBES, K., BROADHEAD, J., BRARDINONI, A. D., GRAY, D., & STOKES, B. V.
(2013). Forests and landslides: The role of trees and forests in the prevention of
landslides and rehabilitation of landslide-affected areas in Asia Second edition. Rap
Publication, 02.

GOEPEL, K. D. (2013). Implementing the analytic hierarchy process as a standard method
for multi-criteria decision making in corporate enterprises-a new AHP excel
template with multiple inputs. In Proceedings of the international symposium on
the analytic hierarchy process (Vol. 2, No. 10, pp. 1-10). Creative Decisions
Foundation Kuala Lumpur.

GUL, H., K. DONG, K. LEE, C. PARK, Y. AHN, S. K. SUNYONG, and G. S. BIGING.
(2018). Estimating landslide susceptibility areas considering the uncertainty
inherent in modeling methods. Stochastic Environmental Research and Risk
Assessment (Vol. 32). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00477-
018-1609-y

HANSEN, J., L. NAZARENKO, R. RUEDY, M. SATO, J. WILLIS, A. DEL GENIO, D.
KOCH, A. LACIS, K. LO, S. MENON, T. NOVAKOV, J. PERLWITZ, G.
RUSSELL, G.A. SCHMIDT, and N. TAUSNEV. (2005). Earth's energy
imbalance: Confirmation and implications. Science, 308, 1431-1435,
doi: 10.1126/science. 1110252.

HO, K., and D. TANG. (2019). Climate change in Malaysia : Trends, contributors,
impacts, mitigation and adaptations. Science of the Total Environment, 650,
1858-1871. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.09.316

HONG, Y., R. ADLER, and G. HUFFMAN. (2006). Evaluation of the potential of NASA
multi-satellite precipitation analysis in global landslide hazard assessment.
Geophysical Research Letters 33, L22402, doi: 10.1029/2006GL028010

IPCC. (2019). Scenario Process for ARS Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs).
March 2019. http://sedac.ipec-data.org/ddc/arS_scenario_process/RCPs.html

IPCC. (2001). Climate Change 2001: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability.
Contribution of Working Group II to the Third Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK, pp. 877-912.

151

INTARAWICHIAN, N., & DASANANDA, S. (2010). Analytical Hierarchy Process for
Landslide Susceptibility Mapping in Lower Mae Chaem Watershed, Northern
Thailand. Suranaree Journal of Science & Technology, 17(3).

INTRIERI, E., T. CARLA, and G. GIGLI. (2019). Forecasting the time of failure of
landslides at slope-scale : A literature review. Earth-Science Reviews, 193 (April),
333-349. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.earscirev.2019.03.019

ITTO. (2002). International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO) guidelines for the
restoration, management and rehabilitation of degraded and secondary tropical
forests. Policy Development Series No 13. International Tropical Timber
Organization in collaboration with the Center for International Forestry Research
(CIFOR), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the
World Conservation Union (IUCN) and the World-Wide Fund for Nature (WWF)
International.

KAVZOGLU, T., SAHIN, E. K., & COLKESEN, I. (2014). Landslide susceptibility
mapping using GIS-based multi-criteria decision analysis, support vector machines,
and logistic regression. Landslides, 1 1(3), 425-439.

KEEFER, D. K. (1984). Landslides caused by earthquakes. Geological Society of America
Bulletin, 95(4), 406-421.

KIM, N. W., LEE, J. Y., PARK, D. H., & KIM, T. W. (2019). Evaluation of future flood
risk according to RCP scenarios using a regional flood frequency analysis for
ungauged watersheds. Water, 1 1(5), 992.

KHAN, S.I.; HONG, Y.; WANG, J.; YILMAZ, K.K.; GOURLEY, J.J., ADLER, R.F.;
BRAKENRIDGE, G.R.; POLICELLI, F.; HABIB, S.; IRWIN, D. (2011). Satellite
Remote Sensing and Hydrologic Modeling for Flood Inundation Mapping in Lake
Victoria Basin: Implications for Hydrologic Prediction in Ungauged Basins. IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 2011, 49, 85-95.

LASCO, R. D., R. V. O. CRUZ, J. M. PULHIN, and F. B. PULHIN. (2010). Climate
change and watersheds. Assessing climate change impacts, vulnerability and
adaptation - the case of Pantabangan-Carranglan Watershed. Retrieved from
http://www. worldagroforestry.org/downloads/publications/PDFs/B16559.pdf

152

LAMBIN, E. F. & GEIST H. J., &LEPERS E. (2003). Dynamics of Land-Use and Land
Cover Change in Tropical Regions. Department of Geography, University of
Louvain, Place Louis Pasteur 3, B-1348.

LA MELA VECA, D. S., CULLOTTA, S., SFERLAZZA, S., & MAETZKE, F. G. (2016).
Anthropogenic influences in land use/land cover changes in Mediterranean forest
landscapes in Sicily. Land, 5(1), 3.

LANDIS, J. R., & KOCH, G. G. (1977). An application of hierarchical kappa-type statistics
in the assessment of majority agreement among multiple observers. Biometrics,
363-374.

LAWAL, D. U., MATORI, A. N., HASHIM, A. M., WAN YUSOF, K., & CHANDIO, I.
A. (2012). Detecting flood susceptible areas using GIS-based analytic hierarchy
process.

MAHAR, A., F. A. LAGMAY, B. A. RACOMA, K. A. ARACAN, J. ALCONIS-AYCO,
and I. L. SADDI. (2017). Disseminating near-real-time hazards information and
flood maps in the Philippines through Web-GIS. Journal of Environmental
Sciences, 59, 13-23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jes.2017.03.014

MORALES JR, F. F., & DE VRIES, W. T. (2021). Establishment of Natural Hazards
Mapping Criteria Using Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP). Front. Sustain. 2:
667105. doi: 10.3389/frsus.

MONTANARI, A., & KOUTSOYIANNIS, D. (2014). Modeling and mitigating natural
hazards: Stationarity is immortal. Water Resources Research, 50(12), 9748-9756.

MOSS, R. H., BABIKER, M., BRINKMAN, S., CALVO, E., CARTER, T., EDMONDS,
J. A., & ZUREK, M. (2008). Towards new scenarios for analysis of emissions,
climate change, impacts, and response strategies.

MYHRE, G., MYHRE, A., & STORDAL, F. (2001). Historical evolution of radiative
forcing of climate. Atmospheric Environment, 35(13), 2361-2373.

153

NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL. (2001). Climate Change Science: An Analysis of
Some Key Questions. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.

NELSON, S. A. (2018). Natural Disasters and Assessing Hazards Risk, Tulane University.

OVERMARS P. O. AND P. H. VERBURG. (2005). Analysis of land use drivers at the
watershed and household level: Linking two paradigms at the Philippine forest
fringe. International Journal of Geographical Information Science Vol. 19, No. 2,
February 2005, pp. 125-152.

OUMA, Y. O., & TATEISHI, R. (2014). Urban flood vulnerability and risk mapping
using integrated multi-parametric AHP and GIS: methodological overview and
case study assessment. Water, 6(6), 1515-1545.

PAGASA, = (2006). = Geophysical Astronomical Services Administration
(PAGASA). Various years. Rainfall data for, 2004(2006), 2007.

PAUL, S.K., BARTARYA, S.K., RAUTELA, P., MAHAJAN, and A.K., (2000).
Catastrophic mass movement of 1998 monsoons at Malpa in Kali Valley, Kumaun
Himalaya (India). Geomorphology (35), 169-180. doi: 10.1016/S0169-
555X(00)00032-5.

PHAM, T. T. H., Turner, S., & Trincsi, K. (2015). Applying a Systematic Review to Land
Use Land Cover Change in Northern Upland V ietnam: The Missing Case of the
Borderlands. Geographical Research, 53(4), 419-435.

PUJOL-MESALLES, R., & MOLINA, E. P. (2013). Urban Growth in the Metropolitan
Region of San José, Costa Rica: A Spatial and Temporal Exploration of the
Determinants of Land Use Change, 1986-2010.

RABONZA, G. (2006). Philippines: NDCC media update-Typhoon Reming (Durian).
Technical Report. Office of Civil Defense.

RAHMAN, M. T. U., TABASSUM, F., RASHEDUZZAMAN, M., SABA, H., SARKAR,
L., FERDOUS, J., & ISLAM, A. Z. (2017). Temporal dynamics of land use/land
cover change and its prediction using CA-ANN model for southwestern coastal
Bangladesh. Environmental monitoring and assessment, 189(11), 1-18.

154

RAHMATI, O., ZEINIVAND, H., & BESHARAT, M. (2016). Flood hazard zoning in
Yasooj region, Iran, using GIS and multi-criteria decision analysis. Geomatics,
Natural Hazards and Risk, 7(3), 1000-1017.

RANGALT, R. S. S. (2018). Landslide susceptibility mapping using logistic regression
model: A case study in Badulla District, Sri Lanka. Procedia Engineering (212),
1046-1053. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2018.01.135

RELIEFWEB. (2018). Tropical Depression Usman - Dec 2018.
https://reliefweb. int/disaster/ec-2018-000426-phl

RWANGA, S. S., & NDAMBUKI, J. M. (2017). Accuracy Assessment of land use/land
cover classification using remote sensing and GIS. International journal of
geosciences, 8(04), 611.

SAATY, T.L. (1980). The analytic hierarchy processes. New York: McGraw Hill
International.

SAHA, A., S. MANDAL, and S. SAHA. (2020). Geo - spatial approach - based landslide
susceptibility mapping using analytical hierarchical process, frequency ratio, logistic
regression and their ensemble methods. SN Applied Sciences, 2(10), 1-21.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s42452-020-03441-3.

SALGHUNA, N. N., PRASAD, P. R. C., & KUMARI, J. A. (2018). Assessing the impact
of land use and land cover changes on the remnant patches of Kondapalli reserve forest
of the Eastern Ghats, Andhra Pradesh, India. The Egyptian Journal of Remote Sensing
and Space Science, 21(3), 419-429.

SEWNET, A. (2015). Land use/ cover change at Infraz Watershed, Northwestern Ethiopia.
Department of Geography and Environmental Studies, Bahir Dar University,
Ethiopia.

SHAH, A. I, SEN, S., DAR, M. U. D., & KUMAR, V. (2017). Land-use/land-cover
change detection and analysis in Aglar Watershed, Uttarakhand. Current Journal
of Applied Science and Technology, 1-11.

155

SHARMA, L. P., PATEL, N., DEBNATH, P., & GHOSE, M. K. (2012). Assessing
landslide vulnerability from soil characteristics—a GIS-based analysis. Arabian
Journal of Geosciences, 5(4), 789-796.

SHERBININ, A. D., CARR, D., CASSELS, S., & JIANG, L. (2007). Population and
environment. Annu. Rev. Environ. Resour., 32, 345-373.

SIDDAYAO, G. P., S. E. VALDEZ, and P. L. FERNANDEZ. (2014). Analytic Hierarchy
Process (AHP) in Spatial Modeling for Floodplain Risk Assessment, International
Journal of Machine Learning and Computing, Vol. 4, No. 5, October 2014. pp, 450-

457. https://doi.org/10.7763/IJMLC.2014.V4.453

SIMON, A. L. (1981). Practical Hydraulics, John Wiley & Sons, , ISBN 0-471-05381-3

SMIT, B., O. PILIFOSOVA, I. BURTON, B. CHALLENGER, S. HUQ, R.J.T. KLEIN,
and G. YOHE. (2001). Adaptation to climate change in the context of sustainable
development and equity. Jn: McCarthy, J.J., Canziani, O.F., Leary, N. (Eds.),

THIEKEN, A. H., H. APEL, and B. MERZ. (2015). Assessing the probability of large-
scale flood loss events: a case study for the river Rhine, Germany. Journal of
Flood Risk management, 8(3), 247-262.808. Retrieved: August 12, 2019.

https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/jfr3.12091

UN-ODRR and WB (2010). World Development Report 2010: Development and
Climate Change

VAN WESTEN, C. J. (2013). Remote sensing and GIS for natural hazards assessment
and disaster risk management. Treatise on geomorphology, 3, 259-298.

VARNES, D. J., & CRUDEN, D. M. (1996). Landslide types and processes. Landslides:
investigation and mitigation, Transportation Research Board special report, 247.

VARNES D.J. (1984). Landslide hazard zonation: a review of principles and practice.
United Nations International, Paris, Natural Hazards, No. 3 (1984) 63.

WALKER, L. R., & SHIELS, A. B. (2013). Physical causes and consequences for
Landslide Ecology.

156

WAYNE, G. P. (2013). The Beginner's Guide to Representative Concentration Pathways. .
Skeptical Science. https://skepticalscience.com/rep.php?t=3

WORLD METEOROLOGICAL ORGANIZATION (WMO). (2012). International
glossary of hydrology. WMO-No. 385. ISBN 978-92-63-03385-8, pp. 1-461.

YALCIN, G. and Z. AKYUREK, (2002). Analyzing Flood Vulnerable Areas with
Multicriteria Evaluation. Master’s Thesis, Geodetic and Geographic Information
Technologies, Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey, April 2002.

aBeuN a7T23"S TTO 8 3espue’y “6107 ‘L Arensged SBCUI OPNTOIES+HIALL Z JeSpue’] OLOZ ‘ZZ
J0 (¢-p-¢ puvg) aj1sodm09 10]09 asje,y :q Xipueddy Asenigag JO (7-¢-p pueg) 931s0d a0 10109 asjey :y xIpueddy

SAOIGNAddV

8006S8°L8 8677 6107 $80000°0 LIIZE8'0

393110) % WOHBAIISGGC [BIO], 3221102 WOYBAIISGC: aouvne, eddey sddey
I 0 0 [los oreg
S€L986'0 0 1$0@87'T Jo7eM\ pueyU]
9IELss‘0 909976 II SL989I'Zy dn-mg
68S9Lb'0 6IS8IS'8T HITS Purjssezp/pue’] anys
6S969L'0 9¥689L'bZ SEELIO'LI sdorp yermusieg
€LLvE6'0 96Z190'S1 196106’ sdosp jenuuy
9871160 vELSSy'e 19967'S 382101

eddey pajemysy UOISSIIQ % WOISSTMIMIOD) % sselD
oI LL 601 os Irs 1s 9%6 ung
91 0 0 0 0 i) 0 flog oreg
0 LL ) ) 0 if 0 Jove pUuepo]
0 0 96 0 6€ T€ i) dq-anng
0 0 0 by 0€ z 0 Puejssesp/pue] qrays
0 0 €I 0 Lov 4 ze sdorp jerausieg
0 0 0 Or $I S8b 0 sdorp jenuuy
0 0 0 0 os 0 68 yso10,J
BOOLANN purjsse15/puey sdoip sdoi
Tes ond pueyjuy dasa qniqs Jeruus10g jenuuay tat ss)

XLIJVP, WOISNJUOD BdueG. 10A0ZD puRyT asQ pue’y OIOZ :D xipueddy

€9LES0°08 0981 68¢1 6¢1000'0 ElEEEL 0
92110 % WOHEAIISGO 1801, 999.1103 WOYBAIISGOQ. aoueLiv, eddey vddeyy
0 0 0 Tog reg
6L6616°0 0 80£769'L eye pueloy
710860 0 I869IL'b dn-nng
L¥7190°0 bbbbrr by ESOIZb'E6 Purlssesp/pueT ANUS
SIS8s8'0 E%6Sbr 7E LE89LS°6 sdoip yeruusieg
8S0S¢8'°0 L00€66°9 €S0c6 TT sdos_ jenuuy
9€¢909'0 LS87b9'6 E9TLOS'LZ 30104
eddey pavmys7 WOISSIIG % WOISSTUTTIOD) % SsuD
br a Tor 6 109 6ty 09s ums
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tog aeg
0 tL 0 0 0 9 0 Joye pueluy
0 ) Tol 0 v 0 0 dng
0 0 0 S cE Za SI purjsseip/puel qrys
) 0 0 v 90¢ 0 6£ sdorp jermusreg
bl 0 0 0 v7 66€ 0 sdoip jenuuy
0 0 0 0 sel 0 90S 38910]
BOOLIAN pueyssery/puey sdoag sdoip
10S a8; dot 382.10, ss
Mio pusyuy WL qniys Teyaueieg jenuuy = "

XLIJB, WOISNJUOD Bdueq. 12A07) pu] 9879 pue’y 0707 :q XIpusddy

60

1

Appendix E: 2010-2020 Land Use Land Cover Change Map

Appendix F: Land Use Land Cover Change Transition Matrix for the Period 2010-

2020

PTTL LL ee

ia


161

Appendix G: Pairwise Comparison for Landslide

Expert 1
FACTORS Slope Aspect Soil Class Elevation Landuse Rainfall Proximity to River
Slope 1 7 5 7 9 Vv 5
Aspect vw 1 us 7 v7 Vs 7
Soil Class Ws 5 1 5 7 5 7
Elevation vw Ww Vs 1 VS ww Vs
Landuse vo 7 vw 5 1 5 5
Rainfall 7 5 Vs 7 us 1 5
Proximity to River VS Ww vw 5 Vs us 1
Expert 2
Slope 1 7 1 1 1 vo vs
Aspect vw 1 vw vw Ww Vv vs
Soil Class 1 7 1 7 9 V9 1
Elevation 1 7 vw 1 Vg vw 7
Landuse 1 7 9 9 1 1 7
Rainfall 9 9 9 9 1 1 9
Proximity to River 5 5 1 vw Ww ed 1
Expert 3
Slope 1 v9 5 Vv 9 5 5
Aspect 9 1 3 19 Ww 5 5
Soil Class Vs 13 1 5 Vv 5 7
Elevation. 9 9 Vs 1 vw Ww 5
Landuse 9 7 7 7 1 5 5
Rainfall Vs us Vs 7 Vs 1 7
Proximity to River V5 Vs Ww Vs VWs Ww 1
Expert 4
Slope 1 9 1 7 9 1 9
Aspect v9 1 v3 3 Ww ww 3
Soil Class 1 3 1 us 13 1 5
Elevation wy 3 5 1 ed hd 5
Landuse vg 7 3 1 1 7
Rainfall 1 7 1 1 1 7
Proximity to River 9 13 Vs Ws Ww Ww 1
Expert 5
Slope 1 5 7 9 7 Ww wy
Aspect us 1 5 ww a 19 v9
Soil Class Ww Ws 1 Vs vw 7 Ww
Elevation 9 7 5 1 VWs vw ih)
Landuse 7 7 7 5 1 ww w
Rainfall 7 9 7 7 7 1 9
Proximity to River 7 9 7 9 7 9 1

nn

162

Appendix H: Pairwise Comparison for Flood

Expert 1
FACTORS Slope Soil Class _ Elevation Landuse Rainfall _ Proximity to River
Slope 1 13 VS 1/5 V9 7
Soil Class 3 1 Vs 1/9 1/9 V7
Elevation 5 5 1 19 9 1/9
Landuse 5 9 9 1 9 1/9
Rainfall 9 9 9 9 1 9
Proximity to River 7 7 9 9 9 1
Expert 2
Slope 1 7 Is 5 V9 V5
Soil Class V7 1 Vs 5 Vs V7
Elevation 5 5 1 7 7 7
Landuse V5 Vs V7 1 1/5 5
Rainfall 9 5 7 5 1 7
Proximity to River 5 7 V7 5 V7 1
Expert 3
Slope 1 5 7 v7 1/7 7
Soil Class us 1 3 7 5 7
Elevation 7 1/3 1 7 7 V7
Landuse 7 1/7 1/7 1 19 7
Rainfall 7 5 7 9 1 7
Proximity to River 7 7 7 7 7 1
Expert 4
Slope 1 9 V7 7 V7 7
Soil Class v9 1 1/5 7 1/5 1/5
Elevation 7 5 1 7 7 V7
Landuse 7 1/7 7 1 7 7
Rainfall 7 5 7 7 1 7
Proximity to River 7 5 7 7 1/7 1
Expert 5
Slope 1 7 7 7 9 7
Soil Class 7 1 5 1/3 9 9
Elevation v7 5 1 Vs 7 7
Landuse v7 3 5 /7 1/7
Rainfall 1/9 9 7 7 1 1/5
Proximity to River 7 9 7 7 5 1

Leen eee eee el

163

Appendix I: AHP for Landslide

AHP Analytic Hierarchy Process (EvM multiple inputs)
K. D. Goepel Version 15.09.2018 Free web based AHP software on:
Only input data in the light green fields and worksheets!

Number of criteria(2to10)  Scale:[an]
Number of Participants (1 to 20) «Lea ] Consensus:
selected Participant (0=consol.) [Consolidated

Objective|Determine Predictor for Landslide Susceptibility

Author [Niro.M._]
Date a] Thresh: 16-08 Iterations: 6 EVM check: 1.3E-09

Table

http://bpmsg.con

Eigenvalue
Consistency Ratio 0.37 GCI

normalized
principal
Eigenvector

w Sod Cass
Praximty to

13.19%

5.95%
Soil Class 16.5

Elevation | se] -| 6.89%
Land Use 78 104 6 26.1:

Ranfal |6 24/9 35/9 S/I9 738 24.7

Proximity to 273 86 U3 15/9 6.44%
Revver

0.00%
0.00%
0.00%,


164

Appendix J: AHP for Flooding

AHP Analytic Hierarchy Process (EvM multiple inputs)
K. D. Goepel Version 15.09.2018 Free web based AHP software on: hittp//bpmsg.com
Only input data in the light green fields and worksheets!

Number of criteria (2 to 10) Scale:

Number of Participants (1 to 20) «(ea ] Consensus:

p= selected Participant (0=consol.) [Consolidated _
om eee
Author i)

Date [ages] Thresh: 1£-08 Iterations: 6 EvM check: 266-10

Table

Eigenvalue Lambda: 6.825
Consistency Ratio 0.37 GCI: 0.47 PSB 417% CR

Proximity to
River


165

Appendix K: Weights of Classes Within Each Criterion Used in Landslide Modeling

Factors 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Weight
Slope (degrees)
(1) 0-10 1 0.330 0.200 0.110 0.110 0.029
(2) 10-20 3.000 1 0.330 0.110 0.110 0.047
(3) 20-30 5.000 3.000 1 0.200 0.110 0.091
(4) 30-40 9.000 9.000 5.000 1 0.330 0.296
(5) >40 9.000 9.000 9.000 3.000 1 0.538
Consistency Ratio 0.097
Aspect
(1) Flat 1 0.500 0.330 0.140 0.140 0.200 0.200 0.330 0.330 0.023
(2) North 2.000 1 0.330 0.140 0.140 0.250 0.250 3.000 3.000 0.048
(3) Northeast 3.000 3.000 1 0.250 0.250 3.000 3.000 2.000 2.000 0.122
(4) East 7.000 7.000 4.000 1 0.500 3.000 3.000 5.000 5.000 0.235
(5) Southeast 7.000 7.000 4.000 2.000 1 4.000 4.000 5.000 5.000 0.293
(6) South 5.000 4.000 0.330 0.330 0.250 1 0.500 4.000 4.000 0.095
(7) Southwest 5.000 4.000 0.330 0.330 0.250 2.000 1 4.000 4.000 0.109
(8) West 3.000 0.330 0.500 0.200 0.200 0.250 0.250 1 1.000 0.038
(9) Northwest 3.000 0.330 0.500 0.200 0.200 0.250 0.250 1.000 1 0.038
Consistency Ratio 0.090
Elevation (meters)
(1) <300 1 O.111 O.111 0.143 0,333 0.028
(2) 300-600 9.000 1 1.000 7.000 9.000 0.411
(3) 600-900 9.000 1.000 1 7.000 9.000 0.411
(4) 900-1200 7.000 0.143 0.143 1 3.000 0.103
(5) >1200 3.000 O.111 O.111 0.333 1 0.047
Consistency ratio 0.089
Land Use Land Cover
(1) Closed Forest (FC) 1 1.000 0.333 0.333 0.143 0.333 O.111 0.030
(2) Open Forest (FO) 1.000 1 0.333 0.333 O.111 0.333 O.111 0.102
(3) Annual Crops (AC) 3.000 3.000 1 3.000 0.200 3.000 0.143 0.028
(4) Perennial Crops (PC) 3.000 3.000 0.333 1 0.111 3.000 0.143 0.070
6) oa 7.000 9.000 5.000 9.000 1 5.000 1.000 0.343
(6) Built-up (BU) 3.000 3.000 0.333 0.333 0.200 1 0.143 0.054
(7) Baresoil (BS) 9.000 9.000 7.000 7.000 1.000 7.000 1 0.373
Consistency Ratio 0.068
(1) 0-100 1 2.000 3.000 4.000 5.000 0.413
(2) 100-200 0.500 1 0.333 3.000 4.000 0.179
(3) 200-300 0.333 3.000 1 3.000 4.000 0.268
(4) 300-400 0.250 0.333 0.333 1 2.000 0.084
(5) >400 0.200 0.250 0.250 0.500 1 0.055
Consistency Ratio 0.065


166

Appendix K: Continued...

Factors 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Weight

Rainfall (millimeter)

(1) <2800 1 0.333 0.250 0.200 0.200 0.052
(2) 2800 -2900 3.000 1 0.333 0.333 0.250 0.100
(3) 2900-3000 4.000 3.000 1 0.500 1.000 0.233
(4) 3000-3100 5.000 3.000 2.000 1 1.000 0.320
(5) > 3100 5.000 4.000 1.000 1.000 1 0.294
Consistency Ratio 0.028
Soil Class
(1) Guinobatan Sandy
Loam (GSL) 1 3.000 3.000 5.000 0.143 0.167 0.112
(2) Libon Silty Clay
(LSC) 0.333 1 0.333 3.000 0.143 0.167 0.048
(3) Ligao Loam (LL) 0.333 3.000 1 3.000 0.143 0.167 0.070
(4) Macolod-Pili Complex
E \ i I; R 0.031
(MPC) 0.200 0.333 0.333 1 0.143 0.167
(5) Tigaon Clay (TC) 7.000 7.000 7.000 7.000 1 1.000 0.389
(6) Undifferentiated
Mountain Soil (UV) 6.000 6.000 6.000 6.000 1.000 1 0.350
Consistency Ratio 0.028

Appendix L: Weights of Classes Within Each Criterion Used in Flood Modeling.

Factors 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Weight
Slope (degrees)
(1) 0-10 1 3.000 7.000 9.000 9.000 0.539
(2) 10-20 0.333 1 5.000 7.000 7.000 0.291
(3) 20-30 0.143 0.200 1 2.000 2.000 0.077
(4) 30-40 0.111 0.143 0.500 1 2.000 0.053
(5) >40 0.111 0.143 0.500 0.500 1 0.040

Consistency Ratio 0.037
Elevation (meters)
(1) <300 1 5.000 7.000 9.000 9.000 0.604
(2) 300-600 0.200 1 5.000 3.000 3.000 0.202
(3) 600-900 0.143 0.200 1 2.000 2.000 0.082
(4) 900-1200 O.11L 0.333 0.500 1 2.000 0.064
(5) >1200 0.111 0.333 0500 0500 1 0.048

Consistency ratio 0.063
Land Use Land Cover

(1) Closed Forest (FC) 1 1,000 0.200 0.333 0.200 0.143 0.143 0.028

a a nN

Appendix L: Continued...

167

Factors 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 9 Weight
(2) Open Forest (FO) 1.000 1 0.143 0.333 0.200 0.143 0.143 0.027
(3) Annual Crops(AC) 5.000 7.000 1 5.000 3.000 0.250 0.500 0.159
(4) Perennial Crops(PC) 3.000 3.000 0.200 1 ©0,333-«0.143.—«0.143 0.047
(5) Shrub/Grassland
(S/Gr) 5.000 5.000 0.333 3.000 1 0.143 0.143 0.084
(© Built-up (BU) 7.000 7.000 4.000 7.000 7.000 1 0.500 0316
(7) Baresoil (BS) 7.000 7.000 2.000 7.000 7.000 2000 1 0.338
Consistency Ratio 0.082
Proximity to River/Streams (meters)
(1) 0-100 1 3.000 7.000 7.000 9.000 0.516
(2) 100-200 0333 1 5.000 7.000 7.000 0.294
(3) 200-300 0.143 0200 1 3.000 5.000 0.103
(4) 300-400 0.143 0.143 0333 «1 3,000 0.055
(5) >400 0.111 0.143 0,200 0333 1 0.031
Consistency Ratio 0.091
Rainfall (millimeter)
(1) < 2800 1 0333 0.250 0.200 0.200 0.052
(2) 2800 -2900 3.000 1 0.333 0.333 0.250 0.100
(3) 2900-3000 4.000 3.000 1 0.500 1.000 0.233
(4) 3000-3100 5.000 3.000 2000 1 1.000 0.320
(5)>3100 5.000 4.000 1.000 1.000 1 0.294
Consistency Ratio 0.028
Soil Class
w poner 1 0333 0.333 0.250 0.250 3.000 0.072
@ ise Clay 3.000 1 0,333 3.000 3.000 5.000 0.249
(3) Ligao Loam (LL) 3.000 3.000 1 3.000 3,000 5.000 0.362
@) oe Complex 4.990 0333 0333 1 1.000 3,000 0.137
(5) Tigaon Clay (TC) 4.000 0333 0333 1.000 1 3.000 0.137
© Maeaeeaian 0333 0.200 0.200 0333 0333 1 0.043
Consistency Ratio 0.085


168
Appendix M: Validation Using AUC-ROC for Landslide
The computation of accuracy assessment for Landslide
Validation using AUC-ROC for Landslide

ROC Value BY Type (1)/PLOT CURVE(REFERENCE)/PRINT SECOORDINATES.

Case Summary

Valid N (listwise)
Type
Unweighted Weighted
Positive 27 27.00
Negative 23 23.00
Area Under the Curve
Variable Area Sta. Asymp totic Asymptotic 95% Confidence Interval
under test Error Sig. Lower Bound Upper Bound
Value 0.94 0.03 0.000 0.89 0.99
Coordinates of the Curve
: Positive if greater than PA tp:
Test variable or equal to Sensitivity 1 - Specificity
value -0.88563 1.00 1.00
0.11787 1.00 0.96
0.12885 1.00 0.87
0.14977 1.00 0.70
0.15240 1.00 0.70
0.15285 1.00 0.70
0.15735 1.00 0.70
0.15866 1.00 0.70
0.16571 1.00 0.65

0.16707 1.00 0.65


169

Coordinates of the Curve continued...

Positive if greater than

Test variable Sensitivity 1 - Specificity

or equal to

value 0.16768 1.00 0.65
0.16921 1.00 0.65
0.17033 1.00 0.61
0.17790 1.00 0.57
0.18744 0.96 0.39
0.18809 0.96 0.39
0.18887 0.96 0.39
0.18961 0.96 0.39
0.19002 0.96 0.39
0.19033 0.96 0.35
0.19136 0.96 0.35
0.19145 0.96 0.35
0.19236 0.96 0.35
0.19546 0.85 0.17
0.20554 0.70 0.04
0.20600 0.70 0.04
0.20765 0.70 0.04
0.20846 0.70 0.04
0.20973 0.70 0.04
0.21026 0.70 0.04
0.21039 0.70 0.04
0.21124 0.70 0.00
0.21185 0.70 0.00
0.21207 0.70 0.00
0.21507 0.67 0.00
0.21583 0.67 0.00
0.21614 0.67 0.00
0.21874 0.63 0.00
0.22089 0.59 0.00
0.22386 0.44 0.00
0.22498 0.44 0.00
0.22504 0.44 0.00
0.22724 0.37 0.00
0.22767 0.37 0.00
0.22845 0.37 0.00

0.23113 0.30 0.00


170

Coordinates of the Curve continued...

Positive if greater than

Test variabl Pars . tas
e or equal to Sensitivity 1 - Specificity
value 0.24011 0.11 0.00
0.24824 0.11 0.00
0.24885 0.11 0.00
1.26266 0.00 non

Landslide Non-lands Total Accuracy Kappa Threshold

Landslide 26 9 35 0.8 0.58 0.19
Non-Landslide 1 14 15
Total 27 23 50

Appendix N: Validation Using AUC-ROC for Flooding

The computation of accuracy assessment for Flooding

Validation using AUC-ROC for Flooding

ROC value by type (“Flooding Area”)/PLOT CURVE (REFERENCE)/PRINT SE
COORDINATES

Case Summary

Valid N (listwise)
Type
Unweighted Weighted
Positive 25 25.00
Negative 30 30.00
Area Under the Curve
Variable Area Std. Asymp totic Asymptotic 95% Confidence Interval
cer ee ks Sig. Lower Bound Upper Bound

Value 0.98 0.01 0.000 0.96 1.00


Coordinates of the Curve

Positive if greater than

171

Test variable or equal to Sensitivity 1 - Specificity
Value -0.87954299896956 1.00 1.00
0.14594399929047 1.00 0.87
0.15114950388670 1.00 0.87
0.15537200123072 1.00 0.83
0.15670499950647 1.00 0.80
0.15737349912524 1.00 0.80
0.15772550553083 1.00 0.80
0.15873599797487 1.00 0.80
0.16752399504185 1.00 0.73
0.17009499669075 1.00 0.73
0.18264199793339 1.00 0.67
0.19224800169468 1.00 0.57
0.19660799950361 1.00 0.50
0.19672699272633 1.00 0.50
0.20155099779367 1.00 0.50
0.20483899861574 1.00 0.50
0.20777199417353 1.00 0.43
0.21174499392509 1.00 0.40
0.21633800119162 1.00 0.30
0.21837799996138 1.00 0.30
0.22219649702311 1.00 0.27
0.22291399538517 1.00 0.27
0.226995997 13087 1.00 0.27
0.2302674949 1692 0.96 0.23
0.24042099714279 0.96 0.23
0.25 108599662781 0.96 0.20
0.25125698745251 0.96 0.20
0.25642499327660 0.96 0.13
0.25778199732304 0.96 0.13
0.27781599760056 0.80 0.03
0.28599399328232 0.76 0.03
0.29090598970652 0.76 0.03
0.30440148711205 0.76 0.00
0.31320449709892 0.72 0.00
0.31613399088383 0.72 0.00
0.31686848402023 0.72 0.00

Coordinates of the Curve continued...

Positive if greater than

172

Test variable or equal to Sensitivity 1 - Specificity
Value 0.32000549 137592 0.68 0.00
0.33 192299306393 0.64 0.00
0.33439648151398 0.64 0.00
0.33843798935413 0.60 0.00
0.34018449485302 0.60 0.00
0.34519249200821 0.56 0.00
0.35114848613739 0.56 0.00
0.35455648601055 0.56 0.00
0.35973599553108 0.56 0.00
0.36330649256706 0.52 0.00
0.36429449915886 0.52 0.00
0.36800248920918 0.52 0.00
0.37918198 108673 0.48 0.00
0.38298898935318 0.48 0.00
0.41091448068619 0.24 0.00
0.42729698121548 0.04 0.00
1.43 132698535919 0.00 0.00
Flooding Non-flooding Total Accuracy Kappa Threshold
Flooding 24 2 26 0.945 0.89 0.26
Non-flooding 1 28 29
Total 25 30 55


173

Appendix O: Landslide Hazard Map of Mt. Masaraga Watershed Forest Reserve
and Surroundings

Wave

Landslide Hazard
“tt

Appendix P: Flood Hazard Map of Mt. Masaraga Watershed Forest Reserve and
Surroundings


174

Appendix Q: Mt. Masaraga Watershed Forest Reserve and Barangay Boundaries

Quinarabasanan A

Manaba A gitocod stance
Muld@buced Pequeho

Appendix R: Selected Drone Pictures of Areas Susceptible to Landslide and
Flooding in MMWER (Source: CDDRM Office, Ligao City)

to %
MEE NOs Fare

Plate 2: Landslide prone areas in Barangay Baligang, Ligao City

Plate 6: Flood prone and landslide prone areas in Barangay Tambo, Ligao City

He

