
UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS

Master of Science in Applied Nutrition

KRISTINE R. VIGILLA

FOOD EXPENDITURE AND DIETARY DIVERSITY OF PANTAWID PAMILYANG
PILIPINO PROGRAM (4PS) BENEFICIARY AND NON-BENEFICIARY

HOUSEHOLDS IN SELECTED BARANGAYS IN
SAN PABLO CITY, LAGUNA

WILMA A. HURTADA, Ph.D.

Adviser

Date:

This thesis can be made available to the general public.

(es) NO

This thesis can be accessed only after consultation with the author and thesis
adviser.

YES ox(NO)

This thesis can be accessed only by those bound by confidentiality agreement.

YES or ¥Q)

WILMA A. HURTADA, Ph.D.

FOOD EXPENDITURE AND DIETARY DIVERSITY OF PANTAWID
PAMILYANG PILIPINO PROGRAM (4PS) BENEFICIARY AND
NON-BENEFICIARY HOUSEHOLDS IN SELECTED
BARANGAYS IN SAN PABLO CITY, LAGUNA

KRISTINE R. VIGILLA

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF THE GRADUATE SCHOOL
UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES AT LOS BANOS
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE
DEGREE OF

MASTER OF SCIENCE
(Applied Nutrition)

{AMEE O06 GA
STI-16-9841
DECEMBER 2014

The thesis attached hereto entitled, “FOOD EXPENDITURE AND DIETARY
DIVERSITY OF PANTAWID PAMILYANG PILIPINO PROGRAM (4PS)
BENEFICIARY AND NON-BENEFICIARY HOUSEHOLDS IN SELECTED
BARANGAYS IN SAN PABLO CITY, LAGUNA” prepared and submitted by

KRISTINE REYES VIGILLA in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of

MASTER OF SCIENCE (APPLIED NUTRITION) is hereby accepted.

Wh dl rex[lo

oe
DINAH P T. DEPOSITARIO NORMAHITTA P. GORDONCILLO

Member, Guidance Committee Member, Guidance Committee
: : w4h DB
Date Signed Date Signed

WILMA A. HURTADA
Chair, Guidance Committee

JAN 05 rear

Date Signed

Accepted as partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of MASTER OF SCIENCE

(APPLIED NUTRITION).

Alsen
MA. THERESA M. TALAVERA
Director, Institute of Huma rition and Food
v7 a

Date Signed

JOSE V. CAMACHO JR.
Dean, Graduate School

University of HAR Py "aphes Bajos
Date Signed L

ii

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

Kristine Reyes Vigilla was born on the 3 of October, 1989 at Dinalupihan,
Bataan to Mr. Eric M. Vigilla and Mrs. Brenda R. Vigilla as the youngest among two
siblings. The author finished her primary education at Saint Francis School Foundation
and secondary education at Dalton Academy. She entered the University of the
Philippines Los Bafios under the B.S. Nutrition Program and graduated in 2010. In the
same year, she was employed as a Dietitian at The Medical City until 2012. She is

happily married to Andrew D. Montecillo.

KRISTINE R. VIGILLA

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The author would like to express her sincere gratitude to her adviser, Dr. Wilma
A. Hurtada and her committee members, Dr. Normahitta P. Gordoncillo and Dr. Dinah
Pura T. Depositario, for their guidance, patience, understanding, motivation, insightful
comments and constructive criticisms.

Heartfelt appreciation goes to Mr. Benjamin C. Romero of the Department of
Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) San Pablo City for all the support and
guidance during the field work.

She is also grateful to DOST-SEI for the M.Sc. scholarship grant under the
ASTHRD Program and DSWD Field Office IV-A for allowing her to conduct this study
among beneficiary households in San Pablo City.

Lastly, her deepest appreciation to her family and friends for all their support,

guidance and prayers.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Title Page
Approval Page
Biographical Sketch
Acknowledgements
Table of Contents
List of Tables

List of Figures

List of Appendices
Abstract

INTRODUCTION

Background of the Study
Statement of the Problem
Objectives of the Study
Significance of the Study
Operational Definition

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

The Effect of Food Insecurity on Nutrition
An Overview of Food Security
Indicators of Food Security
Determinants of Food Expenditure
Determinants of Dietary Diversity
Food Expenditure, Dietary Diversity and Malnutrition
Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) Programs
CCT Programs across Countries
The Philippine CCT Program: Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program
Objectives of Pantawid Pamilya
Expected Outcomes
Eligibility Criteria
Targeting System
Program Package
Conditionalities
Issues on Pantawid Pamilya
CCT Program and Food Security
Impact Evaluation of Pantawid Pamilya
Conceptual Framework

ornunpe

11
11
16
17
18
20
21
23

27
27
28
29
29
30
31
32
35
36

METHODOLOGY

Research Design
Location of the Study
Sampling Design
Data Collection
Desk Review
Focus Group Discussion (FGD)
Secondary Data
Survey
Analytical Framework
Operational Framework

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Pantawid Pamilya in San Pablo City

Financial Management Practices, Experiences and Insight About the Program
Cash Transfer Management Practices of Beneficiary Households
Experiences of the Beneficiary Households in the Program
Insights of Beneficiary and Non-beneficiary households about the Program

Socio-economic and Demographic Profile

Nutritional Status of Children (Ages 6-60 months) among the Beneficiary and

Non-beneficiary Households

Food Expenditure and HDDS Survey Results

Food Expenditure and HDDS Survey Discussion

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
RECOMMENDATION

LITERATURE CITED

vi

46

46
49
49
50
52
53

55
57

72

74

76

TABLE

LIST OF TABLES

Summary of the Pantawid Pamilya conditionalities.
List of selected barangays for the survey.

Socioeconomic and demographic profile of the beneficiary and non-
beneficiary households.

Percentage distribution based on the nutritional status of 6-60
months old children among beneficiary and non-beneficiary
households.

Percent distribution of total family expenditure by major
expenditure group of the beneficiary and non-beneficiary
households for six months (November 2013-April2014).

T-test analysis of food expenditure, food expenditure per capita and
HDDS of the beneficiary and non-beneficiary households for six
months (November 2013 - April 2014).

Association of food expenditure and the different characteristics of
the beneficiary and non-beneficiary households.

Association of HDDS and the different characteristics of the
beneficiary and non-beneficiary households.

vii

PAGE
31

39
54

55

58

59

62

64

a

LIST OF FIGURES

Overview of food security
Conceptual framework of the study

The map of San Pablo City with the selected barangays for the survey
identified

Analytical framework of the study
Operational framework of the study

The organizational chart of Pantawid Pamilya from regional to
household level

Percentage of expenditure on different food groups of the beneficiary
and non-beneficiary households for six months (November 2013-
April 2014)

Amount of expenditure on different food groups of the beneficiary
and non-beneficiary household for six months (November2013-April
2014)

viii

PAGE
14

37
40

44
45

48

60

61

APPENDIX

1
2

LIST OF APPENDICES

UNICEF conceptual framework

The amount of cash transfers given in selected CCT programs

Payee, frequency of payments and payment system of different
CCT programs across countries

Objectives, components, conditionalities and eligibility criteria
of selected CCT programs

The timeline of increase in coverage (number of beneficiary
household) of Pantawid Pamilya from 2007-2014 at national
level

Summary of impact of cash transfer program on food
consumption and nutrition

Focus group discussion (FGD) questions

Family income and expenditure survey (FIES)

Household dietary diversity score (HDDS) questionnaire
Household dietary diversity score (HDDS) questionnaire guide
Family development session (FDS) topics

The creation of barangay action team (BAT)

WHO conceptual framework on childhood stunting

Qualitative interpretation of correlation coefficient

PAGE
85

86

87

90

92

93

95
97
118
119
124
125

128
129

ABSTRACT

KRISTINE R. VIGILLA. University of the Philippines Los Bafios. December 2014.
Food Expenditure and Dietary Diversity of Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program
(4Ps) Beneficiary and Non-beneficiary Households in Selected Barangays in San

Pablo City, Laguna.

Major Professor: Dr. Wilma A. Hurtada

The main objective of the study was to analyze the food expenditure and dietary
diversity of Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program (4Ps) of the 270 beneficiary and non-
beneficiary households in selected barangays in San Pablo City, Laguna. A focus group
discussions (FGD) were done to investigate the practices of the beneficiary households in
terms of cash transfers management. The study also used secondary data to determine the
height and weight of the children (6 to 60 months old) and describe their nutritional
status. And lastly, the study determine the food expenditure and household dietary
diversity score (HDDS) of the households through survey. Findings show that the
beneficiary households mainly allot the cash transfers they received for school, health
and nutrition of their children. With respect to the nutritional status of the children,
frequency analysis suggest that there is a higher prevalence of malnutrition among
beneficiary households. On the other hand, survey results showed that beneficiary
households spend more on food (absolute value) and have more diverse diet when
compared using T-test for independent samples. The association of the socio-economic
and demographic profile with the food expenditure and dietary diversity of the
households were also analyzed using correlation analysis. The results suggest that
beneficiary households spend more on food and have more diverse diet with a higher
household size and income. Findings also imply that those who live in urban areas tend to
have higher food expenditure compared to those who live in rural areas. Moreover, those
who live in rural areas tend to have higher HDDS than those who live in urban areas.
Finally, female-headed households, as well as whose finances were managed by a family
member with higher educational attainment, tend to have more diverse diet. These
findings imply that there are still problems to be addressed, especially in the nutrition
aspect of the program in the area.

INTRODUCTION

Background of the Study

Malnutrition remains to be a serious problem in many countries. To address this
problem, risks factors should be identified to develop appropriate interventions.
However, risk factors of malnutrition are multifaceted and complex. The relative
importance of each of the known risk factor of malnutrition also tends to vary between
settings. For developing countries, food insecurity is often used as a determinant factor of

malnutrition (Saaka and Osman 2013).

According to FAO (1999), food security is the condition wherein all people, at all
times, have physical, social and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food
which meets their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life. This
concept of food security is further supported by its four pillars, namely: availability,
access, utilization, and stability. Food availability is the condition wherein there is
sufficient, nutritious food and adequate nutrition-relevant services available for the
people. Thus, resources must first be available to achieve food security. On the other
hand, food access refers to the ability to produce and/or purchase the food needed by the
people to meet their dietary requirements and food preferences as well as the assets and
services necessary to achieve and maintain their optimal nutritional status (Ecker and

Breisinger 2012).

Another important component of food security is food utilization. Proper food

utilization that works towards food security are as follows: food should be properly used;

2
proper food processing and storage techniques are employed; adequate knowledge of
nutrition and child care techniques exists and is applied; and adequate health and

sanitation services exist (USAID 1992).

The fourth pillar of food security is food stability. The concept of food stability is
that people must have access and adequate food at all time to be food secure and that
there should be no risk of losing food as a consequence of sudden shocks or cyclical

events (FAO 2006).

One of the major obstacles to achieve food security at the household level is
poverty, thus, poverty eradication is essential to improve access to food (Ecker and
Breisinger 2012). Poverty is the driving factor in the lack of resources to purchase or
otherwise acquire food. With other socioeconomic and political problems, poverty creates

the bulk of food insecurity around the globe (FAO 1999).

In the Philippines, based on the statistics from the Philippine Statistical System
(PSS) through the National Statistical Coordination Board (NSCB), one out of every five
or 19.7 percent Filipino families is considered as poor. This figure is slightly lower than

in 2009 and 2006, which were 20.5 and 21.0 percent, respectively (NSCB 2013).

Aside from poverty incidence, the cited report also included subsistence incidence
or the proportion of Filipino families in extreme poverty which was estimated at 7.5
percent. This means, at that time, there were around 1.6 million extremely poor families

that are living below the food threshold or the means to meet their basic food needs and

3
satisfy the nutritional requirements set by the Food and Nutrition Research Institute

(FNRI) (NSCB 2013). In short, these are the food insecure Filipino households.

There has been a wide range of social protection programs implementation toward
poverty reduction in the Philippines. Findings show that inadequate human capabilities
and limited access to social services are the main culprits causing poverty as well as
inequality in the country. In response, the National Government of the Philippines
adopted the Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) Program, which is now known as
Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino (Bridging Filipino Families out of Poverty) Program. The
Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program, or Pantawid Pamilya/4Ps for short, has the
primary objective of providing social assistance and social development (UNPAN, 2009).
In this program, cash assistance is provided to the poor to alleviate their immediate need
as a short term answer to poverty alleviation. The program also aims to break the
intergenerational poverty cycle through investments in human capital, specifically

education, health and nutrition (Reyes and Tabuga 2013).

The Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) is the lead agency
in the implementation of Pantawid Pamilya. It works in partnership with key agencies
involved formalized by the government like the Department of Education (DepEd) and
the Department of Health (DOH), and Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP) which help
ensure the availability of health and education services as well as provide necessary
support services in the targeted areas. Inter-agency committees were created at the

national, regional and municipality levels (Fernandez and Olfindo 2011).

4
Currently, the program has been running for more than seven years from when it
was pilot tested. Various studies have been conducted to evaluate the program. However,

focus on the nutrition aspect of these studies is very limited.

Statement of the Problem

On the surface, CCT programs have been achieving its goals in various countries.
However, compliance with health and nutrition conditionalities still needs improvement
as compared to education conditionalities which has very high compliance (Bello et al.
2011).

One of the major objectives of Pantawid Pamilya is to break the intergenerational
poverty cycle through investments in education, health and nutrition. To achieve this, the
program provides cash grant amounting to PhP 500 per month that is intended for the
health and nutrition expenses of the beneficiary household, aside from the PhP 300 per
month per child intended for education expenses for 10 months (Reyes and Tabuga
2013). This was designed to increase the per capita income of the beneficiary households
by 23 percent with an expected outcome of 4 percent increase in food expenditure

(UNPAN 2009).

In 2012, the Australian Agency for International Development (AusAID) funded
an impact evaluation study of Chaudhury et al. (2013) on the Philippine Conditional Cash
Transfer Program — Pantawid Pamilya — with the support of World Bank, East Asia and
Pacific Region, as well as the Country Management Unit of the Philippines. The impact

evaluation study lacked data on food expenditure and dietary diversity of the beneficiary

5
households. Although there was higher spending on protein-rich foods, it failed to report
the impact of the program on the share of food expenditure in the household budget and
on the dietary diversity (as a measure of food security) of the beneficiary households,
which are the common indicators used by other CCT programs (e.g. Bolsa Alimentagao
of Brazil, Progresa of Mexico, PRAF of Honduras and RPS of Nicaragua). Data on food
expenditure and dietary diversity, as well as the implication on the program to the
nutritional status of the young children, would be helpful in improving the strategies of

the program, especially in the aspect of nutrition.

Furthermore, the government has no control over how the beneficiary households
spend the cash transfer. Thus, it may be interesting to know how the beneficiary

households manage their finances.

Objectives of the Study

This paper aims to compare the food expenditure and dietary diversity of Pantawid
Pamilyang Pilipino Program beneficiary and non-beneficiary households on selected
barangays in San Pablo City, Laguna.

Specifically, the objectives of the study were:

1. to describe the practices of the beneficiary households in managing cash transfers;

2. to describe the nutritional status of 6 to 60 months old children among beneficiary

and non-beneficiary households;

3. to analyze the food expenditure of the beneficiary and non-beneficiary

households;

6
to determine the food expenditure of the beneficiary and non-beneficiary
households;
to compare the food expenditure of beneficiary and non-beneficiary
households;
to compare the expenditure of beneficiary and non-beneficiary households
on the different food groups, and;
to determine the factors associated with the food expenditure of the

beneficiary households and non-beneficiary households.

4. to analyze the dietary diversity of the beneficiary and non-beneficiary households,

and;

a.

to determine the dietary diversity of the beneficiary and non-beneficiary
households;

to compare the dietary diversity of beneficiary and non-beneficiary
households, and;

to determine the factors associated with the dietary diversity of the

beneficiary and non-beneficiary households.

5. to suggest measures that will improve the design and implementation of the

program.

Significance of the Study

According to Adato and Bassett (2012), CCTs can affect nutrition through several
ways. The cash transfer itself can translate to increased food expenditures. CCTs also
provide workshops and trainings, which include topics on dietary diversity and
behavioral change for nutrition. These are often required in order to receive cash
transfers. In short, the increase in income, with increased nutrition awareness, directly
reduces poverty and food insecurity resulting to improved food expenditure and dietary
diversity and thus, improved children’s nutritional status. In this context, this study
analyzed food expenditure and dietary diversity of the beneficiary households of
Pantawid Pamilya by comparing it to the non-beneficiary households. As a promising
program against food insecurity and malnutrition, this study also looked at the CCT
program implications on the nutritional status of children ages 6-60 months among the
beneficiary households to better understand and help improve the effectiveness of the
program in this area. In addition, the study covered the financial management practices of
the beneficiary households over cash transfers, as well as their experiences and insights

about the program.

Results of this study can be used for planning and developing strategies and
policies to maximize the benefits of the program. This study can help in recognizing the
opportunities for improvement of the nutrition aspect of Pantawid Pamilya
implementation and in generating useful ideas, knowledge and information on how the
various implementing agencies and partners can further assist in a more precise and

effective manner.

Operational Definition

. Aggregate Expenditure — the total amount spent on goods and services at the
household level; the sum total of all the expenditures undertaken during a given time
period by the household.

. Beneficiary Households — those who are receiving cash grants and other benefits from
4Ps.

. Cash Transfer — the monetary assistance provided by a poverty alleviation program;
also known as cash grant.

. Chronic poor — those with per capita income (or consumption) levels persistently
below the poverty line during a long period of time. See also Poverty Threshold.

. Conditional Cash Transfer or CCT Programs - are programs that aim to alleviate
poverty through monetary and in-kind benefits, as well as reduce future incidence of
poverty by encouraging investments in education, health and nutrition.

. Dietary Diversity Score - the sum of the different food groups consumed. For
Household Dietary Diversity Score or HDDS, it is meant to provide an indication of
household economic access to food.

Extremely Poor Household — a household which fails to satisfy the food threshold.
Financial Manager — the person in-charge of handling finances in the household.

. Food security - exists when all people, at all times, have physical, social and
economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food which meet their dietary needs

and food preferences for an active and healthy life.

12.

13.

14.

15°

16.

17.

9

. Food Threshold - refers to the annual per capita cost of basic food requirements

which meet 100% adequacy of the recommended intake of protein and energy (2,000
calories) and 80% adequacy of other nutrients. The monthly food threshold for a

family of five as of 2012 is PhP 5,513.

. Household Member — those who live or belong in the same house.

Income gap — measures the amount of income required by the poor in order to get out
of poverty, in relation to the poverty threshold itself.

Non-beneficiary Households — those who are not receiving any assistance from 4Ps.
Nutrition security — is a condition when all people at all times consume food of
sufficient quantity and quality in terms of variety, diversity, nutrient content and
safety to meet their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life,
coupled with a sanitary environment, adequate health and care.

Poverty Incidence - the proportion of families/individuals whose annual per capita
income falls below the annual per capita poverty threshold to the total number of
families/individuals.

Poverty Line/Threshold - is equal to the annual per capita food threshold plus the cost
of other basic non-food requirements. The monthly poverty threshold for a family of
five as of 2012 is PhP 7,890.

Stunting — used to indicate chronic malnutrition since it reflects the failure to reach

linear skeletal growth.

10
18. Subsistence Incidence - the proportion of families/individuals whose annual per
capita income falls below the annual per capita food threshold to the total
families/individuals.
19. Transient Poor - those whose per capita income (or consumption) levels fluctuate
around the poverty line.
20. Wasting — thinness reflects the recent or current weight loss, often associated with

disease and/or acute food shortage or emergency conditions.

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

The Effect of Food Insecurity on Nutrition

Malnutrition is a condition caused by inadequate or unbalanced food intake or
from poor absorption of food consumed. The risk factors of malnutrition are known to be
multifaceted and complex. To address these, context-specific risk factors must be
identified for appropriate interventions to be implemented. One of the risk factors of
malnutrition is household food insecurity, wherein household have limited or uncertain
availability of nutritionally adequate and safe foods, or limited or uncertain ability to
acquire food in socially acceptable ways. As a result, there would be anxiety and
uncertainty about household food supply, insufficient quality of food, and insufficient

food intake by household members (Saaka and Osman 2013).

The study of Ajao et al. (2010) assessed the influence of household food security
status on the nutritional status of under-five children in Ile-Ife, Nigeria. A semi-structured
questionnaire was administered among the mothers of the households and their children.
Results showed that food-insecure households were five times more likely than secure
households to have wasted children. In conclusion, households with food insecurity were

more likely to have malnourished children.

An Overview of Food and Nutrition Security

Food security is defined as a situation “when all people, at all times, have
physical, social and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet their

dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life” (World Food Summit

12
1996). This definition was also confirmed during the World Summit of Food Security in
2009. The four pillars of food security (i.e. availability, access, utilization, and stability)
were added to the concept and that the nutritional dimension is integral to the concept.
Since then, appeals have been made for concerted actions at all levels (i.e., individual,
household, national, regional, and global) and coordinated efforts and shared
responsibilities across institutions, societies, and economies to tackle food insecurity

effectively (Ecker and Breisinger 2012).

The first pillar of food security is availability. This ensures that there are
sufficient, nutritious food and adequate nutrition-relevant services. Adequate food supply
is one of the many preconditions of having enough food to eat (Sen 1981). Social
sectors, including primary health and education, play a critical role in the prevention of

nutritional deficiencies.

Access serves as the second pillar of food security. It refers to the ability of a
household to produce and/or purchase the food needed by all household members to meet
their dietary requirements and food preferences as well as the assets and services
necessary to achieve and maintain an optimal nutritional status (Ecker and Breisinger

2012).

The third pillar of food security is utilization. This is the condition of adequate
intake of sufficient and safe food based on individual physiological requirements. Lastly,
the fourth pillar of food security is stability, which is the condition that household or

individual must have access and adequate food at all time (Ecker and Breisinger 2012). A

13
diagram of the overview of food security is shown in Figure 1. This is similar to the
UNICEF Conceptual Framework (Appendix 1) which focuses on the causal factors of
malnutrition. This diagram shows the main factors of food security on the macro and
micro levels and their linkages across sectors and levels, which in turn determine
nutrition outcomes. The major channels through which external shocks/stress and
interventions at the macro and micro levels sequentially translate into individual
nutritional status and how this affects the economic and social developments in countries

and households (and their individual members) are also illustrated.

The macro level focuses on the national level of food security. Four critical
factors can affect the food security system at this level, namely: macroeconomic stability,
economic growth and its distribution, public spending, and governance and quality of
institutions. A country must maintain its economic ability to attain food availability, even
in times of economic crisis, to assure food security. Public spending, on the other hand, is
the key tool of the government towards improving food security. Government and certain
institutions greatly affect the macro level of food security since they determine the
allocation of resources for spending and investments that can help ease food insecurity
across different sectors (i.e. agriculture and water, trade and transport, health and
education), which contribute to food access and nutrition by providing food, generating
household incomes, and/or supplying assets and services essential for malnutrition

prevention and treatment, and regions within the country (Ecker and Breisinger 2012).

Interventions MACRO : Economy & state

> Macroeconomk
stability

> Quality of institutions > Economic growth
& governance & structure

Economic crises &

Key sectors climate change
—1—

Agriculture & Infrastructure & Public health &

water trade education

Economic policies &
investments

MICRO: Household & household members.

Social protection
‘measures

access Natural disasters &

Food Assets & services
* Income * Water

* Prices = Shelter &

* Production sanitation

for own Health care
consumption © Information &
knowledge

Resource
allocation
&care

Food & nutrient
intake

Human capacity &
productivity
ECONOMIC & SOCIAL
DEVELOPMENT

Figure 1. Overview of food security (adopted from Ecker and Breisinger 2012).

On the other hand, micro dimension of the system focuses on the economic and
physical access to food and assets and public services (which directly affect the health
status) at household and individual level. Food access is mainly affected by income and

assets necessary for own food production for intake. Poverty not only limits the access to

15
food of sufficient quantity and quality but also increases the vulnerability in increasing
food prices. These factors affect the nutritional status of an individual. Therefore, poverty
is regarded as the major obstacle to achieve food security at the household level. Thus,
poverty should be eradicated to improve access to food (Ecker and Breisinger 2012), or at

the very least should be alleviated.

According to Pangaribowo (2013), the concept of nutrition security came into the
picture when it was recognized that it is a necessity to include nutritional aspects into
food security. While food is defined as any substance that people eat and drink to
maintain life and growth, nutrition adds the aspects of health services, healthy
environment and caring practices. Thus, FAO defined nutrition security as a condition
when all people at all times consume food of sufficient quantity and quality in terms of
variety, diversity, nutrient content and safety to meet their dietary needs and food
preferences for an active and healthy life, coupled with a sanitary environment, adequate

health and care.

Furthermore, the concept of food security and nutrition security were then
combined and termed as food and nutrition security. It is a condition when all people, at
all times, have physical, social and economic access to sufficient, safe, and nutritious
food which meets their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life.
Food and nutrition security is also a condition where adequate food (quantity, quality,
safety, socio-cultural acceptability) is available and accessible for and satisfactorily

utilized by all individuals at all times to live a healthy and happy life. As a result of

16
combining the two concepts in a more integrated way as a single goal of policy, food

security and nutrition security is now more widely used (Pangaribowo 2013).

Indicators of Food and Nutrition Security

Food access can be measured in a number of ways including quantitative food
consumption surveys or income and expenditure analyses (Saaka and Osman 2013). In
the study of Melgar-Quinonez et al. (2007), the association between food insecurity,
determined by a modified version of the U.S. Household Food Security Survey Module
(US HFSSM), and total daily per capita (DPC) consumption (measured as household
expenditures) of urban and rural households in Bolivia, Burkina Faso, and the Philippines
were examined. Results showed that food-secure households had significantly higher
total DPC food expenditures as well as expenditures on animal source foods, vegetables,
and fats and oils than moderately and severely food-insecure households. Their findings
also suggested that those households facing food insecurity, even at moderate levels,
might have very poor dietary quality, characterized by the low intake of micronutrient-

tich foods.

There are numerous indicators of food and nutrition security at the global,
national, household and individual level. Each indicator reflects a specific aspect of FNS
and is only relevant for certain situations. One of these indicators is the diet diversity
score (DDS). Dietary diversity represents the number of different foods or food groups
consumed over a given reference period. It is used as an indicator of food and nutrition

security because it correlates with measures of food consumption and is a good measure

17
of household food access and caloric availability. Varied diet is a worthy outcome in

itself and is associated with a number of improved health outcomes (Pangaribowo 2013).

In the study of Saaka and Osman (2013), household dietary diversity score
(HDDS) was used to assess the magnitude of household food insecurity and their
consequences on the nutritional status of children 6-36 months and mothers in Tamale
Metropolis of Northern Ghana. Their results showed that HDDS was significantly
associated with body mass index (BMI) of mothers and chronic malnutrition (stunted
growth). Thus, these findings strengthen the evidence that improved household dietary
diversity is a proxy measure of household food and security. It implies that the economic
ability of a household to access a variety of foods improve the nutritional status among

young children and mothers.

Determinants of Food Expenditure

Various factors affect food expenditure and dietary diversity of a household and
one of these is income. Several countries studied and documented the income-related
differences in dietary intake patterns. Results showed that higher socio-economic status

had more conducive diets in achieving good health.

The food expenditure patterns between low and higher-income households were
compared in the study of Kirkpatrick and Tarasuk (2003). It was reported that total food
expenditures of the lower-income households were lower as compared with other
households. Lower-income households also purchased fewer servings of fruits and

vegetables.

18

In the study of Donkoh et al. (2014), the determinants of household food
expenditure and its effect on welfare was investigated in Ghana. Results showed that
households with female heads with little education, smaller households and households
living farther from the nation’s capital had spent greater percentages of their incomes on
food. The findings confirmed Engel’s Law which describe the relationship of household
expenditure and income; food expenditure increases with income and family size, but
food budget shares declines with income. In short, the poorer a family is, the larger the
budget it spends on nourishment.

Furthermore, the effect of gender power in intra-household in spending pattern
was explored by Gitter and Barham (2007). Results revealed that when women were
more powerful, more household resources were devoted toward children.

Moreover, location had an effect on the food expenditure of the household. In the
study of Fousekis and Lazaridis (2001), the food demand in the urban and rural areas of
Greece were estimated and compared. The study relied on nonparametric methods,
particularly on Kernel analysis. It was observed that the food expenditure of rural
households was higher than those of urban households. The differences could be
attributed to the relatively higher amount of consumption from own production of basic
food items in rural areas, higher or more availability of other consumer goods (education,

health, entertainment, etc.) in the urban areas and higher rent paid in urban areas.

Determinants of Dietary Diversity

Dietary diversity is used as proxy in assessing food and nutrition security since it

can reflect the economic access of the household to food. The strategies employed by the

19
household for the acquisition of food also play a vital role. The food access of the
households can be established by considering their ability to produce food or exchange
their assets for food (e.g. bartending, purchase and food—for-work). Thus, the income;
their access to, use of and/or ownership of land; their livestock; their labour and the
products of their labour; their inheritance; and gifts and transfers are all considered as
people’s assets. However, the value of the said assets varies with market forces, including

wages and prices of commodities (FAO 1997).

Additionally, food insecurity of the lower income groups is mainly due to
poverty. Also, most of these food-insecure people live in the rural areas. Thus, countries
must develop strategies to lift the purchasing power of the poor by helping them to have

income growth (Rosen and Shapouri 2001).

A study was conducted by Aidoo et al. (2013) to assess the determinants of
household food security among rural households in Sekyere-African Plains in Ghana
district. Results showed that with increasing household size, the household food security
decreases. The increase in household size indirectly reduces the income per head, and
thus, expenditure per head and per capita consumption. Also, in areas where households
depend on less productive agricultural land, having a larger household size leads to an
increase in demand for food. Since this demand is not matched with the existing food

supply, the household ends up becoming food insecure.

Aside from income, household size and location, factors affecting household food

security in various developing countries have been documented in some literatures.

20
Among the commonly identified determinants of food security are educational attainment
and sex of the household head.

In the study of Oluwatayo (2008), sex and educational level attained by the
household head had a positive influence on food security among the Nigerian households.
These findings are corroborated in the study of Bashir et al. (2012) regarding the
educational attainment of the household head and food security. On the other hand,
Akarue and Bakporhe (2013) reported that more male-headed households are food

insecure than female-headed households.

Food Expenditure, Dietary Diversity and Malnutrition

Increases in incomes of households can improve their food security in terms of
improving their access or capacity to acquire or avail food. Additional income can also
result to an increase in food consumption leading to improved nutritional well-being as
measured by anthropometric indicators. Generally, increases in income are associated
with increases in caloric intake of staple foods, especially for the poorer household but
still lesser than those with higher income groups. It is also associated with non-staple
food consumption, especially meats (von Braun 1992).

Brinkman et al. (2010) assessed the impact of global economic and financial
crises on food expenditure/consumption, nutrition and health using data from the World
Food Programme (WFP). It was observed that due to high prices, the households were
forced to reduce the quality and quantity of the food they buy and consume.

Consequently, a large number of vulnerable households became at risk of malnutrition,

21
and among the population group most affected were young children, pregnant and
lactating women.

On the other hand, Campbell et al. (2010) characterized the relationship of
household expenditure on rice and non-rice food with maternal and child malnutrition.
Using data from the Bangladesh Nutrition Surveillance Project, 2000-2005, the
prevalence of maternal and child malnutrition were measured in respective set of food
expenditure category. Findings revealed that households that spent a greater proportion
on non-rice foods and less rice had lower prevalence of maternal and child malnutrition.

It appears that households must not only have the means to buy food but also the
knowledge on which food to buy in order to reduce malnutrition and even prevent
mortality. Campbell et al. (2008) examined the relationships between household food
expenditures and under-5 child mortality among families in rural Indonesia using data
collected between 2000 and 2003 in the Indonesia Nutrition and Health Surveillance
System. Food expenditures were divided into 4 major categories: plant foods (fruits and
vegetables), animal foods, other non-grain foods, and grain foods (primarily rice). The
findings suggest that a greater proportion of income was spent on fruits and vegetables

and less on grains that lower under-5 child mortality.

Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) Programs

Numerous programs have been developed to eradicate poverty such as livelihood
programs and micro financing. In recent years, the concept of Conditional Cash Transfer

Programs as an instrument to alleviate poverty became popular.

22

Conditional Cash Transfer or CCT Programs, as described by Skoufias and Di

Maro (2008), are programs that aim to alleviate poverty through monetary and in-kind
benefits, as well as reduce future incidence of poverty by encouraging investments in
education, health and nutrition. CCT Program schemes include provision of cash directly
to poor households on the condition of fulfilling specific requirements such as minimum
attendance of children in school, and/or attendance at health clinics, participation in
immunization, and the like. These requirements distinguish CCT from unconditional cash
transfers (such as pensions to senior citizens and the physically challenged children). As a
result, the schemes create motivation among households to adjust their behavior towards
nationally accepted social goals. Thus, programs like these are often used to improve the
access and consumption of available goods and services like health and education (UNDP

2009).

The amount of cash transfers received by the beneficiary households of a CCT
Program varies across countries (Appendix 2). Cash transfer is often received by the
mothers. However, in some countries, students, child’s caregiver or agents are allowed as
payee of the program. Frequency and mode of payment also differ across countries. Cash
transfers are usually distributed monthly or bi-monthly through debit cards or checks

(Appendix 3).

Aside from certain conditions and attempt to influence the behavior of the
recipient, vulnerability is also recognized in CCT. It requires eligibility criteria that

determine the vulnerable person/groups are as to constitute protective social security

23
measures (UNDP 2009). This ensures that the program is indeed providing for and
enabling the individuals and groups that are in need.

The concept of CCT started in the 1990s. It originated in Latin American
countries (notably Brazil, Argentina and Mexico) mainly in response to their
macroeconomic crisis. During that time, poorer households’ demand for social services,
such as education and health, declined drastically. With this, the focus of the government
then shifted from supply-side delivery of basic services to the demand-side. They also
shifted the distribution of general subsidies to a more sharply-targeted program which

aims to improve human capital formation and its efficiency in the long run (UNDP 2009).

CCT Programs across Countries

Nowadays, several countries adopt the schemes of the CCT program, which aim
at improving children’s human capital. Mexico’s Education, Health, and Nutrition
Program or Progresa, which was launched in 1997, is the first large-scale program to
incorporate both health and education component. However, in March 2002, Progresa
changed its name to Oportunidades and broadened its objectives. This was then followed
by Families in Action or Familias en Accién (FA) program in Colombia, Family
Assistance Program or Programa de Asignacién Familiar (PRAF) in Honduras, Program
of Advancement through Health and Education (PATH) in Jamaica, Social Protection
Network or Red de Proteccién Social (RPS) in Nicaragua, and Social Solidarity Fund

(SSF) in Turkey (Rawlings and Rubio 2005). The objectives, components,

24
conditionalities and eligibility of the respective CCT programs are summarized in
Appendix 4.

In the study of Rawlings and Rubio (2005), the impact of these CCT programs
was evaluated. Results showed that programs in Colombia, Mexico and Nicaragua seem
to be effective means for promoting human capital build-up among poor households. Its
success is evidenced by increased school enrolment rates, improved preventive health
care and increase in household consumption. These empirical evidences suggest that the
programs were efficient and effective and that the evaluation of the programs was useful
in meeting new demands at hand without compromising the primary objectives of the
programs. However, it does not suggest that similar successes can be achieved in other
countries nor imply that positive results from one program subject in the said evaluation
is necessarily the best approach in achieving a particular outcome.

As a new approach to social assistance, it faces several criticisms like weak
targeting, high administrative or component costs such as materials in workfare program,
lack of integration of disparate projects with a multiplicity of overlapping or unrelated
goals, accusations of paternalism and clientelism and excessive focus on reducing current
poverty with little attention to long-term structural poverty (Rawlings and Rubio 2005).

However, most of the CCT programs today have become multi-sectoral and
integrated in nature. Thus, the prospects of tackling short-term poverty while protecting
the formation of human capital/capabilities can now, thereby, as well address long-term

poverty. This led governments in Africa and Asia to also implement such schemes as a

25
response to reducing the daunting deprivations in multiple dimensions of human

development (UNDP 2009).

The Philippine CCT Program: Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program

With its success in other countries, the national government adopted a similar
CCT program through the leadership of the Department of Social Welfare and
Development (DSWD). It is called the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program or
Pantawid Pamilya (UNPAN 2009).

The CCT program started in November 2006. With technical assistance from the
World Bank, DSWD started the implementation of the National Sector Support for Social
Welfare and Development Project (NSS-SWDRP). This project covers four reform areas,
namely: (a) Leading and Engaging the Sector in Social Protection; (b) Providing Faster
and Better Social Protection; (c) Introducing Financial Reforms to Sustain the Reform
Process; and (d) Improving Delivery Systems and Capacities through its (2) major
components: (i) Component 1- Policy and Program Reform Agenda Development; and
(ii) Component 2- Capacity Development and Installation of Systems and Tools
(UNPAN 2009).

Pantawid Pamilya was then proposed in support of the second reform agenda —
Providing Faster and Better Social Protection. This enabled DSWD to become more
effective in addressing issues related to social protection. Through this, issues related to
social protection can be addressed by supporting a system in targeting poor households

and maintain an updated database of such, which can also be used by other social

26
protection and poverty reduction programs, and by supporting the monitoring and
evaluation system of the Pantawid Pamilya as part of the effort of DSWD to move to
empirically based planning and policy (UNPAN 2009).

According to Fernandez and Olfindo (2011), Pantawid Pamilya was pilot-tested
in 2007 and was called Ahon Pamilyang Pilipino Program. With a planned target of
20,000 households, 6,000 beneficiary households were covered in the selected six
municipalities and two cities of the program. The six municipalities covered were the
following: four rural (Sibagat and Esperanza in Agusan del Sur, Lopez Jaena and
Bonifacio in Misamis Occidental) and two urban (Pasay City and Caloocan City in Metro
Manila) (Fernandez and Olfindo 2011).

After pilot-testing, full implementation of the Pantawid Pamilya immediately
followed in 2008. The target areas included 26 provinces and 12 cities nationwide,
including Quezon in Region IV-A.

Since then, Pantawid Pamilya has expanded significantly in coverage and scale
(Appendix 5). In March 2008, it scaled up as a response to the food and fuel price shocks
and global financial crisis. By January 2011, the program had about | million beneficiary
households, making it one of the largest social protection programs in the Philippines.
Various agencies like AusAID and Asian Development Bank (ADB) also provided
technical assistance and support in the subsequent phases (Fernandez and Olfindo 2011).

As of June 25, 2014, Pantawid Pamilya operates in 80 provinces covering 1483
municipalities and 144 key cities in all 17 regions nationwide. A total of 4,090,667

households are registered in the program (DSWD 2014).

27

Objectives of Pantawid Pamilya

The primary objectives of Pantawid Pamilya are to provide social assistance and
social development (Reyes and Tabuga 2013). Its purpose is to provide cash assistance to
the poor to alleviate their immediate need as an answer to short-term poverty alleviation.
Also, it aims to break the intergenerational poverty cycle through investments in human
capital i.e., education, health and nutrition. Furthermore, it aims to help fulfill the
country’s commitment to meeting some of the Millennium Development Goals (MDG),
which include: eradicating extreme poverty, achieving universal primary education,
promoting gender equality, reducing child mortality, and improving maternal health

(Fernandez and Olfindo 2011).

Expected Outcomes

Aside from the goals and objectives of the program, there are also set of expected
outcome from the beneficiary households in terms of their health and nutrition, education
and poverty or economic capacity (UNPAN 2009).

For health and nutrition of the households, the program expects to have a 10
percent increase in the number of pregnant women getting antenatal and post natal care,
and whose child birth is attended by a skilled health professional; 10 percent increase in
the number of children 0-5 years old availing of health preventive services and
immunization; 6 percent decrease in stunting among children age 0-5 years old; and 0.5

percent decrease from baseline level in the growth rate of the population (UNPAN 2009).

28
On the other hand, the program’s expected outcome in terms of education are: the
current attendance of children to increase by 8 percent; the transition rates from primary
to secondary school to increase by 8 percent; the years of education completed to increase
by one year; the elementary school gross enrollment rate for children 6 to 12 years to
increase by 5 percent; the attendance in a school or day care over 85 percent of school
days to increase by 10 percent; and increased enrollment of children 3-5 years old to day
care/pre-school by 5 percent (UNPAN 2009).
Lastly, the beneficiary households are expected to increase the share of food
expenditures in the household budget by 4 percent and the expenditure on nutrient dense

foods (protein rich foods, fruits and vegetables) by 2 percent (UNPAN 2009).

Eligibility Criteria

To be eligible or become a beneficiary of the cash grants, the household should be
a resident in poor areas selected by the program and classified as poor based on the
targeting system. The household must also have a pregnant woman or at least one child
aged 0-14 years. Lastly, they must be willing to commit and meet the conditionalities
implied in the program (Fernandez and Olfindo 2011).

Moreover, due to the reform of the educational system under the Administration
of President Aquino, the age coverage of children of Pantawid Pamilya has been
extended to 15-17 years old of poor households. However, this shall be applied only to
the households who exited early in the program because of having no 0-14 years old

anymore. Thus, eligible households shall be those who exited early in the Pantawid

29
Pamilya Program, or those who were not able to complete the 5-year program period due

to no longer having 0-14 years old or pregnant woman in the household (DSWD 2013).

Targeting System

The program targets poor households located in the poorest areas of the
Philippines. The official poverty incidence based on the latest Family Income and
Expenditure Survey (FIES) by the National Statistics Office (NSO) was employed to
identify the poorest provinces. From this, the poorest municipalities are selected using the
poverty incidence of Small Area Estimates (SAE) by the NSCB. On the other hand,
poorest cities are selected based on a standard set of indicators such as data on pockets of
poverty (Fernandez and Olfindo 2011).

In selecting poor households within the municipality, proxy means test (PMT)
method was used by determining the household’s economic condition based on
information such as household composition, socio-economic characteristics, assets,
housing conditions and tenure status, education, access to basic services, and regional
variables. This method later became the National Household Targeting System for

Poverty Reduction or NHTS-PR (Fernandez and Olfindo 2011).

Program Package

The identified poor households can receive PhP 6,000 annually (PhP 500 per
month) for their health and nutrition expenses. For education expenses, the program

provides PhP 3,000 per child for one school year (i.e. 10 months). Each beneficiary

30
household can only receive educational grant for up to a maximum of three children
(Reyes and Tabuga 2013).

For households with 15-17 years old, the program will provide social assistance in
the form of educational grant only. The cash grant is increased to Php500 from PhP300
per child considering that children will need to go to the city/municipal main proper

where the high school facility is most often located (DSWD 2013).

Conditionalities

Different conditionalities were set for the age-relevant members of the beneficiary
household in order to avail of the health and education grants. Conditionalities are
summarized in Table 1. The 0-5 year old children must visit the health centers regularly
to receive preventive health check-ups and vaccines, while the 6-14 year old children
must receive deworming pills twice a year. For education grant conditionalities, 3-5 year
old children must attend day care or pre-school classes and 6-14 year old children to
enroll in elementary or high school at least 85% of the time. On the other hand, pregnant
women must avail of pre- and post-natal care and be attended during childbirth by a
trained health professional. Lastly, the parents must attend the Family Development

Sessions (FDS) at least once a month (Fernandez and Olfindo 2011).

31

Table 1. Summary of the Pantawid Pamilya conditionalities (adopted from Fernandez
and Olfindo 2011).

HOUSEHOLD HEALTH GRANT EDUCATION GRANT
MEMBER CONDITIONALITIES CONDITIONALITIES

Children aged 3-5 years old who
receive education grants must be
enrolled in a day care or pre-school
program and maintain a class
attendance rate of 85 percent per
month.

Visit health centers to avail of
health services in the periodicity
defined by DOH protocol.

Children aged 0-
5 years

Must be enrolled in elementary or
Children aged 6- | Take de-worming pills twice a secondary school and maintain a
14 years year at schools. class attendance rate of 85 percent
per month.

Have at least one pre-natal
consultation each

Pregnant Women trimester during the pregnancy.

Delivery is assisted by skilled
health personnel.

Attend family development
sessions at least once
a month.

Grantee

Issues on Pantawid Pamilya

The salient features of Pantawid Pamilya and reviews were discussed and issues
surrounding the program were expounded by Reyes and Tabuga (2012). It questions the
integrity of the targeting system since it is based only on a single reference period in
identifying the extremely poor. Treating transient and chronic poor as the same will not
tackle poverty successfully. To address this, one needs to utilize more than one reference

period to account for the movements in and out of poverty.

32

The paper also reviewed the strategy of covering only selected barangays in some
of the municipalities to reduce data collection costs. This may lead to significant
exclusion, thus, may not be the most appropriate strategy. Another option suggested is the
use of community-based monitoring system (CBMS), which is an organized process of
data collection and processing at the local level and integration of data in local planning,
program implementation and impact-monitoring. CBMS also works towards poverty
reduction and is already used by LGUs. Thus, partnering with LGUs may be a more
practical solution. This would not only minimize duplication of efforts and wastage of
resources, but it would also encourage greater buy-in by the local governments in
national programs (Reyes and Tabuga 2013).

Furthermore, the effect of the amount of cash grant received by the beneficiaries
of the program was brought into question in terms of its sufficiency to encourage the
children to go to school or is there an incidence that the beneficiaries’ participation in
labor force reduced due to transfer (Reyes and Tabuga 2013).

Lastly, Llanto (2008) and Reyes and Tabuga (2012), suggested that concerns about the
program to ensure that the extremely poor experience the maximum benefits from the program
must be addressed. Furthermore, empirical evidence the 4Ps program impacts human capital

outcomes should be established before contemplating any scaling up.

CCT Program and Food Security

As a promising program, it is often correlated to improved food security. In other
countries, CCT Programs are rigorously reviewed to evaluate its impact not only in health

and education but also in terms of household expenditure and dietary diversity.

33)

Studies on impact assessment of Bolsa Alimentagdo of Brazil, Progresa of
Mexico, PRAF of Honduras and RPS of Nicaragua showed that the programs led to a
change in household expenditure. Specifically, survey revealed that there was an increase
in the average level of consumption (purchases and production) among Progresa
beneficiaries of Mexico. Their food expenditure increased from 2 to 10.6 percent of total
expenditure compared to control households. Higher expenditure was allocated on fruits,
vegetables, meats and animal products (IFPRI 2002). In terms of dietary diversity, an
increase in the number of food items purchased was also observed as an impact of cash
transfer programs (Appendix 6). In Nicaragua for example, the RPS beneficiary
households consumed additional four food items, on the average, compared to the non-
beneficiary households. Furthermore, beneficiaries also consumed food of higher
nutritional quality. They consumed less of the two staples (grain and beans) and more
nutrient dense foods such as meats, vegetables and fruits (Adato and Bassett 2012).

On the other hand, these factors have not yet been evaluated among Pantawid
Pamilya beneficiary households (Chaudhury et al. 2013). NSCB still view Pantawid
Pamilya as a useful tool in eradicating poverty, which is the driving factor in the lack of
resources to purchase or otherwise acquire food.

According to an NSCB (2013) report, food threshold should be satisfied first to
attain poverty threshold. The food threshold is the minimum income required by a family
to meet its basic food needs and satisfy the nutritional requirements set by the FNRI,
while having individuals in the family remaining economically and socially productive.

Poverty threshold, on the other hand, is a similar concept but incorporates the costs of

34
basic non-food needs, such as clothing, housing, transportation, health, and education
expenses, among others, in addition to costs of basic food needs. Poor families are
classified as those whose incomes are below poverty threshold while extremely poor are
those whose incomes are below food threshold.

Aside from this, NSCB also released other poverty-related statistics report, such
as the income gap. Income gap is the measure of the amount of income required by the
poor in order to get out of poverty, in relation to the poverty threshold itself. In 2012,
poor families need 26.2 percent increase in income to attain poverty threshold. In short,
for a poor family with five members, an additional income of PhP 2,067 per month is
needed to move out of poverty in 2012. Thus, if the government were to provide mere
cash transfer to all poor households in terms of what they would require to cross the
poverty threshold, a total of Php124 billion in 2012 would be required to eradicate
poverty. This estimation is relatively big when compared vis-a-vis to the budget of the
DSWD for the Pantawid Pamilya for the entirety of 2012 which was only Php 39.4
billion (NSCB 2013).

Furthermore, the Pantawid Pamilya program is designed to constitute
approximately 23 percent of beneficiary household per capita income. However, the
beneficiaries were receiving only 11 percent. It was concluded that to ensure that the
beneficiary households are receiving the full benefit of the program, more efforts should

be exerted (Chaudhury et al. 2013).

35

Impact Evaluation of Pantawid Pamilya

Based on the impact evaluation of Pantawid Pamilya, it appears that it is
achieving its objectives in terms of maternal and child health. Poor mothers now have
access to basic health service as evident on their use of antenatal and postnatal care.
Severe stunting has been reduced which indicates that the program is enabling the
families to better care for their children in a sustained and consistent manner. Children
(ages 0-5) are receiving age-appropriate health services including regular growth
monitoring, receipt of deworming pills, and vitamin A supplementation. The program is
also having an impact on the health of school-aged children 6-14 years old by ensuring
their access to deworming pills (Chaudhury et al. 2013). Although the program has
seemingly been achieving its goal in this area, the compliance with the health
conditionalities still need improvement compared to education conditionalities which has
very high compliance (Bello et al. 2011).

In terms of socio-economic indicators, there is a shift in spending patterns of poor
households. Increase in spending in education and medical expenses were observed.
Also, it was observed that poor household beneficiaries spend 38 percent more per capita
on protein-rich food such as dairy and eggs. However, the study did not conclude that
there was an increase in overall level of expenditure or consumption. Although, based on
the estimated per capita expenditure per day of sample households, reports suggest that
the cash grants represents an approximate 11 percent of household’s per capita

expenditure. To confirm this, data on aggregate consumption of the poor household is

36
required. Further research is needed to better understand the impact of Pantawid Pamilya
on household consumption or expenditure (Chaudhury et al. 2013).

Since Pantawid Pamilya or CCT in general is a relatively new approach
compared to other traditional social assistance programs, further studies need to be
conducted to assess its effectiveness. Although, it seems to be a promising program as it
achieves its primary objectives in other countries, its replicability in different conditions
still remains a challenge (Rawlings and Rubio 2005). Thus, in-depth qualitative study

will lead to a better understanding on the socio-economic impact of Pantawid Pamilya.

Conceptual Framework

Figure 2 shows the conceptual framework of the study. This study investigated
the implications of whether a poor household receiving cash transfer or not (independent
variable) on their food expenditure and dietary diversity (dependent variable). It also
determined the association of the respondents’ socio-economic and demographic
characteristics (modulating variable) on their food expenditure and dietary diversity.
Furthermore, nutritional status of the children ages 6 to 60 months (dependent variable)

among the respondents was also described.

Food Expenditure

Cash Grant from
Pantawid Pamilya

Dietary Diversity

Socio-economic a
Demographic
Profile

Figure 2. Conceptual framework of the study.

37

Nutritional Status
of Children
(ages 6-60 months)


METHODOLOGY

Research Design

The identified research problems and objectives of the study were addressed
through a descriptive research design. The implementation of the program, Pantawid
Pamilya of DSWD City Link in San Pablo City and the practices of the beneficiary
households in terms of financial management of the cash grant or cash transfer they
receive from the program were described. The food expenditure and dietary diversity of
the beneficiary households were also analyzed by comparing it to food expenditure and
dietary diversity of non-beneficiary households. Lastly, the food expenditure and dietary
diversity of the two groups were also correlated with various socio-economic and
demographic characteristics of the households and nutritional status of the children (ages

6-60 months) among the households.

Location of the Study

The study was conducted in San Pablo City, Laguna. The city of San Pablo is an
active participant of the program since its full implementation in 2011. This city has the
highest poverty incidence among the six cities of Laguna based on the 2003 and 2009
City and Municipal Level Poverty Estimates of NSCB. This means that compared to
other cities in Laguna, San Pablo City has the highest number of households with an

income below the poverty threshold.

39

Sampling Design

Considering the financial resources and manpower, respondents for the survey
were selected from certain barangays in San Pablo City (Figure 3). These barangays were
chosen based on the number of beneficiary and non-beneficiary households. The 10
barangays with the most number of beneficiary and non-beneficiary households were
chosen; five barangays were chosen from urban areas and five from rural areas. The

selected barangays are listed in Table 2.

Table 2. List of selected barangays for the survey.

URBAN* RURAL*
San Ignacio TI-A
Del Remedio VI-E
San Gregorio I-B
Santa Monica II-E
San Vicente Bagong Bayan

* Based on the classification of San Pablo City Planning and Development Office.

The study employed stratified random sampling using equal allocation. The
population consisted of 1262 households; 1041 of which are beneficiary household while
221 are non-beneficiary household of the program. Of these 1262 households, 270 were

selected by setting alpha to 5% and p=0.5 using the formula given as follows:

NPQ

n* IN— 1][CV(P)P]2 + PQ

40

From the sample size of 270, 135 respondents were selected from each group of

households. The respondents were randomly selected from the list of households in each

group.

Figure 3. The map of San Pablo City with the selected barangays for the survey identified

41

Data Collection

Desk Review

Information about the actual implementation of Pantawid Pamilya in San Pablo City was
gathered through interviews of the DSWD City Link. Pertinent documents that will

support the information from the interview were also obtained.

Focus Group Discussion (FGD)

Four FGD sessions, two for each group, were conducted. The FDG sessions were
participated in by household representatives who handle the finances at home. With a set
of open-ended questions, the knowledge and insights of the participants about the
program were established. For the beneficiary mothers, their cash management practices,
experience about the program and their perspective on what other ways can the program
help were explored as well (Appendix 7).

In the selection of participants, 8-10 household representatives were invited to
join each session. These household representatives were selected from the households to
be surveyed. The FGD for the beneficiary households were conducted in Bagong Bayan
and San Ignacio, while FGD for the non-beneficiary household was conducted in San

Ignacio and Barangay II-A.

Secondary Data

For the anthropometric measurements of the children ages 6-60 months, data on

their height and weight were gathered from the respective Barangay Health Center who

42

monitors the growth of the children. These data was used in determining the nutrition

status of the children based on the Child Growth Standard (CGS).

Survey

The respondents were surveyed using the modified 2006 Family Income and
Expenditure Survey (FIES) and Household Dietary Diversity Score (HDDS)
questionnaires. The FIES was used to gather data on their food expenditures on various
food groups namely: cereals and cereal preparation; roots and tubers; fruits and
vegetables; meat and meat preparations; dairy products and eggs; fish and marine
products; coffee, cocoa and tea; non-alcoholic beverages; and food not elsewhere
classified (includes sugar, oil, condiments, ice and cooked foods) as well as food
regularly consumed outside their home. Aside from food expenditures, FIES also covered
the household expenses on other major expenditure groups such as education, medical
care, etc. Data on household income, household head, financial manager and household
size were also gathered using FIES (Appendix 8).

On the other hand, Household Dietary Diversity Score (HDDS) questionnaire was
used in measuring the diet diversity of the household (Appendix 9). HDDS determined
the number of different food groups consumed by the household using the 24-hour recall
method (Appendix 10). This also reflects the economic ability of a household to access a
variety of foods. Different food 12 groups include the following: cereals; root and tubers;
vegetables; fruits; meat, poultry, offal; eggs; fish and seafood; pulses/legumes/nuts; milk
and milk products; oil/fats; sugar/honey and others (Swindale and Bilinsky 2006). HDDS

can also be used to assess food insecurity of the household (Saaka and Osman 2013).

43

Analytical Framework

Figure 4 shows the analytical framework of the study. For the content analysis of
the data gathered in FGD, all recorded information from the participants were compiled.
The compiled information were analyzed by looking for common categories or theme
across the entries for each question. Categories were then arranged from those with the
largest number of entries to those with the smallest. It was then synthesized by
summarizing the findings for each category noting the similarities and differences
between the groups.

For the survey, descriptive analysis—specifically measures of central tendency
(mean and mode), measure of dispersion (range), and frequency statistics —as well as t-
test for independent samples were used in describing the socio-economic and
demographic profile of the beneficiary and non-beneficiary households.

The food expenditure and HDDS of the beneficiary and non-beneficiary
households were compared using t-test for independent samples. It was also used in
comparing the amount and percentage of expenditure of the two groups in different food
groups. Moreover, the study used various statistical tests in the correlation analysis of
food expenditure and HDDS with the socio-economic and demographic characteristics of
the two groups. Pearson correlation coefficient was employed for continuous and discrete
quantitative variables, while Eta correlation coefficient (nominal) and Spearman

correlation coefficient (ordinal) for qualitative variables.

Furthermore, descriptive analysis particularly frequency statistics, was also used
in describing the nutritional status of the children ages 6-60 months among the

beneficiary and non-beneficiary households.

PRIMARY DATA COLLECTION SECONDARY DATA COLLECTION

Desk Review Anthropometric Measurement of
Focus Group Discussion children ages 6-60 months
Survey Height

Socio-economic and Demographic Weight

Profile

Food Expenditure
Household Dietary Diversity Score

Content Analysis

Descriptive Analysis

T-Test for Two Independent Samples
Correlation Analysis

Dd

Cash Transfers Management Practices of the Beneficiary Households

Analysis of Food Expenditure of Beneficiary and Non-beneficiary Households
Analysis of Dietary Diversity of Beneficiary and Non-beneficiary Households
Nutritional Status of Children Ages 6-60 months among Beneficiary and Non-beneficiary
Households

Figure 4. Analytical framework of the study

45
Operational Framework

On the other hand, Figure 5 shows the variables used to analyze the food
expenditure and dietary diversity of the beneficiary and non-beneficiary households.
These variables were associated with the respondents’ socio-economic and demographic
characteristics such as household size, income, location, educational attainment and sex
of the person managing the finances in the household. Furthermore, to describe the
nutritional status of the children ages 6 to 60 months among the beneficiary and non-
beneficiary households, indicators like weight-for-age, length/height-for-age, weight-for-

length/height and BMI-for-age were used.

Food Expenditure
% of Food Expenditure in
H hold E dit a
cel eel alpen ts Nutritional Status
Food Expenditure (absolute :
value) of Children
Food Expenditure per capita (Ages 6-60 months)
Cash Grant from Expenditure per Food Group weight-for-age
Pantawid Pamilya (absolute value and in %) height-for-age
weight-for-height
BMI-for-age
Dietary Diversity
Household Dietary Diversity

Score (HDDS)

Socio-economic and
Demographic Profile
Household Size
Income
Location
Educational Attainment of
Financial Manager
Sex of Financial Manager

Figure 5. Operational framework of the study

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The following discussions encompass the implementation of the program
Pantawid Pamilya of DSWD City Link in San Pablo City and the practices of the
beneficiary households in terms of financial management of the cash grant or cash
transfer they receive from the program. The experiences and insights of the beneficiary
households, as well as the observations and comments of the non-beneficiary households,
towards the program were also documented. Furthermore, the nutritional status of the
children (ages 6-60 months years old) among beneficiary and non-beneficiary households
were described. Lastly, the results of the comparative analysis of food expenditure and
HDDS of beneficiary and non-beneficiary households of Pantawid Pamilya in the 10

selected barangays in San Pablo City, Laguna were discussed.

Pantawid Pamilya in San Pablo City

Pantawid Pamilya in San Pablo City started in the year 2011. Prior to this, they
conducted a survey and identified the households qualified for the program. However,
before the households could be registered to the program, they were asked to comply
with certain requirements (e.g. birth certificate of the children). Those who were able to
comply with the requirements were registered to the program and became beneficiary
households. However, those who were not able to provide the said requirements,
remained in the list of qualified households but not registered to the program. Thus, they
did not receive any assistance or cash grants from the program.

Like in other municipalities, city/municipality links are assigned to organize the

program operations at the city/municipal level. Ideally, one person is assigned for every

47

1000 household to better respond to program implementation needs. In the case of San
Pablo City, there are currently three city links overseeing the 2726 beneficiary
households in 67 barangays.

These city links are also in charge of presiding the meetings in the barangays and
coordinate with several nongovernment organizations or NGOs (usually religious
organizations like Jehovah’s Witness, Christians, etc.) to conduct trainings and FDS
(family development sessions) among beneficiary households. The FDS is conducted
every month and some of the topics discussed are on responsible parenting, family
development, financial management and how to become a better member of a community
(Appendix 11). They also mobilize the beneficiary households in helping their
communities by participating in various activities like Brigada Eskwela or National
Schools Maintenance Week and street sweeping.

Parent leaders are the point-person between city links and the beneficiary
households in the barangays. Aside from trainings and monthly FDS, the parent leaders
are also able to attend trainings on food and nutrition once. Usually, they are taught about
selection and utilization of available and nutritious foods that can be found or planted in
their backyards like malunggay, saluyot, and kamote tops. They are also taught on how to
prepare certain dishes out of it.

With the help of local government units (LGUs), an organization was formed to
ease the implementation and monitoring of the program in San Pablo City. The
organization is called the Barangay Action Team (BAT). This body includes the
Barangay Chairman and other health workers in the barangay. They are tasked in

monitoring and reporting any violations in relation to the conditions of the program

48

committed by the beneficiary households. They also guide these households in the areas
like drug abuse, gambling, responsible parenting and child labor (Appendix 12). The

organizational chart of the Pantawid Pamilya is presented in Figure 6.

Pantawid Pamilya
Regional

Pantawid Pamilya
San Pablo City Link

Barangay Action
Team

Pantawid Pamilya
Parent Leader

Figure 6. The organizational chart of Pantawid Pamilya from regional to household level

Aside from this, the DSWD City Link started organizing the women in various
barangays; the women organization is called Kababaihan Liping Pilipina or KALIPI.
Members of this organization are usually the beneficiary households. It aims to empower

and help the women in the community to generate income. With the help of LGU, DA

49

and DOLE, the women are given livelihood such as paper bag making which they sell to
contracted buyer. Moreover, they are also trained on possible business ventures like
pulvoron, candy and soap making. However, since the organization is still in its early
stages, the income generated is still minimal.

Furthermore, the DSWD City Link also tap various government organizations like
DA to provide seeds for beneficiary households to start their own backyard gardening
that will enable the households to have an additional source of food. However, the
provision of seeds is limited to a number of households.

Financial Management Practices, Experiences and
Insights about the Program

The Focus Group Discussion (FGD) was done to document the practices of the
beneficiary households in managing the cash transfers they receive from Pantawid
Pamilya, as well as their experiences and insights on the program. The non-beneficiary

households were also asked about their observations and comments towards the program.

Cash Transfer Management Practices of Beneficiary Households

Before the beneficiary households were registered to the program, they were
informed that the cash grant is intended for their children, specifically for their education.
Thus, this led the parents to separate the cash grant from their income and solely spend
the cash grant for the benefit of their children. They expressed that they are now able to
provide for the needs of their children especially in terms of school, health and nutrition.

Some said that they have more time and attention for their children now since they

50

stopped engaging in card games or gambling, which is prohibited to those who are

beneficiary of the Pantawid Pamilya.

However, beneficiary households still differ in the way they spend the cash grant.
Some of them spend the cash grant immediately upon receiving it. Since the cash grant is
received every other month, some of these beneficiary households pay the loans they
incurred two months after receiving their last cash grant. During the months between
May and June when classes usually begin, some use the grant to buy uniforms and school
supplies.

On the other hand, majority of the beneficiary households do not immediately
spend the cash grant. They budget the money, allot it mostly on school-related expenses
(e.g. school projects, baon, supplies). Some of the parents even allot the entire grant for
school-related expenses since they can afford to buy food for their family using their own
income. Beneficiary households also buy food for their children like bread, biscuits for
baon, fruits and milk, as well as vitamins. If there is still money left, they use it to buy
clothes, slippers, bags and other needs of their children.

Non-beneficiary household neighbors also observed these things. Unlike before,
some of their beneficiary household neighbors are now able to feed their family three
times a day. They also mentioned that their beneficiary household neighbors are now able

to buy a variety of nutritious foods, especially when they receive their cash grant.

Experiences of the Beneficiary Households in the Program

The beneficiary households are appreciative of being part of the program. They

expressed that they are now able to provide for the well-being of their children such as

51

new clothing, footwear, toys and sometimes even treat them in fast food chains.
Moreover, parents said that they can now provide the needs of their children in school
like school supplies, uniforms and tuition fees. These are the things that they cannot
easily provide when they were not yet in the program. This seems to encourage the
children to continue their studies and stay in school.

Aside from school and other basic needs, the parents also mentioned that they are
now able to attend to the health and nutrition needs of their children. These include
buying vitamins, medicines and having regular health check-up when the need arises.
Lastly, the beneficiary household parents are now able to buy food items such as rice,
bread, milk and vegetables not only for their children, but for other family members as
well.

Although the parents agreed that the cash grant is very helpful, majority of them
expressed that it is not enough. Majority of them stated that it depends on the number of
members of the household. Although the amount of cash grant depends on the number of
registered children in the program, those with larger household size do not feel the
benefits of the program as those with smaller household size. Also, since the cash grant
is intended to financially help the parents in their expenses for their children, the
households with large or no stable source of income are not as satisfied as much as the
those with smaller and stable source of income. Thus, a large size household with
unstable income tend to spend the cash transfer more on food alone, whereas a small
household with stable income can afford clothing and other supplies needed for schooling

in addition to food.

52

Insights of Beneficiary and Non-beneficiary Households about the Program

The beneficiary households were generally satisfied with the implementation of
the program. However, they preferred the cash grant to be given on a monthly schedule to
prevent them from borrowing money and incurring high interest rates. Some of the
households were obligated to borrow money when the cash grants were delayed, or when
the children needed to pay in school. This usually happens during holidays when
government offices are closed, possibly delaying the processing of the cash grant up to
four months. If cash grant will be given monthly, beneficiary households no longer need
to pay high interest rates for their borrowed money.

Monthly distribution of cash grant will also help the beneficiary households to
check the amount they are entitled to receive every month, especially among those who
transact or receive it through ATM. Beneficiary households who receive the cash grant
over-the-counter can easily check the amount of money they are entitled to get. Any
problems encountered during the transaction can easily be traced. However, for those
who transact through ATM, some expressed that they have no idea on how much they are
entitled to receive. Thus, monthly schedule of cash grant may be advantageous.

Most of the breadwinners of beneficiary and non-beneficiary households had no
stable job or sustainable income. Therefore, it will be better if they will be given
livelihood, especially for the housewives, in addition to the cash grant they receive. With
this, there will be more viable source of income for the family.

Moreover, both the beneficiary and the non-beneficiary households want the
program to continue and help more poor in the future. They mentioned that there are still

many households that are supposed to be beneficiary households of the program and until

53

now are not included as beneficiaries. They hope that in the succeeding waves of
household targeting for the program, more deserving households will be given a chance

to become beneficiary households.

Socio-economic and Demographic Profile

The survey was done in May 2014 in selected barangays in San Pablo City,
Laguna, namely: San Gregorio, San Ignacio, San Vicente, Sta. Monica, Del Remedio,
Bagong Bayan, I-B, II-A, II-E and VI-E using the FIES and HDDS questionnaires.

The socio-economic and demographic profile of the beneficiary and non-
beneficiary households in the 10 selected barangays is summarized in Table 3. Results
showed that the income (absolute value) of the beneficiary households were significantly
higher than those of the non-beneficiary households. However, no significant difference
was found in terms of income per capita between the two groups. This result implies that
the cash transfer from program was not enough to make the income per capita of the
beneficiary households significantly higher compared to the non-beneficiary households.

On the other hand, the household expenditure and household size of the
beneficiary households were significantly higher than the non-beneficiary households.
Furthermore, majority of the respondents from the two groups resided in the rural areas
and had a female financial manager. In terms of educational attainment of the financial
manager, majority among the beneficiary households were more educated than the

majority of the non-beneficiary households.

54

DOUBDIJTUBIS Jo [242] %4O1 1s

106 = ayeuoy 96 aeUay xa

6 8p Arequowayy T'Lp fooyss yar juaMUID)Y jouolwonpy
JoBeuey] jeroueuly
60L leany £69 = [einy uole007
8L10 ESE 19 91 Sle vL 6 (syjuow! ur) uaupytyD Jo ody
*8S0°0 9's £1-Z PLS o1-Zz 8ZIg pjoyssnoy,
#000 €7'EBL‘PS @2OLZE — 9761 6L'€96°€9 100°@81 — 798‘II aanypuadxg
6610 02°008'II 000‘9S - SLL‘Z 18'L66°71 009°9p — 8Zh‘E pido dad aui03uy
+7000 + $6°696'SS 000‘0b7 — 000'1Z 1766589 000007 — 008‘€I (anjea ainjosqe) owoou]

ueay] % apopyasuey uray % apoyyosuey
aNTVA-d SOILSTAALIVUVHOD

SA TOHASNOH AUVIOIANAG-NON SQ TOHASNOH AUVIOIANAL

“spjoyasnoy Asersiyouaq-uou pue Arelo1yauaq ay) Jo apijoid s1ydesSowop pue s1w0Udda0I00¢g *¢ 919421

55

Nutritional Status of Children (Ages 6-60 months old) among the

Beneficiary and Non-beneficiary Households

Table 4 summarizes the percentage distribution of the nutritional status of 6 to 60

months old children among the beneficiary and non-beneficiary households in terms of

weight-for-age, length/height-for-age, weight-for-length/height and BMI-for-age.

Table 4. Percentage distribution based on the nutritional status of 6-60 months old
children among beneficiary and non-beneficiary households.

NUTRITIONAL STATUS BENEFICIARY IN-BENEFICIARY
Weight-for-age
Normal 69.8 75.8
Underweight 22.6 16.7
Severely underweight 15 7.6
Total 100.0 100.0
Length/height-for-age
Normal 42.9 53.1
Stunted 11.4 18.8
Severely stunted 45.7 28.1
Total 100.0 100.0
Weight-for-length/height
Obese 28.0 14.3
Overweight 12.0 7A
At risk of overweight 16.0 14.3
Normal 36.0 53.6
Wasted 4.0 71
Severely wasted 40 3.6
Total 100.0 100.0
BML-for-age
Obese 25.7 15.2
Overweight 8.6 91
At risk of overweight 11.4 15.2
Normal 25.0 39.4
Wasted 7.0 6.1
Severely wasted 28.6 15.2
Total 100.0 100.0


56

Results showed that based on weight-for-age, children among beneficiary
households (30.1%) had higher percentage of underweight and severely underweight
combined, compared to children among non-beneficiary households (24.3%). On the
other hand, children among beneficiary households (57.1%) also had higher percentage
on stunting and severe stunting combined, compared to non-beneficiary households
(46.9%) based on length/height-for-age. Moreover, based on weight-for-length/height
and BMI-for-age, the children among beneficiary households (40% and 34.4%,
respectively) had higher percentage of obesity and overweight combined, compared to
children among non-beneficiary households (21.4% and 24.3%, respectively).
Furthermore, children among beneficiary households (35.6%) also had higher percentage
on wasting and severe wasting combined, compared to non-beneficiary households
(21.3%) based on BMI-for-age. On the contrary, children among beneficiary households
(8%) also had lower percentage on wasting and severe wasting combined, compared to

non-beneficiary households (10.7%) based on weight-for-length/height.

Given the cash transfer from Pantawid Pamilya, coupled with the mother’s
effective parenting and counselling sessions and the weight monitoring of children,
beneficiary households are expected to be able to translate the expected increase in their
food expenditure into better nutritional status of their families. However, results suggest
that there is higher prevalence of malnutrition (except for wasting and severe wasting
combined based on weight-for-length/height) among children in beneficiary households
compared to non-beneficiary households. These results also imply that in spite of more
than three years of implementation of the program in the area, there are still problems to

be addressed in the nutrition of the children. Probably, employing strategies that may

57

complement the cash transfers can help address these problems. Based on the study of
Langendorf et al. (2014), combining cash transfer with a nutritious supplementary food
are potentially more effective at preventing acute malnutrition than strategies relying on
either cash transfer or nutritious supplementary food alone. On the other hand, Bassett
(2008) emphasized employing nutrition-related conditionalities that generally require
participation in education workshops to increase maternal knowledge and improve
practices related to proper child care and feeding practices, sanitation and food safety.
These are some of the factors that, if neglected, can contribute to stunted growth of the
children based on the WHO Conceptual Framework on Childhood Stunting (Appendix
13). Thus, these strategies may help ensure food and nutrition security among beneficiary

households, which can lead to improved nutritional status of the children.

Food Expenditure and HDDS Survey Results

Table 5 presents the percent distribution of total household expenditure by major
expenditure group of beneficiary and non-beneficiary households. Result showed that
there was no significant difference in terms of food budget share (p-value=0492) between
beneficiary and non-beneficiary household. But supposedly, the food budget share or the
percentage of food expenditure on household expenditure of the beneficiary households
is higher than the non-beneficiary by 4 percent as per the objective of the program.
However, the results indicated otherwise; beneficiary households even had slightly lower

food budget share on food than non-beneficiary households.

58

Table 5. Percent distribution of total household expenditure by major expenditure group
of the beneficiary and non-beneficiary households for six months (November

2013-April 2014).

EXPENDITURE BENEFICIARY (%) | NON-BENEFICIARY (%)

Food 75.09 75.72
Alcoholic Beverages 1.28 1.07
Tobacco 1.42 1.61
Fuel, Light and Water 6.43 5.93
Transportation and Communication 3.95 3.32
Household Operations 1.52 1.49
Personal Care and Effects 3.86 3.93
Clothing, Footwear and Other Wear 2.15 1.62
Education 0.53 0.66
Recreation 0.10 0.11
Medical Care 0.70 0.75
Non-Durable Furnishings 0.11 0.16
Durable Furniture and Equipment 0.20 0.11
Rental 0.34 1.38
House Maintenance and Minor Repairs 0.34 0.17
Taxes Paid 0.06 0.01
Miscellaneous Expenditures 1.10 0.97
Other Expenditures 0.69 0.79

Total 100.00 100.00


59

The food expenditure (absolute value) and household dietary diversity score
(HDDS) of the beneficiary and non-beneficiary households were also compared using T-
test for independent samples (Table 6). Findings revealed that even though the
beneficiary households had lower percentage of food expenditure on household
expenditure than the non-beneficiary households, the beneficiary households had
significantly higher food expenditure (absolute value) than non-beneficiary households.
However, there was no significant difference in terms of food expenditure per capita.
Results also indicated that the HDDS of the beneficiary households was significantly
higher than the non-beneficiary households. This result implies that beneficiary

households have higher economic access to food.

Table 6. T-test analysis of food expenditure, food expenditure per capita and HDDS of
the beneficiary and non-beneficiary households for six months (November
2013-April 2014).

CHARACTERISTICS BENEFICIARY NON-BENEFICIARY P-VALUE
Food Expenditure

47,050.26 40,606.48 0.000*
(absolute value)
Bod Expencinie 8620.40 8305.21 0.589
per capita
HDDS 7.79 7.49 0.036*

at 10% level of significance

The percentage and absolute amount of expenditure per food group of the
beneficiary and non-beneficiary households were also analyzed using T-test for
independent samples. Results showed no significant differences between the two groups

in terms of percentage of expenditure on different food groups (Figure 7).

Cereal and cereal preparations
‘@ Roots and tubers,

1s Frutts and vegetables

‘= Meat and mest preparations
= Dalry products and eggs

‘= Fish and marine products

= Coffee, cocoa and tea

|= Non-alcoholic beverages

» Food not elsewhere classified

= Consumed outside the home

Beneficiary Non-Beneficiary

Figure 7. Percentage of expenditure on different food groups of the beneficiary and non-
beneficiary households for six months (November 2013-April 2014)

On the other hand, in terms of the absolute amount of expenditure per food group
(Figure 8), beneficiary households spent significantly higher than non-beneficiary
households on the following food groups: cereals (p-value=0.059); roots and tubers (p-
value=0.013); fruits and vegetables (p-value=0.000); meat and meat preparations (p-
value=0.000); fish and seafoods (p-value=0.007); foods consumed outside home (p-

value=0.017), and; foods not specified elsewhere (p-value=0.010).

61

(p10z dv-€107 JequIsAON)

SYJUOUI XIS 10} spfoyssnoy Arelolyauaq-uoU pue AreIoyaUAQ ay) Jo sdnos pooy juasaJJIP UO ainytpuddxe Jo yuNouTY *g BMI]

Aernyauaq
-UON

Aenyeueg

awoy
ay) apisino
pawinsuo>

payissey> suonesedaid
auaymasya safeianaq ea} pue sjonposd s@apue — suoyexedasd ~—sayqeyaBan jeasa>
you pooy 2yOYOIe-UON 80202 ‘aayo) aueW pue Ys|4 s}onposd AJeq eawpueIeAAW  puesiNy siaqn) pue SJooYy pue jeasa)

0

0008

o000t

dd Ut omppusdxg

62

Different socio-economic and demographic characteristics of the respondents were
also used to identify the factors associated with the food expenditure (absolute value) of
the two groups using correlation analysis. For the beneficiary households, results showed
that food expenditure was significantly associated with household size, income and
location (all had p-value=0.000). However, results also suggest that household size,
income and location had different degrees of association with food expenditure
(Appendix 14). Household size had weak association with food expenditure
(coefficient=0.266), whereas income (0.830) and location (0.440) had very strong and

moderate association with food expenditure, respectively (Table 7).

Table 7. Association of food expenditure and the different characteristics of the
beneficiary and non-beneficiary households.

CHARACTERISTICS BENEFICIARY NON: BENENICIARY)
Coefficient p-value Coefficient p-value
Household Size! 0.266 0.000* 0.316 0.000*
Income! 0.830 0.000* 0.804 0.000*
Location? 0.440 0.000* -0.067 0.352
Financial Manager
Sex? 0.022 0.400 -0.011 -0.996
Educ. Attainment? -0.003 0.921 0.080 0.180

1 Pearson correlation coefficient
2 Eta correlation coefficient
3 Spearman's correlation coefficient
*at 10% level of significance
Household size and income and location had a positive correlation with food
expenditure indicating a direct relationship. The beneficiary households who lived in

urban areas spent on the average PhP 62,009.23 on food for six months, while the

average food expenditure in six months of those who lived in rural areas was PhP

63

40,418.97. This implies that those beneficiary households who live in urban areas tend to
have higher food expenditure than those who live in rural areas.

On the other hand, food expenditure (absolute value) of the non-beneficiary
households was only found to be significantly and positively associated with household
size (p-value=0.000) and income (p-value=0.000), which also suggests a direct
association. However, the association of food expenditure with household size was weak
(coefficient=0.3 16), whereas for income, the association was strong (coefficient=0.804).

Different socio-economic and demographic characteristics of the respondents
were also used to identify the factors associated with HDDS of the two groups using
correlation analysis (Table 8).Results showed that household size (p-value=0.062),
income (p-value=0.000), location (p-value=0.000), sex (p-value=0.000) and educational
attainment (p-value=0.000) of financial manager of the beneficiary households were all
significantly and positively associated with HDDS. This implies that those who live in
rural (average HDDS: 7.99) and have female financial manager (HDDS: 7.91) in the
household tend to have higher HDDS as compared to urban (average HDDS: 7.35) and
have male financial manager (HDDS: 6.11). The degree of association of HDDS of
beneficiary households with income (coefficient=0.152), location (coefficient=0.151) and
educational attainment of financial manager (coefficient=0.139) was very weak, while it
was weak with sex of the financial manager (coefficient=0.230).

On the other hand, household size (p-value=0.006), location (p-value=0.000) and
educational attainment (p-value=0.000) of the financial manager of the household were
found to be significantly associated with the HDDS of the non-beneficiary households.

Household size had a negative (coefficient=-0.185) association with HDDS, while

64

location had a positive (coefficient=0.270) association with HDDS. This implies that
those who live in rural areas (average HDDS: 7.84) tend to have higher HDDS as
compared to those in the urban areas (average HDDS: 6.63). Lastly, educational
attainment of financial manager of the household had a positive (coefficient=0.224)
association with HDDS of the non-beneficiary households. Nonetheless, the relationship
of HDDS with household size of the non-beneficiary households was very weak
(coefficient=-0.185) whereas, it was weak for both location (coefficient=0.270) and

educational attainment (coefficient=0.224) of financial manager.

Table 8. Association of HDDS and the different characteristics of the beneficiary and
non-beneficiary households.

BENEFICIARY NON-BENEFICIARY
CHARACTERISTICS - -

Coefficient p-value Coefficient p-value
Household Size! 0.058 0.062* -0.185 0.006*

Income! 0.152 0.000* -0.061 0.368
Location” 0.151 0.000* 0.270 0.000*

Financial Manager

Sex? 0.230 0.000* 0.083 0.412

Educ. Attainment? 0.139 0.000* 0.224 0.000*

1 Pearson correlation coefficient

2 Eta correlation coefficient

3 Spearman's correlation coefficient
at 10% level of significance

Food Expenditure and HDDS Survey Discussion

The results from the t-test for independent samples revealed that the beneficiary
households had higher food expenditure (absolute value) than the non-beneficiary
households. This may be attributed to the added income from the Pantawid Pamilyang

Pilipino Program, which significantly increased the income of the beneficiary

65

households. According to Holmes and Bhuvanendra (2013), cash transfers directly
increase income which can be spent on increasing the quantity of food consumed. Similar
results were observed in a CCT program in Mexico, where beneficiary households had
higher food expenditure than for comparable control households (Hoddinott et al. 2000).
Also, based on the FGD, the beneficiary household parents said that they are now able to
buy more food not only for their children but also for their family and feed them three
times a day.

However, in terms of food expenditure per capita of the two groups, there was no
significant difference found. This implies that the cash transfer from the program was not
enough to make the food expenditure per capita of the beneficiary households
significantly higher compared to the non-beneficiary households. Also, as mentioned, the
program aimed to increase the percentage of food expenditure in household expenditure
by 4%. However, results showed no significant difference between the two groups.
Percentage statistics even showed that the beneficiary households had slightly lower food
budget share on household expenditure than the non-beneficiary households even if they
had significantly higher food expenditure and income.

Results from the correlation analysis showed that there was a positive association
between the income and food expenditure (absolute value) of beneficiary and non-
beneficiary households found in this study. According to FAO (1997), the ability of the
household to access to the food supply can be considered in terms of their income. The
result implies that those households with higher income had higher economic ability to

acquire food, and thus, have higher food expenditure.

66

Another socio-economic and demographic characteristic that was positively
associated to the food expenditure (absolute value) of the beneficiary and non-beneficiary
households was household size. Sekhampu (2012) explained that larger household sizes
require increased food expenditure. Also, the cost of providing a meal for six is little
more than the cost for four (Ridgwell 1996).

Food expenditure (absolute value) was also associated with the location of the
beneficiary households only. Beneficiary households living in urban areas tend to have
higher food expenditure than those who live in rural areas. In the paper of Stage et al.
(2009), those who live in urban areas tend to spend higher on food purchased
commercially at market prices, rather than own-produced food. Whereas, in rural areas,
almost half of their food are own produced rather than purchased. In the case of the
beneficiary households, even though they were given seeds for backyard gardening, those
living in urban areas have limited land for gardening. Meanwhile, in rural areas, there is
sufficient land for backyard gardening. This enables them to produce their own food.

Another reason cited by Stage et al. (2009) is that urban dwellers tend to have
higher income that can be used to acquire food than those in rural areas. As mentioned
earlier, households with higher income tend to have higher food expenditure. When the
income of the beneficiary households living in urban (Php 88,933.14) and rural (Php
60,151.63) areas were compared using t-test for independent samples, results showed that
beneficiary households living in urban had significantly higher income (p-value=0.001)
than those who lived in rural areas. This may also be the reason why the food expenditure

on the non-beneficiary households is not associated with their location. There was no

67

significant difference (p-value=0.917) between the income of the non-beneficiary
households who live in urban (Php 55153.63) and rural areas (Php 55774.73).

Findings also indicated that beneficiary households had significantly higher
HDDS than the non-beneficiary households. They spend more on food groups like
cereals, roots and tubers, fruits and vegetables, meat and meat preparations, fish and
seafoods, food consumed outside home, and on food not specified elsewhere. These
findings also suggest that beneficiary household are able to spend more on nutrient dense
food such as protein-rich food (meat and fish), and on fruits and vegetables than their
non-beneficiary household counterpart. This observation is consistent with the statement
of the mothers during the FGD that they use the cash grant to purchase protein-rich food,
fruits and vegetables, as well as treat their children to fast food restaurants. It seems that
having added income through the CCT program in their disposal, beneficiary households
can now avail of more diverse food as compared to the non-beneficiary households. Since
the HDDS also reflects the economic ability of a household to access a variety of foods
(Swindale and Bilinsky 2006), it seems that the cash grant that was added to their
household income helped increase their access to variety of food and thus, more food
secure. Improved quality of food consumption of beneficiary households has also been
observed in other countries. In Colombia for example, there has been an increased
expenditure on items rich in protein, such as milk, meat, and eggs among the beneficiary
households of their CCT Program, the Familias en Accién (Attanasio and Mesnard 2006).

Dietary diversity of the non-beneficiary households seems to be negatively
affected by household size. Non-beneficiary households with larger households were

observed to have lower HDDS. In study of Pelto et al. (1991), it was also observed that

68

those from larger households had significantly consumed poorer quality diets. It appears
that the resources available to the families might be getting are inadequate to support
large household size. Furthermore, according to Olayemi (2012), the implication of
having large family on food security is that there will be lesser food available to each
person within the household.

On the other hand, larger households had higher HDDS as observed among
beneficiary households. Although household size usually has a negative effect, Toulmin
(1986) stated that household size can also have a positive impact on food security and
dietary quality when there is more diversified income sources. In the case of beneficiary
households, aside from their usual sources of income such as salaries, wages and gift
from relatives, they also had other sources like cash transfers from the program, as well
as income generated by those households who are members of the women’s organization,
KALIPI.

The HDDS of the beneficiary households was significantly and positively
associated with their household income. Generally, those with high income household
have higher dietary diversity, while low income household have lower dietary diversity
(Worsley et al. 2003). According to Steward and Blisard (2011), low income households
tend to buy less meat, dairy products, fruits and vegetables. This purchasing pattern of
the low income households can lead to less varied diet, on the average, than the higher
income household. Taruvinga et al. (2013) also suggest that demand for vegetables and
fruits increase with income, while for low income households, these are considered as an
expensive source of energy, and thus, prioritize fulfilment of their basic energy

requirement to avoid hunger.

69

On the other hand, there was a negative but no significant association between the
HDDS of the non-beneficiary households and their household income. Although, based
on the correlation, coefficient suggests that those with low income households have
higher HDDS than higher income households, the p-value implies that there was no
significant difference. This is probably due to lack of nutrition knowledge, which can
also influence the household food acquisition (Kachondham 1992). Unlike the
beneficiary households, the non-beneficiary households were not trained about food and
nutrition. Thus, even with high income households, their dietary diversity is just the same
as those with low income households.

Another factor which was positively associated to HDDS of the two groups was
location. For both groups, findings showed that households living in rural areas have
more access to a variety of food than those who live in urban areas. This implies that
beneficiary households living in urban areas are more prone to food insecurity as
compared to those in rural areas. As mentioned by Browne et al. (2009), those who are
living in urban areas are likewise vulnerable to food insecurity. Further complicating the
scenario, food prices are often higher in urban areas than in rural areas (Saethre 2005;
Stage et al. 2009). Also, according to Popkin (1993), even though urban settlers generally
have greater access to a more diverse array of both domestic and imported food, it does
not necessarily mean that it can be translated into increased dietary consumption (Popkin
et a. 2001; Johns and Shtapit 2004).

These findings were also observed in Minnesotan communities in the study of
Smith and Miller (2011) as they explored the food system in urban and rural

communities. Findings showed that urban residents relied more on retail grocery stores.

70

Whereas the residents in rural areas, aside from buying from retail grocery stores for
food, also had gardening, hunting, and informal food exchange systems as their food
sources. Results also revealed that these activities may contribute valuable nutrients to
the diet of the rural communities.

The sex of the financial head or manager in the household was also associated
with HDDS of the beneficiary households. Results imply that beneficiary households
with female financial manager have more diverse diet compared to those beneficiary
households who have male counterpart. According to Pandya-Lorch et al. (2012), men
and women spend money differently. Women are likely to spend the income they control
on food, healthcare and education of their children. Furthermore, women are usually
responsible for food preparation. Therefore, women are more crucial to the dietary
diversity of their households. Women also select food to purchase by considering which
will complement their staple foods and balance the household’s diet (World Bank 2009).

According to IFPRI (2002), being a beneficiary household decreases the
probability of men as sole decision maker in the household. In fact, over time, men are
less likely to make decisions by themselves. There is a tendency that women will become
the sole decision maker on the use of their household’s extra income. This shift in pattern
on decision-making, as most evidences show, may have positive effects on household
food security (Quisumbing et al. 1995). This probably explains why sex of the financial
manager in the household is only associated with HDDS among beneficiary households
but not in non-beneficiary households. Possibly, in non-beneficiary households, although
the women or the wife handles the finances, the decision-making still lies on the men or

husbands.

71

Lastly, the HDDS of the two groups was positively associated with the
educational attainment of the financial manager in the household. This implies that the
more educated the financial manager, the more diverse the diet of the household
becomes. According to Taruvinga et al. (2013), this positive association of education to
the quality of the diet in the household may be due to greater awareness of and the ability

to better understand nutrition knowledge as well as put the knowledge into practice.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

The study aimed to analyze the food expenditure and dietary diversity of Pantawid

Pamilyang Pilipino Program beneficiary and non-beneficiary households on selected

barangays in San Pablo City, Laguna. The following were the major findings:

1.

Majority of the beneficiary households expressed that they allotted the cash
transfers they received for school, health and nutrition of their children.
Meanwhile, some households used the cash transfer for school-related needs of
their children alone since they can afford expenses on health and nutrition of their
household. They claimed that they see to it that the cash transfer is solely spent
for the needs of their children.

With respect to the nutritional status of the children (6 to 60 months old), results
suggest that there is a higher prevalence of malnutrition (except for wasting and
severe wasting combined based on weight-for-length/height) among beneficiary
households. These results also imply that there are still problems to be addressed
in the nutrition of the children.

Beneficiary households had higher food expenditure (absolute value) and HDDS
compared to the non-beneficiary households. However, there was no significant
difference in terms of food expenditure per capita.

The food expenditure (absolute value) of the two groups was associated with
household size and income, as well as location of the beneficiary households. On
the other hand, HDDS of the two groups was associated with household size,
location and educational attainment of the financial manager, as well as income

and sex of the financial manager in the beneficiary households.

73

5. Finally, findings suggest that the beneficiary households spend more on food and
have more diverse diet as household size and income increase. This also implies
that those who live in urban areas tend to have higher food expenditure than those
who live in rural areas. However, those who live in rural areas tend to have higher
household dietary diversity than those who live in urban areas. Moreover, female
and more educated head of the households also tend to be more diverse than the

less educated and male-headed households.

RECOMMENDATION

Due to lack of a baseline data, the study was only able to describe and compare
the food expenditures and HDDS of the beneficiary and non-beneficiary households, and
show their associations with various factors that may be affecting them. The availability
of a baseline data (eg. food expenditure, HDDS, nutritional status of children) could aid
in the assessment if the cash transfer program impacts the food expenditure and
household dietary diversity. This will also be helpful for an in-depth impact evaluation in
the future in assessing the performance of the conditional cash transfer program more
precisely, especially in terms of health and nutritional status of the households.

Moreover, results from the correlation analysis in the study imply that food
expenditure and dietary diversity of the beneficiaries of Pantawid Pamilya may depend
on socio-economic and demographic characteristics of the households. These
implications of socio-economic and demographic characteristics on the food expenditure
and dietary diversity of the beneficiary household may also be further investigated in
future studies

Furthermore, findings suggest that beneficiary households, and even among non-
beneficiary households, living in rural areas have higher access to a variety of food than
in urban areas. These observations seem to contradict the results obtained by other studies
in which households living in urban areas are said to have more access to a variety of
food. Investigation of other factors that might affect food security among urban and rural
poor may help in planning suitable strategies of Pantawid Pamilya in improving their
dietary diversity. It will be interesting to note if the socio-cultural activities (i.e. barter

system, gardening, foraging, etc.) will also be looked into in future studies.

75

For the nutritional status of the children, possible contributors like child care,
available health services and sanitation system, presence of illness, and intra-household
distribution were not considered in this study. Thus, for future investigation, it is
recommended to look further into these factors in pursuit of understanding and improving
the nutritional status among the beneficiary households.

In addition, the amount of cash transfer given for health and nutrition of the
children by Pantawid Pamilya is only Php 500. Probably, this amount is too small to
have an impact on the nutrition of the children and increasing it may significantly
improve the nutritional status of the children. Perhaps, combining cash transfer with food
transfer or supplementary food may help assure improvements in the nutritional status of
young children. Furthermore, incorporating topics that can increase the maternal
knowledge and improve practices in terms of proper child care and feeding practices,
sanitation, food safety and other factors that can contribute to nutrition status of the
children, in the trainings and FDS among the beneficiary households may help lead to
improved nutritional status of the children.

Lastly, the city link supports women empowerment and even initiated the
formation of a women’s organization in the area. However, the effects these kinds of
organization among beneficiary households have not yet been explored in the context of
Pantawid Pamilya. Thus, for future studies, it may be noteworthy to know how women
empowerment specifically affects the beneficiary households and how it could help the

program in its objectives on health, nutrition and poverty alleviation.

LITERATURE CITED

ADATO M, BASSETT L. 2012. Social protection and cash transfers to strengthen
familes affected by HIV and AIDS. Research reports. International Food Policy
Research Institute (IFPRI). Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://www. ifpri.org/sites/default/files/publications/rr177.pdf

AIDOO R, MENSAH JO, TUFFOUR T. 2013. Determinants of household food security
in the Sekyere-A fram plains district of Ghana. European Scientific Journal, 9(21).
Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://eujournal.org/index.php/esj/article/download/1488/1497

AJAO KO, OJOFEITIMI EO, ADEBAYO AA, FATUSI AO, AFOLABI OT. 2010.
Influence of family size, household food security status, and child care practices
on the nutritional status of under-five children in Ile-Ife, Nigeria. Afr J Reprod
Health. (4 Spec no.) : pp. 117-26. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://www. fpconference2009.org/media/DIR_169701/15f1ae857ca97 193 ffff831f
ffffd524.pdf

AKARUE OB, BAKPORHE OT. 2013. Food Insecurity and its Determinants in Rural
Households in Ughelli North Local Government Area of Delta State Nigeria.
International Journal of Innovative Agriculture & Biology Research 1 (2):20-30,
2013. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from __ http://seahipub.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/10/IJIABR-S-2-2013.pdf

ATTANASIO O, MESNARD A. 2006. The impact of a conditional cash transfer
programme on consumption in Colombia. Fiscal Studies 27(4): 421-42. Retrieved
July 7, 2014 from http://www. ifs.org.uk/edepo/rs_fam02.pdf

AUDSLEY B, HALME R, BALZER N. 2011. Comparing cash and food transfers: a
cost-benefit analysis from Rural Malawi in Omamo, S.W., U. Gentilini and S.
Sandstrém. Revolution: From Food Aid to Food Assistance-Innovations in
Overcoming Hunger. WFP. Retrieved July 7, 2014 from
http://documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/newsroom/wfp225957
pdf

BAILEY S. 2013. The Impact of Cash Transfers on Food Consumption in Humanitarian
Settings: A review of evidence. Retrieved September 23, 2014 from
www.cashlearning.org/downloads/cfgb---impact-of-cash-transfers-on-food-
consumption-may-2013-final-clean.pdf

BASHIR MK, SCHILIZZI S, PANDIT R. 2012. The determinants of rural household
food security in the Punjab, Pakistan: an econometric analysis (No. 122526).
Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://ageconsearch.umn.edu/bitstream/122526/2/working%20paper%201203.pdf

BASSETT L. 2008. Can conditional cash transfer programs play a greater role in
reducing child under nutrition? World Bank Social Policy Discussion Paper, 835.

77

Retrieved September 23, 2014 from
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/SOCIALPROTECTION/Resources/SP-
Discussion-papers/Safety-Nets-DP/0835.pdf

BELLO AL, BUSTOS RB, MANALO NA. 2011. Policy Issues and Strategic Directions
for Conditional Cash Transfer as a Measure to Reduce Rural Poverty and
Malnutrition in the Immediate and Medium Terms. UPLB-CEM Policy Paper
Series 1. Policy Paper 6.

BRINKMAN HJ, DE PEE S, SANOGO I, SUBRAN L, BLOEM MW. 2010. High food
prices and the global financial crisis have reduced access to nutritious food and
worsened nutritional status and health. The Journal of Nutrition, 140(1), 153S-
1618. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://jn.nutrition.org/content/140/1/153S.full.pdf+html.

BROWNE J, LAURENCE S, THORPE S. 2009. Acting on food insecurity in urban
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities. Policy and practice
interventions to improve local access and supply of nutritious food, 2000-2010.
Retrieved July 7, 2014 from
http://www. healthinfonet.ecu.edu.au/uploads/resources/17213_17213_acting-on-
food-insecurity-in-urban-atsi-communities.pdf

CAMPBELL AA, DE PEE S, SUN K, KRAEMER K, THORNE-LYMAN A,
MOENCH-PFANNER R, SEMBA RD. 2010. Household rice expenditure and
maternal and child nutritional status in Bangladesh. The Journal of Nutrition,
140(1), 189S-194S. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://jn.nutrition.org/content/140/1/189S.full.pdft+htm]

CAMPBELL AA, THORNE-LYMAN A, SUN K, DE PEE S, KRAEMER K,
MOENCH-PFANNER R, SEMBA RD. 2008. Greater household expenditures on
fruits and vegetables but not animal source foods are associated with decreased
risk of under-five child mortality among families in rural Indonesia. The Journal
of Nutrition, 138(11), 2244-2249. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://jn.nutrition.org/content/138/11/2244.full

CHARMARBAGWALA R, RANGER M, WADDINGTON H, WHITE H. 2004. The
determinants of child health and nutrition: a meta-analysis. World Bank.

Retrieved (September 23, 2014 from
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTEDS 1 4/Resources/child_health_nutrition.p
df

CHAUDHURY N, FRIEDMAN J, ONISH J. 2013. Philippines Conditional Cash
Transfer Program Impact Evaluation 2012. The World Bank. Report Number
75533-PH. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/13244/755330ES
WOP1180pact0Evaluation02012.pdf?sequence=1

DEVEREUX S, JERE P. 2008. ‘Choice, dignity and empowerment’: Cash and food
transfers in Swaziland: An evaluation of Save the Children’s emergency drought

ah)

response, 2007/08. Swaziland: Save the Children. Retrieved July 7, 2014 from
http://www.savethechildren.org.uk/sites/default/files/docs/SavetheChildren_Emer
gency_Drought_Response_Evaluation_08_1.pdf

[DSWD] DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL WELFARE AND DEVELOPMENT. 2012.
Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program Implementation Status Report 2nd Quarter
of 2012. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from _http://www.dswd.gov.ph/wp-
content/uploads/2012/09/2ndqtr2012.pdf

[DSWD] DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL WELFARE AND DEVELOPMENT. 2013.
Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program Implementation Status Report Ist Quarter
of 2013. Retrieved October 3, 2014  fromhttp://www.dswd.gov.ph/wp-
content/uploads/2012/01/Pantawid-Pamilya-Program-Implementation-Status-
Report-First-Quarter-2013.pdf

ECKER O, BREISINGER C. 2012. The Food Security System: A New Conceptual
Framework. IFPRI Discussion Paper 01166. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://www. ifpri.org/sites/default/files/publications/ifpridp0 1 166.pdf

[FAO] FOOD AND AGRICULTURE. 1997. Agriculture food and nutrition for Africa -
A resource book for teachers of agriculture. Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations. Food and Nutrition Division. Rome. Retrieved June 19, 2013
from http://www. fao.org/docrep/w0078e/w0078e04.htm

[FAO] FOOD AND AGRICULTURE. 1999. The state of food insecurity in the world.
ISBN 92-5-104328-0. Retrieved June 19, 2013
fromhttp://www. fao.org/docrep/007/x3 1 14e/x3114e00.htm

[FAO] FOOD AND AGRICULTURE. 2002. The State of Food Insecurity in the World
2001. Rome. Retrieved June 19, 2013
fromhttp://www.fao.org/docrep/005/y467 le/y4671e06.htm

[FAO] FOOD AND AGRICULTURE. 2006. Food security. Forestry Policy Brief 02.
Rome. Retrieved June 19, 2013  fromhttp://www.fao.org/forestry/13128-
0e6f36f27e009 1 05Sbec28ebe830f46b3.pdf

FERNALD LC, GERTLER PJ, NEUFELDLM. 2008. Role of cash in conditional cash
transfer programmes for child health, growth, and development: an analysis of
Mexico's<i>Oportunidades</i>. The Lancet, 371(9615), 828-837. Retrieved
November 8, 2014 from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2779574/#__ffn_sectitle

FERNANDEZ L, OLFINDO R. 2011. Overview of the Philippines’ Conditional Cash
Transfer Program: The Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program (Pantawid Pamilya).
Philippine Social Protection Note. No 2. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/201 1/07/08/00033303
8 _20110708021205/Rendered/PDF/628790BRIOPhilOmeOabstractOasOno010.pdf

79

FISZBEIN A, SCHADY N. 2009. Conditional Cash Transfers: Reducing Present and
Future Poverty. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, The
World Bank. Retrieved September 23, 2014 from
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTCCT/Resources/5757608-
1234228266004/PRR-CCT_web_noembargo.pdf

FOUSEKIS P, LAZARIDIS P. 2001. Food expenditure patterns of the urban and the rural
households in Greece. a kernel regression analysis. Agricultural Economic
Review, 2(1), 5-19. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://www.eng.auth.gr/mattas/2_1_1.pdf

GILLESPIE S, MASON J. 1991. Nutrition-relevant actions: some experience from the
eighties and lessons for the nineties. Nutrition Policy Discussion Paper, No. 10.
ACC/SCN. WHO. Geneva, Switzerland. Retrieved September 23, 2014 from
http://agris.fao.org/agris-search/search.do?recordID=XF92 18327

GITTER SR, BARHAM BL. 2007. Women's power, conditional cash transfers, and
schooling in Nicaragua. The World Bank Economic Review, 22(2), 271-290.
Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://wber.oxfordjournals.org/content/22/2/271 abstract

HODDINOTT J, SKOUFIAS E, WASHBURN R. 2000. The impact of PROGRESA on
consumption: A final report. International Food Policy Research Institute,

Washington, Dc. Retrieved July 7, 2014 from
http://oportunidades.gob.mx:80 1 0/es/wersd53465sdg1/docs/2000/ifpri_2000_nutr
ition.pdf

HOLMES R, BHUVANENDRA D. 2013. Social protection and resilient food systems:
The role of cash transfers. Retrieved July 7, 2014 from
http://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi-assets/publications-opinion-
files/8601.pdf

{IFPRI] INTERNATIONAL FOOD POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE. 2002.
PROGRESA: Breaking the Cycle of Poverty. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://www. ifpri.org/pubs/ib/ib6.pdf

JAYAWARDENA R, BYRNE NM, SOARES MJ, KATULANDA P, YADAV B,
HILLS AP. 2013. High dietary diversity is associated with obesity in Sri Lankan
adults: an evaluation of three dietary scores. BMC Public Health, 13(1), 314.
Retrieved September 23, 2014 from
http://www. biomedcentral.com/content/pdff 147 1-2458-13-314.pdf

JOHNS T, STHAPIT BR. 2004.Biocultural diversity in the sustainability of developing-
country food systems. Food & Nutrition Bulletin, 25(2), 143-155. Retrieved
September 23, 2014 from
http://www. ingentaconnect.com/content/nsinf/fnb/2004/00000025/00000002/art0
0007

80

KACHONDHAM Y. 1992. 27. Rapid rural appraisal and rapid assessment procedures: A
comparison. Retrieved September 23, 2014 from http://www. idpas.org/pdf/309-
27RapidRuralA ppraisal.pdf

KIRKPATRICK S, TARASUK V. 2003. The relationship between low income and
household food expenditure patterns in Canada. Public Health Nutrition, 6(06),
589-597. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://journals.cambridge.org/download.php? file=%2FPHN%2FPHN6_06%2FS1
36898000300079Xa.pdf&code=9e67937bad9f20252cf84720c1 3bb8d5,

LANGENDORF C, ROEDERER T, DE PEE S, BROWN D, DOYON S, MAMATY
AA, GRAIS RF. 2014.Preventing acute malnutrition among young children in
crises: a prospective intervention study in Niger. PLoS medicine, 11(9),
e€1001714.Retrieved November 8, 2014 from
http://www. plosmedicine.org/article/fetchObject.action?uri=info%3 Adoi%2F 10.1
371%2Fjournal.pmed.1001714&representation=PDF

LEMKE S, VORSTER HH, VAN RENSBURG NS, ZICHE J. 2003. Empowered
women, social networks and the contribution of qualitative research: broadening
our understanding of underlying causes for food and nutrition insecurity. Public
Health Nutrition, 6(08), 759-764. Retrieved September 23, 2014 from
http://journals.cambridge.org/download.php? file=%2FPHN%2FPHN6_08%2FS1
368980003001022a.pdf&code=bf3 7cef8386296270 1 f7ea49a2a202a6

LLANTO GM. 2008. Make ‘deliberate’ haste in rolling out the 4Ps. Philippine Institute
for Development Studies. ISSN 1656-5266 No. 2008-09. Retrieved June 19, 2013
from http://dirp4.pids.gov.ph/ris/pn/pidspn0809.pdf

MALUCCIO JA, FLORES R. 2005. Impact evaluation of a conditional cash transfer
program: The Nicaraguan Red de Proteccién Social. IFPRI Research Report 141.
Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute. Retrieved July 7,
2014 from http://www. ifpri.org/sites/default/files/publications/rr141.pdf

MELGAR-QUINONEZ HR, NORD M, PEREZ-ESCAMILLA R, SEGALL-CORREA
A M. 2007. Psychometric properties of a modified US-household food security
survey module in Campinas, Brazil. European journal of clinical nutrition, 62(5),
665-673. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://www.nature.com/ejcn/journal/v62/n5/pdf/1602760a.pdf

[NSCB] NATIONAL STATISTICAL COORDINATION BOARD. 2013. Despite rise in
the number of families, extreme poverty among families remains steady at 1.6
million in 2012—NSCB Press Release. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://www.nscb.gov.ph/pressreleases/2013/NSCB-PR-
20131213_povertypress.asp

OLAYEMI AO. 2012. Effects of family size on household food security in Osun State,
Nigeria. Asian Journal of Agriculture and Rural Development, 2(2), 136-141.

81

Retrieved July 7, 2014 from http://www.pakinsight.com/pdf-files/54-AJARD-
136-141.pdf

OLORUNSANYA EO, OMOTESHO OA. 2014. A gender analysis of determinants of
poverty among rural farming households in Nigeria. Albanian J. Agric. Sci. 2014;
13 (2): 96-109. Retrieved September 23, 2014 from
https://docs.google.com/a/ubt.edu.al/viewer?a=v &pid=sites&srcid=dWJOLmVkd
SShbHxyc3NifGd4O0jJmYmZjNzA 1 OTI4NDdjZjY

OLUWATAYO IB. 2008. Explaining inequality and welfare status of households in rural
Nigeria: Evidence from Ekiti State. Hum. Soc. Sci. J., 3: 70- 80. Retrieved June
19, 2013 from http://www. idosi.org/hssj/hssj3(1)08/9.pdf

PANDYA-LORCH R, FRITSCHEL H, KARELINA Z, YOSEF S. 2012. Agriculture,
Nutrition and Health: Connecting the Dots. In 2011 Global Food Policy Report,
54-61. Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute. Retrieved
September 23, 2014 from
http://www. ifpri.org/sites/default/files/publications/oc72ch06.pdf

PANGARIBOWO, E. H., GERBER, N., & TORERO, M. (2013). Food and nutrition
security indicators: a review (No. 108). ZEF Working Paper Series.Retrieved
November 9, 2014 from
http://www3.lei.wur.nl/FoodSecurePublications/05_Pangaribowo%20Gerber%20
Torero_FNS%20Indicators.pdf

PELTO GH, URGELLO J, ALLEN LH, CHAVEZ A, MARTINEZ H, MENESES L,
BACKSTRAND J.1991. Household size, food intake and anthropometric status of
school-age children in a highland Mexican area. Social Science & Medicine,
33(10), 1135-1140. Retrieved (July 7, 2014 from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1767283

POPKIN BM, HORTON SH, KIM S. 2001. The nutrition transition and prevention of
diet-related diseases in Asia and the Pacific. Manila: Asian Development Bank.
Retrieved September 23, 2014 from
http://www. ifpri.org/sites/default/files/pubs/pubs/books/nutran/nutran_front.pdf

POPKIN BM. 1993. Nutrition patterns and transitions. Population and Development
Review, 19: 138-157. Retrieved September 23, 2014 from
http://www jstor.org/discover/10.2307/2938388?uid=3738824 &uid=2&uid=4&si
d=21104700414583

QUISUMBING A, BROWN LR, FELDSTEIN HS, HADDAD L, PENA, C. 1995.
Women: The key to food security. Food Policy Report. International Food Policy
Research Institute, Washington DC. Retrieved September 23, 2014 from
http://www. ifpri.orgsites/default/files/publications/fpr21.pdf

RAWLINGS LB, RUBIO GM. 2005. Evaluating the Impact of Conditional Cash
Transfer Programs. The World Bank Research Observer, vol. 20, no. 1. pp. 29-55.
Retrieved June 19, 2013 from

82

http://www.crin.org/docs/Evaluating%20the%20Imapact%200f%20Cash%20Tran
sfer%20Programs.pdf

REYES CM, TABUGA AD. 2012. Conditional Cash Transfer Program in the
Philippines: Is It Reaching the Extremely Poor? Discussion Paper Series No.
2012-42. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://dirp4.pids.gov.ph/ris/dps/pidsdps1242.pdf

REYES CM, TABUGA AD. 2013. Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino: Why “deepening”
matters in achieving its human capital objectives. Philippine Institute for
Development Studies. ISSN 1656-5266 No. 2013-02. Retrieved June 19, 2013
from http://dirp4.pids.gov.ph/ris/pn/pidspn1302.pdf

RIDGWELL J. 1996. Examining Food and Nutrition. Heinemann Educational. Oxford.
p.173

ROSEN S, SHAPOURI S. 2001. Effects of Income Distribution on Food Security. US
Department of Agriculture Information Bulletin, (765-2), 765-72. Retrieved June
19, 2013 from http://ageconsearch.umn.edu/bitstream/33717/1/ai017652.pdf

SAAKA M, OSMAN SM. 2013. Does Household Food Insecurity Affect the Nutritional
Status of Preschool Children Aged 6-36 Months? International Journal of
Population Research. Volume 2013, Article ID 304169, 12 pages. Retrieved June
19, 2013 from http://www.hindawi.com/journals/ijpr/2013/304169/

SAETHRE E. 2005. Nutrition, economics and food distribution in an Australian
Aboriginal community. In Anthropological Forum Vol. 15, No. 2, pp. 151-169.
Routledge. Retrieved July 7, 2014 from
http://www.anthropology.hawaii.edu/People/Faculty/Saethre/pdfs/Saethre_nutriti
on_economics.pdf

SCHWAB B, MARGOLIES A, HODDINOTT J. 2013. Impact Evaluation of Cash and
Food Transfers for the Seasonal Emergency Safety Net in Hajjah and Ibb
Governorates: Yemen Endline Report. Washington, DC: International Food
Policy Research Institute. Retrieved July 7, 2014 from
http://documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/resources/wfp257674.
pdf

SEKHAMPU TJ. 2012. Socio-economic Determinants of Household Food Expenditure
in a Low Income Township in South Africa. Mediterranean Journal of Social
Sciences, 449, Retrieved July 4, 2014 from
http://www.mcser.org/images/stories/2_journal/mjss_september_2012/tshediso%2
Ojoseph%20sekhampu%202%20paper.pdf

SEN A. 1981.Poverty and famines: an essay on entitlement and deprivation. Oxford
University Press. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://www. ifpri.org/sites/default/files/publications/rr177.pdf
http://203.128.31.71/articles/0198284632%20Poverty%20and%20Famines.pdf

83

SKOUFIAS E, DI MARO V. 2008. Conditional cash transfers, adult work incentives,
and poverty. The Journal of Development Studies, 44(7), 935-960. Retrieved June
19, 2013 from http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/00220380802 150730

SMITH C, MILLER H. 2011. Accessing the Food Systems in Urban and Rural
Minnesotan Communities. J Nutr Edu Behav., 2011; 43:492-504. Retrieved
September 23, 2014 from http://www jneb.org/article/S 1499-4046 (11)00379-
4/pdf

STAGE J, STAGE J, MCGRANAHAN G. 2009. Is urbanization contributing to higher
food prices? Urbanization and Emerging Population Issues Series. IIED and
UNFPA, London. Retrieved July 7, 2014 from
http://pubs.iied.org/pdfs/10573IIED.pdf

STEWART H, BLISARD N. 2011. Are Lower Income Households Willing to Budget for
Fruits and Vegetables? DIANE Publishing.

SWINDALE A, BILINSKY P. 2006. Household Dietary Diversity Score (HDDS) for
Measurement of Household Food Access: Indicator Guide (v.2). Washington,
D.C.: Food and Nutrition Technical Assistance Project, Academy for Educational
Development. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPHILIPPINES/Resources/4PsDS WD. pdf

TARUVINGA A, MUCHENJE V, MUSHUNJE A. 2013. Determinants of rural
household dietary diversity: The case of Amatole and Nyandeni districts, South
Africa. Journal of Development and Sustainability, 2(4), 2233-2247. Retrieved
September 23, 2014 from http://isdsnet.com/ijds-v2n4-4.pdf

TOULMIN C. 1986. Access to food, dry season strategies and household size amongst
the Bambara of Central Mali. IDS Bull 17, 58-67. Retrieved July 7, 2014 from
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/).1759-5436.1986.mp17003009.x/pdf

[UNDP] UNITED NATION DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME. 2009. Conditional Cash
Transfer Schemes for Alleviating Human Poverty: Relevance for India. Retrieved
June 19, 2013 from
http://online.wsj.com/public/resources/documents/CCT_DP.pdf

[UNPAN] UNITED NATIONS PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION NETWORK. 2009. 4Ps
Concept Paper for MCC. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://unpan1 .un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/unge/unpan040549.pdf

[USAID] UNITED STATES AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT.
1992. Policy Determination 19, Definition of Food Security, April 13, 1992.
Washington, Dc. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PNAA V468.pdf

VON BRAUN J, BOUIS H, KUMAR S, PANDYA-LORCH R. 1992. Improving Food
Security of the Poor: Concept, Policy, and Programs. Washington, DC:

84

International Food Policy Research Institute. Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://www. ifpri.org/sites/default/files/publications/oc23.pdf

WORLD BANK. 2009. Gender in Agriculture Sourcebook. The International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, The World Bank. Washington DC. Retrieved
September 23, 2014 from
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTGENAGRLIVSOUBOOK/Resources/Com
pleteBook.pdf

WORLD BANK. 2013. GDP per capita (current US$). Retrieved June 19, 2013 from
http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD/countries/1 W?display=de
fault

WORSLEY A, BLASCHE R., BALL K, CRAWFORD D. 2003. Income differences in
food consumption in the 1995 Australian National Nutrition Survey. European
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 57(10), 1198-1211.Retrieved November 7, 2014
fromhttp://www.nature.com/ejcn/journal/v57/n1 0/pdf/1601670a.pdf

APPENDICES

Appendix 1: UNICEF Conceptual Framework

Manifestation

Ze ~~
tN ft

Insufficient
Inadequate CO) health services & Underlying

Immediate
Causes

Inadequate care for
children and

access to food js
ren unhealthy environment Causes

inadequate f education

Resources and Control
Human, economic and

izational resources :
orpenieaie Basic

Causes

Political and Ideological Factors

Economic} Structure

Potential

86

Appendix 2: The amount of cash transfers given in selected CCT programs (adapted from

Rawlings and Rubio, 2005)

Transfer size

fe TeUt Education Health and nutrition
Primary school: Col$14,000 (US$6)
Colombia | per child per month; Secondary Col$46,500 (US$20) per
FA school: Col$28,000 (US$12) per family per month
child per month
Voucher: L$828 (US$58) per child .
Honduras | per year; average supply incentive pe beam era ease a
PRAF II of L$57,940 (US$4,000) per school supply incentive L$87,315
per year
Grant: J$500 (US$9) per child per a
Jamaica | month after second year (program a eee
PATH began at J$300 per child per Pr
month
month)
Primary school: varies by grade,
Mex$80-165 (US$8~-17) per child
per month plus Mex$100 (US$11) | Mex$125 (US$13) per
Mexico per year per child for school household per month in 1999
Progresa materials; Secondary school: varies | of Mex$750 per month for
by grade and gender, Mex$240- food support and educational
265 (US$25-32) per child per grants
month plus Mex$200 (US$20) per
year per child for school materials
Grant: C$240 (US$17) every 2
months per household plus C$275
Nicaragua | (US$20) per child per year for C$480 (US$34) per
RPS school materials; household every 2 months
Supply incentive: C$10 (US$0.7)
per student every 2 months
Primary and secondary school
grant: TL 12.8 million (US$9.50)
Turkey per month for first child, TL10.8 TL8.1 million (US$6) per
SSF million (US$8) for second, and child per month

TL8.8 million (US$6.50) for each
subsequent child


87

Appendix 3: Payee, frequency of payments and payment system of different CCT
Programs across countries (adopted from Fiszbein, et al., 2009)

Region/Country/Program
Africa

Burkina Faso: Orphans and
‘Vulnerable Children

Kenya: CLOVC

Nigeria: OPE

East Asia and Pacific

Frequency of
Payee payments Payment system
Parent/guardian Quarterly Through the village committee against
HIV/AIDS

Parentiguardian ——-Bimonthly

Mother and Monthly

designated
household member

Cambodia: CESSP Parent/guardian Three
installments:
Cambodia: JFPR Parent/guardian Three
installments
Indonesia: JPS Directly to the Monthly
students (or their
families)
Indonesia: PKH Mother or woman = Quarterly
who takes care of the
children in family
Europe and Central Asia
‘Turkey: SRMP Mother Bimonthly
Latin America and the Caribbean
Argentina: Programa Familias Mother Monthly
Bolivia: Juancito Pinto Child (accompanied Annually
by parent or
guardian)
Brazil Bolsa Alimentaio Mother Monthly

In 30 of the 37 districts, through the existing
government structure via district treasuries; in
the remaining 7 districts, through post offices
Through microfinance agencies and local
community banks

Cash handed out at ceremonies in the school

Cash handed out at ceremonies in the schoo!

Cash paid chrough local post offices?

(Cash paid through focal post offices

‘Through a banking institution; where the bank
has no branches, through the postal service

Through debit cards with the Banco de la
Nacion Argentina
Army distributes cash payments at school sites

‘Transfers were credited to a magnetic card
that could be used to withdraw cash at affices
of a federally owned bank: in very isolated
municipalities, at lottery agents or shops

cmsinued

88

Frequency of

Ragion/Country/Program Payee payments Payment system

Branil: Bolsa Escola Mother Monthly ‘Transfers credited to a magnetic card that
could be used to withdraw cash at offices
of a federally owned bank: in very isolated
municipalities, at lottery agents or shops

Brazil: Bolsa Familia Mother Monthly ‘Transfers credited to a debit card distributed to
beneficiaries

Brazil: PETI Mother Monthly Deposited into a beneficiary's bank account

Chile: Chile Solidario Mother Monthly Through National Social Security Institure
Service centers or payment points

Chile: SUF Mother Monthly Through National Social Security Insitute
Service centers or payment points

Colombia: Familias en Acciéa Mather Bimonthly Through the banking system

Colombia: SCAE-Bogoté Seudent Bimonthly’ Through beneficiary’s bank account with
associated debit card

Dominican Republic: Head of household Bimonthlyt. Through debit cards that can be used only in

Solidaridad certain stores for certain products (food and
education supplies)

Dominican Republic: TAE/ Mother Bimonthly By checks distributed through the schools

ILAE

Ecuador: BDH ‘Women Monthly Collected at any branch office from the largest
network of private banks (Banred) or from the
National Agricultural Bank

El Salvador: Red Solidaria Mother Bimonthly In cash at payment posts; payments are
outsourced to a commercial bank

Guatemala: Mi Farnilia Progresa Mother Bimonthly Through a government-owned bank (BanRural)

Honduras: PRAF Mother Every six Vouchers cashed at branch offices of

months BANHCAFE
Jamaica: PATH Family representative Bimonchly Checks disbursed through post offices: prepaid
or his/her agent cash cards

Mexico: Oportunidades Mother Bimonthly Cash at payment points and payments through
beneficiary's savings account with BANSEFI

Nicaragua: Atencién a Crisis” Child's caregiver Bimonthly Cash at payment points

Nicaragua: RPS Child’s caregiver -Bimonthly Cash at payment points

Panama: Red de Opornunidades Mother Bimonthly _At post offices and commercial banks

Paraguay: Teoopora/PROPAIS I Mother Bimonthly Mobile cashier

Peru: Juntos Mother Monthly Through beneficiary's bank account at the

Banco de la Nacion and associated debit card

89

Frequency of
Roplon/Country/Program Payes payments Paymant system
Middle East and North Africa
Yemen, Republic of: BED Mother forsome Quarterly Cash handed out at parent meetings in school
schools; father in
others .
South Asia
Bangladesh: FSSAP Female sudent Twice yearly = Through direct depasit to a bank account in
the girl’s name
Bangladesh: PESP Beneficiary’s Quarterly By diract transfer to beneficiary's bank account
guardian
Bangladesh: ROSC Mother/guardian = Twice yearly* By direct transfer wo beneficiary's bank account
India (Haryana): Apni Bet Girls Once Savings bond that matures when beneficiary
Apna Dhan turns 18 years of age
Pakinan: CSP Parenw/guardian Quanerty At post offices
Pakistan: Panicipatian in Student's household = Quanerty Direct transfer via postal money order
Education through Innovative
‘Scheme for the Excluded
Vulnerable
Pakistan PESRP/Punjab Female Student's household Quarterly Through direct transfer via posal money order
School Stipend Program from the education district office

Source: Program profiles.

Nore: BANHCAFE ~ Banco Handurena de] Café; BANSEFI - Banco ddl Abocro Nacional y Servicios Financieross BDH « Bono de
Desarrollo Humano; BEDP - Basic Education Develapment Project; CESSP - Cambodia Education Secor Support Project; COPE
= Care of the Poors CSP = Child Support Program; CT-OVC + Cash Transfer for Orphans and Vulnerable Children; 4Ps « Pamtawid
Pamailyang Pilipino Programa; FSSAP ~ Female Secondary School Assistance Program; JFPR « Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction Girls
Scholarship Program; [PS + Jaring Pengamanan Sasial; PATH = Program of Advancement through Health and Education; PESP =
Primary Education Stipend Program PESR? = Punjab Edacation Sector Refarm Program; PETI » Programa de Erradiicagao do Trabatho
Infantil PKH = Program Kelaarga Harapan; PRAF » Programa de Asignacién Familiar; ROSC » Reaching Out-of School Children;
RPS « Red de Prateccién Social; SCAE » Subsidia Condiconado a la Austencia Escalar; SRMP = Social Risk Mitigation Project; SUF
= Subsidio Unitario Familia; TAEAILAE = Tarjeta de Asistencia Escolar/Incentiva a la Asistencia Escolar.

2. Program at the piloe stage.

b. Other payment roodulities will be tested and evaluated in the upcamaing second phase of the program.

«. October, January, and April

. This later changed to the schools collecting the funds directly “on behalf of the parents.”

¢ Bimonthly far the education grant, monthly for the pregnancy grant, one-time grant for birch ar a dinic.

£. The pilot program comprises three types of interventions with different payment schedales: (1) bimanthly payments; (2) bimanuhly
payments of a partial benefit, the rese being accumalated and made available at the beginning of the school year (December); and (3)
bimonthly payments, an additional payment being made upon graduation and enrollment in higher education.

p. The Comer es Primero camaponent is paid monthly, and the [LAE component is paid bimonthly.

h. March/April and September/October.


90

‘snjeys / abe (unay

Aueroyauag hq | sad eouasqe you Ajgyes

yulod yo yno aouepiou! Ayanod say | SeHPA UolUM Jooyos 8 SB GARE 11092]

peuiwiayepaid | uo Bulpuadap saysued ssoie seek sod s0skep | sonesnpa yes Piiyo eonpad ‘Auenod

& WIM eInWIOy syisia yyeay | 6 wnwixew) nt 4) yues6 uoyeonp3 Liemeuadiigh aed

Buuoos y jo saquinu %se ques6 yeaH ° ‘Auanod aonpad snuy

pauinbas | jo souepuaye pue ‘sawojno yyeey

Su) UI Jooyos anoudu ‘uawureye

WNW leuoyjeonpa eseasou|

pousd | siayjow
yuow-

eu pare Joy Bulures, | sjooyos Auewud Ayrenod jo

Jajuao yyeay oouss | UORHINU :ssayus9 Jo} sanquaouy | 2/9410 2ub Yeeuq diey

auoyy | $24098-2 96e Jo} yY6Iey aBerene | 40 Aouanbay I ft ales yyjeay 10 | Addns ‘Ueyonon | UE Salley 1sez00d
ysamo] 4) YIM Saniediounyy pauinbai 40 SAP | soanuaoul Aidd 2) JO UeIPIIYo I sve
: 2 wnwixew juecut Aidans leuoneonpe) | 5 : sesnpuoH

uy UM “pue S(gayonon yeay seaqueouy | Svowe jeydeo uewny

eouel|dwoo quewjo1ue pue uoljnu) puewag jo uonejnwinsoe

au) eseasoul

jooyog | S2AMue0U! puewag
(spjoyesnoy
Jood eseqejep NAgSIS
BurAyquep! | syep-o}-dn UM Si Buuoyuow

Jo} 389) sueaws | *UEdE Pue seoyues WiJeay pue yuauldorona ajoko you Ages e se

‘Axoud & UO uojeonpe jo Ajddns ayenbape as ujuow-z e anes ‘sanyediounw
paseg waysks ym SuesBoud jeuOHeU JaUjo ul umoi6 s, onus ul aouepuaye uojeonpe yyjeoy Apisqns Jews ul sayiwey v4
uoNeUout 6 ed ued jou si led un | Joy ensatenes Jooyos looyos Ajyyuowg dood Ajawayxe | eIquiojod

ue) NaasiS !SJUEWAEUU! 000'00L YEW) Weay seinBay | 08 ISeelIW ul juausenut jeydeo

JOMa} YIM Sjeyideo jUsWedep YseIndey uewny aseaou|

UeU} JaUjO Si
Pjoyasno; o1yd uonijnu nu
1H 1ydesBoe5 pue yea eonpa pue Han uonjeonpy
enay9 Ayiqi6yy seanoeldo wesBord
! Lea! $an1/2UOHIPUCD syuauoduioa
(sooz ‘orang

pur s8urjmey woy pajdepe) swiesdoid [DD poyosjas Jo elrayI9 Aj]IQISI}9 pue sait]euoHIpuod ‘syusUoduOD ‘saatoefqQO :p xIpusddy


91

ween ~ |
Jo AQsiui eu)
Aq jas ajnpayos %SE you Ages
ejnuuoy Buucos Bune6iey 2 0} Buipsoooe | jo souepuaye e se amas ‘Ayeuoneu 4ss
® UO paseg js} . Hy suoweulooeA | WwnwiUIW ym yuei6 yyeay yues6 uoneonp3, ey 400d Ajawieaxe
SUBOW-AXOd erdisiioadl ou salimekos [UEgRN pue Guuoyuow ‘uewjoiua 1 JUBUNSOAU! |e}Ideo Aan
yymoub looyos uewny ay) aseasoul
404 SYISIA 3189
yyeay sejnBay
‘@seyd JojId puoses Ou) Ul z dnoIb |
pue | aseyd joyd ayy ul ajqiBya
ejnuuoy Buuoos 4 uonowod
8 Aq pauiuuayap Peart nae bea syle} uonuynu | apes6 jooyos
st Aung aad pue wieayye | — pue ‘pouad
Zz aseyd 0} Ssaooe ‘azis Ajlwey uo paseq aouepuaye pue yuow-ony eanueout Ajddns
youd (ellen xepur AyjeulBsew e 0} Buipscooe “suoneuisoen | @ uj eoussge 'g 4@pUN UaIpIIYo 40} ‘@AnuaoU! Ayanod awayxa
ou pue a re sdnou6 om) ul payissejo aam sease  a1ep-0} ° patie eBeyoed aseo yey Ajddns ‘sjeuayew ur Bully) spjoyasnoy Sdy
ueuy ssaj wm | SP8U0 S21 jediowunw aiqi61j9 ULM | on ssuuoyuow peenoxeun o1seq ‘uoneonpa | jooyds 40} woddns uj uojejnwnooe | enBeseoin
seale snsuso ‘Ajoedeo |e00) pue ainjonysesjul ° ymoi6 yo skep uyeey pue uonuynU ues6 uoneonp3 | jeydeo uewny ejowolg
payajes WeOIUNWWOD pue Wodsuel} 40} SJISIA a1e0 g uey samay poo) 40) uedB ysed
spjoyasnoy je Poo6 ‘s1a}U80 pe pue yyeay seinBoy ‘uawjolua
"| aseyd yojig | S!00U9S 0 sse00e poos ‘eouapiou! jo0usg
" Ayeanod aware y6iy yy
sonyedioiunw pue sjuewpedeq
sonsua}eeyo aca
soyjo 400z pue wjeay syuawejddns
pue awoou! @ouls papnjou! ueaq aney xapul uonujnu ‘saoinies
pjoyasnoy | AyjeulGuew y6iy e yyw sease ueqn tid anh Pacer yyeay yo A\ddns sone ‘suayjOW pue UaIp}IYyo
jo sisfjeue ‘yayUso aued Yyeay puke jooyos pue sisia | jo souepuaye parosduit ‘uoneonpe yenb puediddns Ayejnomed ‘saywey eselBolg
yueuiwuosip | Aiepuoses pue Asewud 0} eoue}sip yyeey pue 4ood jo snyeys jeuonUyNU
Jajueo yyeay | winuIUIW YW ‘sJeueyeWJOoYoS OoKxeW
Buisn paynuap! uleyeo e uly! ssadoe pue yosequunu ‘uewjo1ue uonuynu ‘aBeyoed Jo} woddns'sjues6 | PUS 'yiIeay ‘teuoneonpe ?
aue spjoyasnoy sjueyqeyu! 0OS'z UeY) Jama; pue auinbau 8y) ar saoIMas aleo yyJeay suciiasti au anrosduuy
0g UeY) o2oW yw xepul AWeuIBEW rn soquow leousS | “oseq ‘uondwinsuos leuojeonp3
yBiy & ym sanlunWWwod jeany pjoyasnoy je Pooy Joy yuerB yseD
Aq aouejdwosa

(ponunuos) :p xipueddy


92

vloz €T0Z 710z TLOz oroz 6002 8007 L007

000'9

OTy‘Lee Ce

SOs'cte o00000t

cev‘S66
oo000sT

0000002

— o0000sz
OTT'ste'z

000000E

oooo0sE

— o00000r
L16‘L26'€

299'060'r
o0000sr

[pao] [euonen
1 p1OZ-LOOT Woy eATTUEY PlmejuEY Jo (pjoyesnoy Areloyaueg Jo JequINN) eBeJeAod UF esearoU] Jo auLoUN] OM -¢ xIpusddy

93

aos
-2 a8e-10}-J431am

ueaw ul! aduey>
ON ‘3yZla@muapun
Pily> syuiod %TT-

asesane
uo ‘Aep sad pawnsuod
sdnou3 poo} 7+

agesane uo
Aep sad Aso3aje3 pooy T+

yeduwi on

yeaw saye Auguny Alan
squiod %/"¢- ‘jeaw saye
Au3uny yeymawos s}ulod
adequaoiad ¢'¢7- ‘jeaw
aaye pi yes SuIod %E7+

(ployasnoy papeay
-ajew) Aep sad sjeaw
Jeaw p'0+ (pjoyasnoy
papeay-ajeway) Aep
dad sjeaw sueaw S/‘0+

(spjoyasnoy papeay

pauasiom aye3u!
syulod %S¢- ‘panoudwit
a}3U! Poo} sy

(nadv9)
JaAesaun, oere|Ndog e o1ody
ap ayauigey ‘anbiquezo-w

saysuess yse> iuryoyy ‘imejey)

paflorg (19 W4) SsaysuedL
yse> pue pooy ‘imejew

(193q) sajsues, yse>

pedui oy ~ajeway) Aep sad sjeaw Aouaa. a
emor ee

%0v+ ‘Aep Jad sjeaw 60+ raeay SARK ASIN
3e3 0} ySnoua

sAemje %OT+ 1329 0} uolsuag a3e-pjO ‘0430s97
y8noua Janau syuiod %OT-
uossad Jad |e9} €8T-O8T+

fayequ! alsojed Mo] pey (dNSd) @wwess0lg 19N

Ployasnoy yey} pooulja»!| Ayayes annonpodg ‘eidoui3
squjod %2°TT 03 9°0T-

snjeys [EUO!NAINN Ayssanig Aueqal Aep jad jeaw/sa3uny uonduinsuo> pooy wesZoud ‘Auyjuno>

“(7107

Shesseg pue ojepy woy pajdope) uoniynu pue uondumsuos pooy uo wesZoid Jaysuey yseo Jo yoedun Jo sewing :9 xipusddy

94

uaspliy>
qyslamuapun

40 adejuadiad ul
uononpai ajqissog

(ade> usaysam)
(uaspyiy> pasojo>
pue 49e)q) wog+
‘(jeuolyeu) ueWOM
Aq paniaza uolsuad
31 (Skog) wo gg'o+
‘(syai3) wo €7°7+

saeah € S44 JO €/Z
ysea] Je 10} pue ayt)
4o JeaA ysaly Sulunp
99 paniarai J!
adeuane uo woG'E+

aam Jad saw,

uanas ulajoid Buiwinsuo>
Pjoyasnoy syurod

%O'TT+ Syaam Jad sau
uanas sulweyA Sulwnsuos
spjoyasnoy syulod %7T+

yaam Jad au) au0

Jo Bulwinsuo> spjoyasnoy
squiod %p'OE+ ‘Aep

Jad sjeaw aaiy) Sunea
spjoyasnoy syuiod %9+
‘Aep Jad jeaw auo sujea
spjoyasnoy sjulod %9-

(uewom Aq

UaJp]!y> 4apjo pue ynpe)
4aBuny jo Aqiqeqoid
%8'S- ‘(pajood awosu!
uossad 4!) jeaw paddiys
qnpe yeyy aoueys %SZ-

o1seq) sy

“payenjena jou asam s3jnsai yey) a3e2!pu! sjja2 yue!g

(spjoyasnoy

paqdayje-AlH) aunyipuadxa
Poo} yjnpe jeau ul

squiod %¢"OT+ ‘(swiay! pooy
aiseq) quod % %T+ ‘(sway
Poo} |Je) syuiod % G:T+

(sway! pooy
id %Z'T+ “(sway
POO} IIe) syulod %G'T+

(S19$) awayss
daysues| Yyses je190S ‘eiquez

(avo)
uolsuag a8y pO ‘ely YyyNos

(99) quer
yioddns pyiyd ‘ea1yy yanos

(ponunuos) :9 xipusddy

95

Appendix 7: Focus Group Discussion Questions

For Beneficiary Households

This focus group discussion will be conducted to serve the objectives of
the study. All participants are encouraged to engage in discussion and share
their opinion, insights and comments regarding the topic. Rest assured that any
information that will be gathered from this activity will be treated with utmost
confidentiality.

Insights about the program (Engagement Questions)
1. How did you come to know about the program?
2. What do you know about the 4Ps? What is it for? Why did you apply for 4Ps program?

Experience in cash grant management (Exploratory Questions)

3. What is the average amount of cash grant you are receiving every month? For what is
cash grant for? How do you receive it? How often?

4. How do you manage the cash grant after receiving it? Were you informed where should it
be spent on?

5. Do you have trainings about financial management? How about on nutrition and health?
So far, where are the cash grant going? If given a chance would you like to undergo
these kinds of trainings? Why? What trainings do you think will further help you?

6. Is the cash grant for health and nutrition you are currently receiving enough for your
household? Why did you say so?

7. Were there items/products that you are now, being a cash grantee, able to afford or
spend more on to, compared when you are not yet a cash grantee? What are those?
Why? What else? Learnings from training? About health?

8. Based on your experience, do you think the program helped improved the health and
nutrition of your household? In what ways? What are the improvements in your
households? How about in your neighbourhood who are also cash grantees?

9. Do you encounter any problems related to the program? What are problems do you often
encounter? (Grievances, management, inconvenience, etc.)

Suggestions (Exit Questions)
10.Can you say that there are still rooms for improvement in the strategies of the program in
helping the households? In what ways can the program further help the households
particularly in the aspect of nutrition?

96

For Non-beneficiary Households

This focus group discussion will be conducted to serve the objectives of
the study. All participants are encouraged to engage in discussion and share
their opinion, insights and comments regarding the topic. Rest assured that any
information that will be gathered from this activity will be treated with utmost
confidentiality.

Insights about the program (Engagement Questions)
41. What do you know about the 4Ps? What is it for?
2. How did you come to know about the program?
3. Why didn’t you apply or comply with the requirements in 4Ps?

Experience in cash grant management (Exploratory Questions)

4. If you were a cash grantee, do you know the amount of cash grant you will
be receiving every month? How much?

5. How would you manage the cash grant after receiving it?

6. Would you say that it will be enough for the health and nutrition expenses
of your household? Why did you say so?

7. Will there be items/products will you be able to afford or spend more on to,
compared now that you are not yet a cash grantee? What are those?

8. Do you think the program will help improved the health and nutrition of
your household? In what ways? What improvements do your households
need?

Suggestions (Exit Questions)

9. Can you say that there are still rooms for improvement in the strategies of
the program in helping the poor households? In what ways can the
program further help the poor households particularly in the aspect of
nutrition?

97

Appendix 8: Family Income and Expenditure Survey (FIES)

Zaaess

RRRAR

‘ey Moerngen/noaeg an a"

iw

we

v
wy «
Nig

+ ret shquseg Bs virprnvoumesoyen Be RK 1 OF
= wet ehquing As urrgfoumeouny RH A TE
urd

pr T———r
“ 8
Oh Mm

a
a
a
a co 1a
maa
- TL wu
——— rei 9 Ga
R
@
@
mae
71 wo om
” es Da

=< 7 won
— x eo
se woe
oe wm i004 woos
aes wia%4, vw 6
Sree wa i004, 7 Oe
Semana mio.
= RET ry ©
we qepye ev ‘
sex wage, cw ‘
wx we sv °
se wera sy ?
aa rd s
= Nn ,
a = wT G
—_— sx tyowye

"ow. prowesnoH

ry poem sang vanrrndey

98

ov
oF
G
8
a 4
9
5 ‘Ohjousad ye eUyjOseD “Z|
7 | ‘sayiddns pue jeparew “T|
4 eBejeH Buenngey Leer wer | wat
Z| PUK) COO
T T 201 Buremed es exed oAey eq joRnuind Temng eu (9) wiue BueeTeyeU es (q)
renee
amsove| ue 00 Bun cor Fesied ae cre ax uemng dues} es exyjupy Bue 1twepey oueed)
bene] (Suewey aeqeq ew es e7ea) yeaee 203) emeeui3 Jueu oAju uemng suet
Pera gsnung -Bed es sodeven uepesey “A Tiv es Aoinyedaeus ejem Suny Loup ewyiuiy Sue 1wepey oueed ‘00
sueueyey Su o1qurehia el Suny cuiemed Buoyiues eBw es eAjiued Suoku! Sue eq enury Aew "Uemng eu (9) Wive BUEETEREU es (2)
(OASIadaS ONVd WAI LW 3NVUNSNI ‘ONVINYdvdOVd ‘DIENL Lv YNIIOSVD
seAywied 3u oaquiah|w (puly eu ueueyes 3u orquiaAw Bu BuelE “LN3AUNM ONY VINVSY>) SYVL VS LIDDNVEWN IGNIH YN OASOD3N/SNVWLINVAWHOWNId TTY
—— tlpt0z may - €t0z asquiadgon) ueueYer es exyjuuny Sued eq) Su Suejg
(Aypads) ed eq 2
——:ed eqD AeuenD) Aevex © :ueueyer es sdeyes 3u yemeyeser, Tayddns pue jewasew T
red eg tempenu0xD sejnBayO :eme#e#Buew Bun eBe|eH Suenngey Li pene Use UT way
———— yeqess Bu un PU) 000
red eqi) Aeuend) § Aevex C) sueueyes es eyniwny Suiyeundueg| 20u Buoyeqes) es esed oAey eq soysewun3 Temng eu (9) wiue Sueeseyeu es (q)
red qi even) A101 -ueueyes 3u ounui EEE) ao,
—————x quemng Sues} es eyiupy Bue 1wepey oueed|
10N 39€1U09 204 emeSeur Sueu of1u uemng Buell
sAeSuezeg “FOTW es Aoimvedseur ejem Suny coup ewyiury Sue eT
a oueed ‘00 Suny ZuoksynsjUoy es eked BuoAu! Bue eq enUry Aew "TEMNG EU [O] WUE BUCEIEREU es (2)
Eraete Ta oaaener NOASHNYLSNON ‘OTW
Bord squapuodsay yo awen
re8y ON GI PloyasnoH| !9ads) ed eq “€
a1gO1d PlouasnoH <1 ued ‘okjoned ye euyjosen “Z|
soyddns pue jeuavew T
(AAAA/pp/wiwu) eBejen Suennqey Cea wen] TST
:weAeuedeSe1 se|nwsfeu uejey ‘oAueAs|dauag Suny PUK 00O

ssodeyew Sueu sei
ynui}sSew Bueu sexo

aaquesd yser-uonC) —aaquesd ysexO)
:Aio8aye9 ployasnoy
:weAeuedged 8u ested

(ptoz Wwdy-etoz saquiaA0N)

Aanans asnyipuadx3 pue awoou Ajiwme4

‘ON 13D,

{Ou Buoyeqen es esed oAey eq soysewund "TeMng EU [9] WUE BUCETEHEU es (q)

eBejeH Buenngen (e) F] v0
ex duemng dues) es eypyjury Sue jwepey oueen)

203] emeeuyd Sueu odju uerng Buel)

oueed ‘oo Suny ZeuiwiuiBed es eked SuoAus ue eq eury Aew7UEMNG EU (9) Wiue BUEIExEU es (2)
VNIWIWDVd ‘6v

2
&

6e z
[i
j2eds) ed equ
Tiedas pue aaueuayuiew Z| MSY) W1OL
eBejeH Suenngey pup uy seo ul way "ine meduse “opesoduey>)
Pune) COC Fy red equ P|
Zou Suoyeqen es e1ed ofey eq sosewind ‘TEMG eU To) WUE BUEETEFET es (Q) 3 eAnya149 >|
3 sajpoou quersut °q
Eesied Suenngen (€) d vee 3 (saqua ‘2e/2129) jeas29 weyul “e
ox Quemng Sues! es eynyiury Sue jwepey oueeo| sjeasa2 Bued eal“
— zou emedeu3 Sueu ou wemna Sue toa quosesew ‘vowra)
7 T
“00 Buny ou Buoyegen es ekpusedBuofur Bue eg eyuy Kew "TERR BTCC HUEETTEU es) * misea/seipoon
4 | (239 ‘uewns ‘ex3u1q1a)
NOASVHINNWIOX LY JDVYOLS ‘NOASVLYOdSNVUL SNOASIGUAS ‘BV a uyueyey “9
eee | (238 ‘anoy enesse>)
(Aypads) ed equ “Z| By sed eqt ">|
Aejdns ye sajeAiasew ay anoy aye “4
eSeen duenngey EE eau wai ay anoy asodnd-jly e
Tt @ME TIO) euueH's
201 Buiemed es exed okey eq soxsewund TEMNG eu [9] WINE BUeeTeHeU es (q) sunssia “py
edejeH Suenngey (e) ry v1 (232 ‘uowew ‘Aeuow)
———— x duemng Sues} es eyy!uyy Zue jWepey oUReD sed eqi >
203 emeSeui8 3ueu oAu uemng Suey) lesapued “q
a (peasq paris) 3207 “e|
Q°Lv es Aojmedsew ‘ejem Suny Zoup exm1ury Bue IWepey OUees ‘oo Buny {232 ‘UoAsesiueBio Bu peyejewewed Aedeuys “e
“yeyejedeBued “yowedeBIued es edjiwed Suodui Bue eq enuly Aew ‘Temng eu [9] Wiue BUCETEHEN es (e) ay er eine
SIDINUIS TYNOSHId ONY TWNOLLV3YIIY “TVIIOS “ALINNWWINOD ‘LY ay ures8 a}oun“a|
sod qo2 uo us03 “e|
sew 2
(Ayi29ds) ed eqhz (aye ‘aon umoug ‘wderew
T sjeuayew Mey "T 8 red eqh”
edejeH Suenngey Pu UT Tse) U1 way m sty
ay 22 VIN 2
PUK) OOO ‘tacin 4
011 Suemed es exed oAey eq soysewins ‘ueMng EU [9] WUE BUCETEREU es (2) (09-ui ‘Ze-ul ‘9€-¥I ‘v-D)
ay JeuaWU09 ‘AzeUIps0 “q|
q on (2 ‘peu
— (Ay aads) ‘esouBeww ‘opesouig
urenSed spury 3u Suorynposd ew ‘3! ‘asor ues ‘BemBem)
rele BW *L ay ssejo ast ‘jetads“e
wiexded edu Sued eqi-9| seBiq ‘T
Sionposd suyew wg ysy passs201ds| TOL POD UT Use ut a can
uonesedaid aw “py Been ONS aId wun
wopesedaid ajqexalan pue yniae
$13qn9 PUE $3001 wWol) UONeledaid 2 ounsnuins BujeySed eau
wonesedaid jea199 1 Bu ueueyer Suodu) es oe) eBWi Bu OuNsuoyoyeU/UIexexeu ue IWepey CUeed SEIU] SUES] SU Goo] es
ehuea suonesedaud je2s89 pue sjeaia9 “TTy
Aesuuseurg e3W BU e3IEH |g. on soven Bu eBeieH want Aeyeq es uleury Suleyseg “Ty
Ty 85 KoMeATU "ejem Hany CejuMGEU OF UES "OO HUNG Leg OS AERUCUTAT ‘oyeqos 2e ujwnu) Bujsejexexen ‘wIeyZed "y

© eAjlwed Buod! Bu ownsuoyeu eu eq oynpoud eBw Aew ‘uemng eu (9) wiue Bueesexeu es (q) upseeg ae ujsnaseo eS - |) Wed

e
s

od pq °s"0|
ajpunq Aoyaad ‘y'0)
ajpung sannaj AoB6un|oW ‘€'0|
ajpunq Buoy6uny ‘sdoi ajown9 °2'0}
ay ofjoday "To

saiqeiaan Ayea“e|
sajqerafan ysaid 2
(212 ‘seuesuew ‘seqn)|

ed eq '2
ay eAeded 'p
ay eduew "2
ay (nia “suewejey ‘uepuejeg)
ay swnay sania -q]
ay Bulges “e|

synag ysald ‘T

TROL Puy aT W5eD UI id
eBejeH/OAsald wun

weg way

"pounsnuins
[TRS] Bu qoo| es

ureySed e8w Bu ueueyes BucAU! es oF) eBw Bu uleyexeu Bue 1wepey ouees FFT

Aging ye seni “ET

HSV 1V1O1
(299 ‘an9 ajowe))

z ed eqi +)
sod sdiy> oeyog “2
sod eAaleH “P
sod ayea enesse) 2
8y in8nyq

ay

3y
8y ayowiey “E
8y enesse) “2
By seqeyed ‘T|

TROL PU UT qseD UI ood
CBee H/Oksard yun eg wart

pounsnwns
Bureyed e8w 3u ueueyes Buohu! es oe) eBW Bu Uleyeyeu Sue twepey OUeed SETUT] Sues! Bu Goo] es
sraqny pue s100u ‘ZTY

ae

eBejeH Suenngen (e) 4

(yjuow Jad sajes aBesane) uemng|
ues) es eqnijuyy Sue wepey oueed
Zou emedeurd Sueu oAju uemng Bue]

“Gov es Aojmedsew
‘ejem Suny 2021p ex)y1U)y Bue |Wepey oUees ‘oo Suny ¢('229 ‘uleyded ‘Aeyeq es UOAsesoHap BU

emedied ‘iyeueued 3:2) esnyednuewewed es okey eq eyury Aew "UEMNG EU [9] WIUE BueETExEU es (e)
VAUNLIVANNVIVINDVd 9

(Aypads) ed eqi “2|
epujued au edejeH “T|

eBejey Suenngey pury Uy yseo ul [ way

pun) eo

Zepunned es exed oAey eq soysewnd Tenn eu (9) Wiue BueETeyEU es (q)

[Seren Suennaen le) ry

({yjuou sad sajes aesane) zuemng]
dues} es eypylupy Sue rwepey oueeo
Zou emedeuls Sueu ofu uemng suey}
"g Sy es AoimedBew ejem Suny Loup ey4/Uy Sue Hyejey oueed 00 Suny gioy!!

-Beu Bueu o yjemapis es ‘axBuajed es epunnseu es eq eury Aew Temng eu [5] Wiue BueeIexEU es (2)
VONLLILDVd “SV

ed eqi‘€|

‘oAjoajad ye EUNjOses “Z|
aopeyeqesy edu es opjamsed “T
edejeH Suenngey puny ul yse Uy way

PUK) 00

gaeqn@ungued es exed okey eq soysewin3 ‘TeMng Gu (9) Wiue SUeETEyEU es (q)

q 4g
uogi/dokey eu sidueqeqew ‘S|
eqn’ es Suyjed oynpoud Sued eqh *p|
os011°E|
Buovessued 2
aunt
ehiwed
AeBweud | su ownsuoyen eseieH weg way
eBw gu edejey au eBeieH Suenngey

“bv es Aoimedsew ejem duny ceyundeu oy uees-uees ye 1wepey ov Oued “00 Suny
gleqn3unued es edjjwed Bu eq osqwiadw Sue eq eynyeu Aew Temng eu (9) WUE SUCEIEyEU es (e)
LvanoNNONvd ‘by

101

le

4 rr

ujsmased Sued eq) "s

ohjoniad ye eujjoses *p|
Jopeyeqezs eSus es opjamseg “e|
apransad ye spaay ‘sazyjuad 2
sSuypa3urg “t|

edejeH Suenngey Pan ur ase UL way

PU) ec)

0uU peinyey eBui ye eps! Bu yinyded es esed oAey eq sorsewind ‘TERN EU (9) WUE BUEETEFEU es (q)

o q vi HSV WLOL
owu ededey Sued eqt “€ i ——— eT (are ‘0309 ap eeu) ed eqi"q
ysuIleUs *Z 3 4aq9ng ynueag “e|
epsi"T, ed eqi9)
AeBiweuig cued uoAsynpoud
sairdueaeier ae eBeren Buenngey | Gee wan 1 rete eatoay ed sara
GeV es Aojmed3ew ‘ejem Suny gerundeu on uees-uees ye 1wepey oueed ‘oo Buny gposnsnuins eBwi ee pve eared ;
‘du eAed 1eZep Suewe) eSw Bu eynyeyeu eu edjiwed Bu eq osquiakiw Aew UEMNG EU (9) Wiue TueereyeU es (e) cee pata 7
VASIDNIDNVd "EV a (238 {1814209 yinJ4) ed eqy 2}
[_____ 77 : inete
—aeE€E=--=-—eeE===* =e ujsnqse3 Sued eqy “Z| 3 ajddeauid pauues ‘e
aquahuny “9 uonesedaid yn2J “pb
Ho ae jangs a (238 ‘Ansey) ed eqt “2
opjamsed *p| 8y ynueag “q|
aomeoie sod BoAIn/orng “e|
spaes‘z ed eqie
dohey auegeje edu Bu 148ed “T
egejeH duenngey puny ur ‘yse ul wey (23a ‘soungoy) s12y30 EP
PUK) °OC) 3y uoluo Z°P}
doAey e8w Bu eBejee-Bed es ered okey eq soysewind ‘Temng EU [o) Wiue BUEETEFEU es (q) 3 youn Tp
4 4 tc SC ed eat]
:(Ayivads) ed eq] (2 ay (232 ‘enBo4) 0d 09) »°3
30111 (q ‘aypunq mous E>}
sere (e 8y obuo; 2°2|
dokey es Bujje3 oxsnpoid °2| 3 sojany2iqoH T°?
(Aypads) ed eqi (a sauna] 12430 pue sueaq Aip/uaai9 °>|
megeien (P
youew (2) (212 ‘aohes ‘eseqejey)
exea (q| bd oq ‘sq
Aogea (e] ay owwiol “pq
Goren arpung 20 '€ 4
aueoe |p enyweg egejeH uodsynposd wou ay 1woyt663 74
eB Bu esejeq|  OUSYPIEN | suenngey Su iweg 3y phojodwy °T°4}
Bu eBeieH sa]qeya8an ying °q|
q'zv es Aojnyedew ‘ejem Suny geiundeu o1 uees-uees ye 1wepey OUeeS ‘00 Buny goxlu oyyNpod naa
e3w o doAey e8w Bu eSejee-Zed eu eAwed BuoAi Sue eq wiq3edieu Aew TeMng eu [o) Wiue BUEEIEFEU es (e)

dOAVH ON VOVIVY-D¥d ‘ZV


102

oe
es (is “tino inqeA) ed aT "5 ‘ujsmsed Sued eqi‘6|
3 9s95u9“d doAey eSuy
8 peel ae eyesfed es ywed ‘edny es equay ’B
edeqie| iqmaed es pedeg ‘saa uopeSunt
weal 291-2

aL 4s244 “P| (uosaw Bun)
(212 ‘woaso jjng ‘uabo)sns)} eo] jeanajnajie es peAeq eu s2z23u} °9|
3 od 0g} z°2) sopeyeqesy eBus es opjamsed °s|
3 (92-5 ‘yusofug “Ba) oynusof juofuj T°) Ho pue yang “b|
parepmog verenay

epesodeqa “q| .

2,
epesuapuoy ‘e} somn4ed “2
seye9 ‘| spaas "T|
Teo | punuy weyul_] and wea = edejeH Suenngey Pury uy yse> Ul) wai
‘Owunsuoyeu edu Bu OAsaig Lawn PUI) OO

Tpounsnwins: deyesesded es esed oAey eq soysewnd ‘Temng eu (6) WiUe BUCETENEU es (q)

SureySed eBw Su ueueye) BuoAul es oe) eBw Bu wieyeyeu Bue iwepey oueed © jURSi Bu qoo| es

Son xe seved es emed Buowynpold 'S TY ¢ OM |

={e1doa Buipnjoui)ed eqh (2}
a = 3 SC~*Y (12 “u020g) 0d 0g) ¥°q] oyeqo (e|
ay odo, ‘oursoy €'q| (ueweyey)
By Bopion Z°9| eu yepyejnwnweu ye spiy2s0) ed eq] “y|
ay 021/049 ‘osjun6u07 Tq} zed eql (P
ee] 2p IpulH BoAIN (2
EI (238 ‘woH) od 0g] y’D Aeing (q
3 a6osnos puuai, €'0 seynud (e|
3 foo,oay “ay uoayouny Z°0| sajqera8an pue suing “€|
a faaq pausog T'0 ed eg 9
eye] age ayowe) “q
suonesedaid yeayy ‘S| enesse) ‘e|
(212 ‘oAegey ‘exe]e¢) S49qny pue $1004 *Z
ay ed eq 2 ——
3y Suiquiey Bu ausey “q|
8y megejey Bu ausey “e Aejea (e|
ed eqip| 12219) "T|
8y Aogea ‘e TeBiueuig | eAjweg meer feiseear
8y exeg'Z eBu [BU OWNSUOXEN] 9 eongey fu jweg way
By youeW “T, auesejey | Bu edeieH
TOL Duy UT Tse U1 BH5 | sueg wan a Tw &5 Aomedsew ejem Suny ceundeu
oumnsuoyeu edu du ols wn |! 0}! uees ye 1wepey oueed ‘oo Suny Zedjiued SuoA! 1ueeu Aew ‘TEMNG eu (a) Ulue BUBETExEU es (2)
"pounsnuns wivsysoVd ‘TY
SuieySed eBw Bu ueveyey SuoAu! es oe) eSw Bu uiexeyeu Tue iwepey oueed © FEST Bu goo) es OASOD3N/NVVLDIWAVSVNId VOW 'V

awe y TY A Lavd

103

se

(ov a8ed) trv

(Aypads) ‘saajaias ssauisnq|
ye a1e359 Jea4 ‘aoueunsur ‘uiyege) Bu de8ZuerSed ‘Sueinededsed ‘81qn1|
ye eurjosed “ayuadsny es ueAeusney Aew Sueerexexded edu Bue ewesey|
SUV VS LIDDNVQYN IGNIH YN OASODIN/ONVYLDNWAWIOWNId “TT

(ce a8ed) ev

(‘212 ‘Suoyes ‘eqejer ‘eps! Bu jyejeded3ed pue ! 219 ‘spaameas
‘sjrays ‘s8uisa8uy 9u wox!)Sed ‘eps; Bu 1jnyed Bu eAeSex) VASIONIDNd ‘E|

(ce e8ed) zy

“Daa sere]
Suemues ‘Bo Bu eAe8 oranposd eBu ye 219 ‘oxed “youew ‘oAeqey “Aogeg|
‘eyeq ‘meqeey Bu yejeded3ed 3u eAeZex) dOAVH ON VOVIVY-DVd ‘Z|

(9¢ a8ed) tv

(21a yepjeinunweu Sueweyey ‘spiy2s0 ‘1uew ‘seanad|
‘Aen e8n Buewiejey ‘siew ‘Aejed Bu wiuerered Bu eAeSer) yAWSYSOWd ‘T

101‘

Punor TT ysea ul

eB een /oAsaad

a
(ov 28ed) ory “eanyynayst Suewnue Bu okevexed ‘Aeyeq Bu soAe-Bed © NOASNNULSNON ‘OT a
(op a8ed) 6y 248 “BuyAenb auoys ye U/Bueyng ‘eqes# ‘0,U/9 ‘uIse Bu YNINIWDVd *6| 4
“a4 ‘sa|Alas saBuassaw ‘sajyyanze Sujsnoyasem Bued eq}
(6¢ a8ed) gy ye eBapog Bu eAe8 oksoBau /a}2ko13 so daal Bu oyauewewSed Bu eAeSer| ay
NOASYHINNININOY Lv 29VYOLS ‘NOASVLUOdSNVYL DNOASIEUAS °8| ay
‘aa ‘OjuaWaAs!|gesa edu Bu 5
(6€ aded) zy ejeyewewed ‘uoAsesiueBio Bu peyejewewed ‘jeyejedeBued ‘yoweBeBBued| 2
S3DINUIS TYNOSUId ONY TYNOILV3UIIY “IVIIOS ‘ALINNIWINOD ‘L|
(218 ‘uexded Buoyynpoud e8uy|
(g¢ a8ed) oy “Aeyeq es uoAsesoyap Bu emesZed ‘eps) 3u oAnjnyZed ‘BuooSeq Ju emessed| ay
“yeueued ‘ueyeseq Su yeyeided Bu eAedey YAUNLIVANNYAWINOW 9 ay
seBn Bueq} 3,eq1 es| ay
aed)
(8€ Bed) sy Bed ye 1qei-iges es ‘ayBuajed es epuiyyZed Sue ewesey YONILUOVd ‘S| je
Sf
(uoq! xe dofey eu s/2ueqeqew eBw Bu jjnyBed xe ("218 ‘wn8 “ujsay 5y
(ge a8eq) * poquieg ‘ueneu ‘ediu ‘uoBo2) yeqn3 Bu oxonposd eSw Bu eynyded “Bujn| By
fe / Su emeSBed ‘(sasieuo!ssa2u09 Sue ueqi)) ound Bu joyndndged ‘Buoye33ued ay
Bu woy/8ed ‘(101-1!diJound Bu wiveyesded Bu eAeBex) LVENONNONVA “b ay

weg

HS¥2 TvLOL

(aya ‘Buewele
‘eySuejey Suoung) ed eqi “q|
exe] ap eu sng ‘e|

ed eqi ‘€

“ya ‘ops! Boing 2°}

ops} ou Buoobog T°}

sy panes |

payours 7°q

oAny ‘Buea Tq

sy payows/pauid “4|

(23a ‘ouny) 12420 Z°0|
jasayoous “sauipsos [’D)
ajoq/ere| aq e|

ysy passazoid ‘2
(paameas) ‘23a ‘dasouy ‘o1e7
“aya ‘eAjny “Buoyes “y|
usnd 3]

ayemns/uodiy *}|
sqesa‘3|

wend ‘ejdejd ‘eidej) “P|
SuoBBunje9 *2|

snBueg ‘q

yeSep Suewey ‘T

way

es Aomedgew
‘00 Suny

IpulH,

°0

een inte)

:goksoBau Suemeseuls o ueerxey8ed Suedn egeq es peeseyeu

sod

es ueBunueyey sod
efw Bue

unndes ye ql ued sod

eu uiemed/pepiquye eBw Su emeewng eu eAjmed Su eq o1quadiw Aew Temnq eu Wve SUEEIEIEU eS

VAIINYd ON NYVLINYIVHOVNId SNIVMVD ON NVHVISIT “4

tpounsnuins Bureyded
eu 3u ueveyer 3uoAu! es oe) eBw Zu ownsuoyoyeu Sue 1wepey Oued ‘oBBUI) Bues! Bu goo) es
yeSep Suewe Sueqs ye eps} ‘9°TY

HSV) TWLOL
(212 ‘Bba Aimquay) od 0g) €°q
jojo ou Bop3) 2"

anjog T°4

83a passe2oig “q|

od Dg p’0|

01Dq £°0|


+
$

so

Es

EEEEEE

~o

HSW9 WWLOL

(238 ‘ong a3 ‘doup ay
Apues a2}) ed equ p|
482M pajvog “|

UUp 01 Apeay “2

(212 ‘agin sados6
‘aamnf Buy) ogi €°q
a2inf a6u010 2°

azinf ajddoauid T'q}
arenuasu09 “q

(232 “apmod yoqgojos ‘aif
aw) ‘2/0 sa6u)6) od 0g) €°9)
a2inf a6uos0 z°0)

a2inf ajddoauig ['0
Japmod °e|

syuuip payeuoqueauou
pue saoin yng °2|
SAULIP HOS "T

or To punu

used Ul

eB e|eH/OKSB1d

weg

way

3

3

~

:pounsnuins SujeySed

e8w Bu ueveye} BuoAul es 0€} eBW Bu OWNsuOYoyeU Bue |Wepey OUees ‘o8BuI| Sues! Bu Goo} es

uywinu! eu Buisejeyeyeu ia “8'Ty

___—4 HSvO WLOL

(ou1d-o11d) senea] e241 °q
212 ‘3e2 9peIq ‘uoIdN]“e|
ees, “€

ove)

"238 ‘eaiqey ‘eo21y “q
“aya ‘aUIeAO ‘OVW “e|
212/040S) “Z|

sueaq ayo) ‘q|

2ayJ09 yueysuy “e|

adey ‘|

TOL pupar |

use UT

eBejeH/oksead

ond
wun

iweg

way

ypounsnuins Surexded

ew Bu ueueyey Buu! es 083 eBw Bu oWNsuoyoyeU Bue IWepey OUeed ‘O8BuIj Sues! Bu goo} es

ees} 32 €0209 ‘aden “L-TY

ve

dodey 3u oynposd (q)
dokey (e
dOAVH ON VOVTYY-DVd S|

(Ayoads) ‘ed equ (P|

Aen ye seanig (2]

siaqny pue siooy (4)

seasa9 (e|
WINVLVLOVd/wYSYSoVd "Y
dOAVH ON IINHD Vd “€
SNOLVOONV

ON VAVS LV8ND ON OLINGOUd!
ON VHNDWd ‘OSOHLOLOVd *Z|
VASISNIONWd ‘T|

AeBiweuid au ounsuoyen | °8t!2H uenngen Sey
dws Su eS
ew du egejeH Bu eBeien Ad1323y ON
(ges Aojmedaew) een vorewO
gueewyeyeyaed

Jo oAsofau SuemeBeurd ip eu ‘ueueyey es yweBew o uiexew Ae esed ‘eqeq! es peeseyeu eSw Bu
peiniey eu pepiqnye eBw Su emeSewn eu eAjiwed Bu eq o1quadiw Aew ‘TeMNg eu WUE BUCEIEYEU es

S3LLIALV 3NVNILSNS ATINVS “3

105

o
o

(228 ‘saymop ‘punjas xe3) ed eql “TT
eAywedey es ejnw eueweg/eueuI “OT,
‘aauesnsuy es enw Aedy2eq 0 uawasinquiay “6
ueve-j1e 3u ueyequaqgeusd es enw oqni“g|

oyfueq es Aynba ssa

ll

p——___ ng /sBuynes es sjemespynim ’9| od (-249 ‘sayem 291 ‘Aauoy ‘2>1) ed eq “6
(jed:ou11d) eqy es Sueaned es enw pedeg's|

“suopnynsuy yuauusanod Aeyeq es ujeury 3e

ye (521035 1185-125 Bu eAeBey) 063 Bueq! es ein Buesnut P| Seqe] es eymeu Jo uIq eu ULeH3ed °8|

yeue-Sewey eS es ejnw Sueqnuy “¢ 3 (218 ‘saqno wu0uy ‘x1w esiu9|

CO jjwe eu jeuosiad Bu equaqgeg Z| ‘saqno 188ew) ed eq 'y

- uewe-ye Bu euaqied‘t ws exns-a|

PUD AT W525 roy 3 usin P|

(3 es foimeddey) een) UORWO a edn "3

¢pounsnusns es peeseyeu eau es 3uijed a Suemeg “q

‘ou peiny 40 erad 8u deBauejeyeu eu eAywed Bu eq osqwiaétw Aew ‘uemng eu wiue Sueerexeu es 3 equimeg °c

Vad VN dVDONVNIL ONVd Val ‘a ed eqiz|

ussy ‘9|

(‘212 ‘anes uoypay) ed eq)

‘aanes oyewol “a|

aN or gouu eejey ue ouy a

Ta es Aomedew) een) uo O oho "3

eBuein3 ansiay-q

Suoe) oT es ed eqeqew eu pepa Aew eu e1eq Bu eW14 40 sajjedos Bu eAed UeeryeyexBed Bueq! es ein asieuuokey‘e

‘ou pejny 10 esad 8u de8Bueyeyeu eu edjiwied 3u eq o1qwiadW Aew ‘uemng eu wiue SueeseyeU es seanes’s

SVVLI VS LIDDNVAVN IGNIH VN Vid DN NYNANNOWNId ONvd val “29 aeeeetl u

(212 ‘anduazow

SEE oy) 2ouu eBejey Sue ouy a ‘wind Bumayp) s19u0
(Q es oimedaey) een) vole © a $93e]02049 “q
é('238 ‘spuog ‘s9203s) ueunynunwed/juauysanu! eSw es ejnw oqny/opuapiaip es ej 3 saipued e|
‘ou pein; Jo evad Su de#3ueyeyeu eu eAjiwed Su eq ouquiahiw Aew ‘uemng eu wiue Sueeseyeu es syanpoad sens “Z|
AN3WLSIANI NOUS SAN3GINIG “39 3y “299 ‘openoasnuy ‘sassejoyy °2|
By nnd “q|
‘syauag AyIN2as [e105 *€) rexnsy “T|
uonesuaduio> s,uauniom °2|
quawiasnas pue uoysuad *T TROL Puy UI Wepuy_] aud
PU UT se UI waa eBe|eH/oksard Lawn | “Fo bana)
(90 es Aoimedew) een) uoraWO
{S14aUag [21905 40 UOHeSUadWOD s,UaUIOM “uUasNad/uoIsuad es ejnW :pounsnuuns BureyZed
‘owu peiny Jo esad Bu desduereyeu eu edjiwed Bu eq osquiaAiw Aew ‘uemng eu wiue Sueereyeu es eB Bu ueueyes Buchu! es oF} eSw Bu ownsuoyoyeu Bue jwepey ouees ‘o93u!) Sues! Bu qoo} es

SLI4INI@ ALIUNIIS TVIIOS ONY NOILVSNIdWO) S,NIWAYOM ‘LNIW3UILIY ONY NOISN3d “SD see} es peeseu |p Sujeyed Ju yn Sued eqi ‘6'Ty

©
s

HSW2 WWLOL

syns | ("239 ‘022eqQ03 yea] ‘so2eqo3 Sujmay>|
‘aud pue yea) ‘Ynu jayag) ed eq “E|
syns nego. “Z|
syns oAueds “Tt
PUuIy UT yseD Ur Tex sejepey/
eae len/oAsaig ‘Aouanbasg wen
:pounsnwins

ze

‘Bueyned es 3ul/e9 °Z]
oydueg es 8uy/25 "T

Puy Ui ysed Ul way
(s9 es Aoimedzew) elev) uoraw CO

eBueyned ye 0y3ueq es enw saat

u ‘oyu pejny 4o exad Bu deBBueyeyeu eu eAjwied Bu eq ouquiadjw AW ‘ueMng eu WUE SUeeseyeU eS

S3U3LNI ‘vO

eB es ueueye) BUOAU! es oF} eBW Bu so\seSeSeu Bue 1Ye/ey OUeeB OBIT] BIS BU Goo] es (q)

(sv es AojnyedBew) elem uosawO
éosjuesiueu eu eAjiwed Bu eq o1quiadwy Aew TeMng eu ulue BUeeIeyeU es (e)
OyeqOL “bY

(232 ‘wna
“Asim ‘Apuesg ‘Bouequie) sonbr “¢|

(28 ‘seq ‘eqnd) yeIy “2
2228 'T

way

Pury uy yse5 uy 130) sejepey/
eBe|eH/okseid Anuanbasy

:pounsnwins
TEST SU FOOT es (a)

e8us es ueueyer Suodu! es oy eBw Bu soyseBeBeu Bue !ye/ey oueed OBFUT
(pv es Aonjedgew) elev) uous OC,

gunwnu

eu Suisejejeyeu ew Ju wnuiwn eu eAjiwed 8u eq oiquiakiu Aew Temng eu wiue ueeleyeu es (e)

ujwnU] Bulsejexe7en “ey

er) HSV TWLOL

(a12 ‘ade ‘squpyos) epuanaw ‘py
‘242 “quesneysau es 1j1u1q Bureyded “E
oyeqest es t1u1q BureySed “z
ejamysa es 1uIq BuexZed “T

Puly UP yse5 up 7ex0L, sejepey/ woH
e8ejeH/OAsalg Aouanbasy

:pounsnuns

eBw es ueueyes Suodu: Su osquiadw eBw Bu soyseeSeu Sue 1yejey ouees OFFUy SUEST BU GOO] es (q)

(ev es AojnyedBew) elem) uosaw OC
goyeqesy o ejamysa es peiniey Aeyeq Bu seqe| es (epuariaw ‘ueundey ‘ueljeyeduey ‘jesnwe)
uley3ed 3u ijiqnung Ae sejepew eu eAtwed 3u eq osquiakru Aew "UEMNG EU WUE BUEEIEXEU es (e)
Aeyeq Bu sege| es weury SueySeq “ZY

sazeds “¢|

Pury uy use) uy wy
(p> es Aojmeddew) elem) uoraW O

{pounsnuuns es uewuyje
es euas es peAeq Su desSuejeyeu eu edjiwed Bu eq osquiaklw Aew ‘uemng eu wlue SueeseyeU es

NIV-AVINVIND Vd ONVd Val LY ‘AVHVG “Vd SNVHYdNVdWNId WS VIN VLUN “E>

(ODN “Ba) vopsMapsuy arentd °>]

(Aypads) ed eqh (z
DAWdd PIMDIUDg-QNSO (T - UO;Na;ASU] JUaWIaACD “q]
eAyjused Sueq es “e|

(18301)

a2unos
eBejeH/oAsaid

(ed es Aoimediey) een) uo
08) Bueq! es Buyjed Buojm
uew uyje 30 evad eSw 3u ded3ueyeyeu eu eAjwied Bu eq osquaklu Aew TEMG EU WIUE SUEETENEU eS
WSN VS O1IG SNS SNOTNI/Vuad ‘79

peouge]
quauysanul/ueunynuinwed es ejnw oqny/opuapiqia “py
Peosge wos ‘232 ‘ya1jas ‘sys yseD “py

peouge Suyje8 oAsidauaq ued

eq! 3e UoResuadwiod s,uaUmioM ‘uawiasnas ‘suoIsUad “E|
peouge oyeqesjeSeu eu eAjjwedey es Buyjed e1ag“Z

|

peouge es eyesquoy Aew eu

jedey ef es Buje exaq “T

(e101) _ eBelen/orsig DaunOs,
(za esAoimeddew) eievC) vow O

épeosge Buye8 Buojny

uew uije so evad eBw Bu deaauereyeu eu eAwed Bu eq osquiakiw Aew Temng eu WUE BUCEIEYEU es
OVOURY WS ONTIVD SNOTNL/Wuad "TD

Vlad ON NYNNNY-SUNId ONVd val ‘2

107

te or

Ty Tara ‘Keuoy 991) ed eqi OT |
afi esejedwed sued eq! ‘2|
Es ulsy “P|
aur saones ‘2}
jw eynuew “4
Fs pejnyey eSw ae jexnsy ‘e|
see) es peeseu |p SujenSed Su jan Sued eqi “6|
jw! ed eql'P
jw 4ayem pajnog °2|
jw susp payespAyoques-uou pue sain yN24 “4
jw SHULEPYOS “e|
ujwinuy eu Suysejeyeyeu ia “s|
ees "2

0205/23e/040S1 °q)

adey ‘el

ees} 3e 20209 ‘adey *Z|

ay :(Apads) ed eqt “P|
3y ‘Suyep/oAn ‘>|
i ay0q/ere| aq 4
ay eps) Suemues “e|
yeep Suewe) Zueq: 3e eps} “9
2(Aypads) ed eqi °>|

aq 4 ag

< 4 Oo _ a Boj Suemues “a
Cc  — %) jw wean 221
ed eqi'g Bop2| xe seye8 es emeS Suorynpoid ‘s|

3y :(Ayioads) ed eat “P|
dofey es Suyje3 orynposg “S| Fs ausey Sueye| 3g “2

dofey Su ausey “P| 3y Aogeq Buausey ‘eyeq Bu ausey BueMIeS “q
Aviny ye seynid *E| ay youew Su ausey Suemues “el

42qn3 pue yooy *Z

z
ed eqy 9) Fy uonesedaud yna4 “2}
slewa f Aein8 Suemues -q
Aejeg“e| 3y seynud Suemues “e|
sjeasa. *T| Aeing ye seanid “€
3y (Aypads) ed eqi

ehiued y arowey-q
Bu ownsuoyen eBejeH Buenngey way ay seyeved “e
au ese, | Sm Bu eseieH ssaqny pue syooy “Zz

AeBjweurd
ew Su egejeH

:(Ayjoads) ed eqq *)
uyueyey ‘Aedeut “9|

sleW 'P|

(228 ‘aay snounn(8) ujuey Bu asepy Sued eq)

z
(a es Aojmedzew) elev) uoraw CO, fe
Aes weuid eBw Su esejey Sue oue ‘oe} Sueq! es ulp Aedweu Suny geAywed ay
3y
By

SuoAu! Zu ownsuoyeu Bu eSejey Sue oue ‘ueuy Suny Zequaqeu Bu eBejey Bue oue ‘oy! eSW es equaL! uemmueseySued ‘uuey “q|
BueASeyeq Aew Suny Zou eejey Sue oue ‘uosaws Suny Zueueye3 Sueq} es ejnw dodey Suedeje ssejp assy ‘yeI2ads ‘ujuey “e|
© wiueved e8w 3u ded3ueyeyeu eu ueueyes Bu eq o1quiaklwi Aew "eMnG eu UNUE BUCEIEYEU es Suonesedaid jea199 pue sje019) “T
NV XDO1S3AN HO G3DNGOUd $3718V1393A GNV SLINUA ‘SdOUD 4O 3UVHS 13N "8 eB eH/OKSa1d [ Aavend weit
(g es Aojnyedaey) eje/ wos) ‘celled Suoh} due eq! es
ein de#2ueun SuoAjedis 3e Sulsejeyeyeu Suiwnuy ‘ujexded eSw Aew Temng eu WUE BUEEIEFEU es
eqi es ein desdueuy eu oAjedis ye uwunuy Suysejeyexen ‘Bueydeq eS ‘sv


108

bag

“{Ajiaads) ed eqi a]

wna’ Signa Z|
w/sod “242 ‘siuey ‘enpuey “9
yen aquakiny *s
jus (248 ‘se3/auasouay)

ohonnad Suoynpoad “p|
ay (941) se3 uinajouad payanbny “¢
ajpung”_ Aouen “Z
ax —~SF Buyin ‘T

eBejeH/oAsag [Maven wa

(za es Aojmedsew) elev vor O
jed Buoi es eqeq es peeseyeu eu Aedeq efw Bu eq Aegiqdeu efw Aew Temng sueereyeU es (q)

110349,

/HSWD WLOL

pads) ed equ “g|
wing Bani -2
jw/sad “22a ‘s{Buey ‘ejipuey “9
yy aquahuny “Ss
jw (242 ‘se3/auasouay)
oAjouyad Suownpodd “py
ay (941) se3 wnajonad payanbyy “¢
aypunq Aoyen Z
By Buyin T
FORA (ownsuoyou
pas
pury uy ae yeioy 6u jwog) way
pauinsuo>
eBejeH Asad Aanuend
(ata es Aojmed3eyy) een) vasa OC
281qma ye me}! “(janj) oynjued es eAjiwed Bud! Sue eq Sueynuin o soysewnd Aew TEMG SUCETEAEN es (2)

WaLVM GNV LH9I ‘13nd “Ta

SNOILVYIdO GIOHISNOH ‘NOILVIINNWIWO) GNV NOILWLYOdSNVYL “Y3LVM ONY LHD! ‘13nd “a

PART Ill - INCOME AND OTHER RECEIPTS

A. SALARIES AND WAGES FROM EMPLOYMENT

Sa nakalipas na anim (6) na buwan , may nakakatanggap ba ng na sweldo (allowance, bonus, commission, etc.) o ibang bagay (gaya ng

housing, food, grocery, etc.) galing sa trabaho?

Wala (Magpatuloy sa B)

OMeron

Total

|

In Kind

Housing,
clothing,

food, ete.

Basic Salary
or Wages

Total

In Cash

A

Allowance,

jonoraria,
tips, ete

Basic Salar

Vv he
or Wages

Uring
Industriya

Trabaho

Pangalan

e

TOTAL IN KIND (b)

TOTAL IN CASH (a)

Type of
Employment

11 - Regular
2 - Seasonal

Sector

1 Agel

2 Non-agel

30

et

109

De "poled aauaiajas Sulunp pied s|equad
ypeq ‘awoou! yuasin> wo4) saxey Suipjoyyym Buipn)oui)}
uysngse3 Sued eqi “6

(Aeyeq Sunjues
Sueu uosaw Suny) Aeyeq Suodeq Su emeBededsed “g|

(Aeyeq|

Surjues Sued ejem Buny) Aeyeq du emededed3eg “Z|
ueunynweujd ew ye oy3ueq es oSeups| Suedad “9|
oe) Sueq es Sueyned “S|

£T0z @1quiaAqon-Bew o8eq j1}UIq eu
(212 “‘wodsuesn) soysed jeuosiad es pedeq SuekSeyes *p|

£107 asquekqon-Sew
eu ‘212 ‘saouerjdde es peAeq SueASeyeg “€

(jediouyid) Suesn es pedeg ‘z
“aaa ‘Aeyeq ‘edn} Su ekedey Aysadoad teas Bu i11q3ed “T

o8eq ju

TeioIy

eBejey4/oksard Anuend

waa

eu AeBeq eB es eAjiuied BuoA! Bue eq (1p:

eg es Aojnyedaeyy) een)

worn

gpounsnuns

[ag

[ayem pue pue}) 22/A125 [0OUrS “6

2(Asioads) ed equ °2|

aay jeuaduassaw ‘P|
uokseuodsuen Suel'q

qweSeurd eu dodey Bueseje ew Bu ureysed “>

oyauewsew jesee-Bed “|

yedyaeg “e

uokseyjunwioy
ye uokseyodsuen es soxsed Bu jin Sued eq ‘8|

soya ‘ewes3j4 “L|

(irew uaja104 pue 3s2W0)
sdureys aujysew pasoyaw/sdwers a8e2s0d °9)

xe ja) ’P

(seo 2nsawop/seassano) sauoyd Aed

(spun) ausa.ut ‘€°9}

(poo}-a/spso2 auoydyar) a'qoW °2°4|

(aynsajay ‘pydjaajar) auypuor T°]
pied-asd °q)

yausaiul £0)

auoydyj22/a}!9OW ZO)

‘auypuny ‘T'0|
pied-asog “e
“aya ‘ouodajay es unedeg ‘S|

:(Afizads) od 091 ‘SP

saysossa220 ap214an ‘YP

saqni/6uoing ‘€°P|

Auaug 7°}

squo2gny TP
ed eqi P|

aaqhesp 3u opjams "2

{Afiaads) od ogi “p°9}

219/ysea) soysewund Aew ‘TEMTG EU [5] WIT BUEETEHEU eS
SLNAW3SUNGSIG YIHLO ‘1

(212 ‘saauerdde passassodas ‘veld paau|
-aad Buipnjouy aze2ipaw ‘sanp Ayseah 10 Ajyruow ‘21polad|
‘saaj diyssaquiauy ‘sanp uone|2osse 21A)2 pue aseyjam ‘saay
Jeuorssayoud ‘saay je8aj ‘yaya pue aay 01 anp sasso)) ed equ “|
eAjjwed Su Suegn es sazaqul es pedeg ‘z

(suiniwaid

aouesnsul alenuid ¥ SISO ‘SSS (SPUN DIGI-D¥¢ 01 UoRNGUAUOD|
Burpnjou!) swinjwasd quauasiyas pue aruesnsul 3317 “T|

Tevoly Anuend

way

eBejeH/oAsard

(res Aoimedseyy)

een) vole)

épounsnwns

eu AeSeq eB es eAjiwed Bud! es eq (11P3s9/yse) Soysewng Aew TeMNG CU [S) WUE BUPEIEHEU eS

‘S3UM.LIGN3dX3 Y3IHLO “EH

bursoas6 pup abuoys 110 ‘£4

dn-auny s0x0u ‘2g

uopoa1uqny s1ss042 ‘T'4}
soheededaed/ineuededdeq “q|

lasaip/eusjoseg “e|
uoAseyodsuen es soyse8 eu jeuosiad “py

oyseg es ayesewied “¢|

levonewiarut “q|

ansawog-e
ouejdosa es ayeseweg “2

yoads) ed eqi “a

geripad “P|

aprons 2

Aaudaat-q

sng-e|
ayesewed "T

Tevor

Dua wun __] Anuenp/ouenbarg wai

(az@ es Aojmedgew) ejenC) _u020) Zeqeq! es peeseseu Su eked uoAsemUNWIOY
3u un Suew oue ye ayesewed exed eAsiwied SuoA! es uewnuls Sue eq soyseuis Aew TEMNG BUCETEHE es (2)
NOLLVOINNWINOD ONY NOLLVLUOdSNYYL 28

fa

oO

(a1em pue pue}) arias joouss “6]

:(As12ads) ed eqi a]

$99) jevaduassaw ‘p|

uoksevodsuess Bue

duseSeu/8 eu dodey SueBere eBw Bu uieyBeg |
oyauewSew jesee-3ed “q

yedjiBeq 'e

uoAsexjunwoy|

ye uoAseyodsues es soise9 3u jun Sued eqi g
“aya ‘ewesBayas “Z|

(Wwews u3jas04 pue snsewoa)}

sduieas aujysew pasaray/sduiess ae3s0¢ ‘9|
xe)2191 "P

(s)e9 sasawop/seassano) sauoyd hed °2|
(sp102) rausaiut °€'q]

(po0}-2/sps02 auoydyja9) aqow 7°94
{aynsajay ‘pidiaajay) auijpuo7 'T'q)

pied-aid “q|

dausawuy '€°9|

au0ydy127/21!GoW ‘2'0}

‘auyjpuoy ‘T'

pled-isog “e]

“212 ‘ouodajay es uyedeg ‘S|

{Afrads) od 0g) '5'p)

says0858920 aj1yan ‘b°P|

saqni/Buoin5 ‘ep

Aang 7°)

squpauqny ‘T'p

(Ayraads) ed eat “P|

Jaqdesp 8u opjams “9

Ajoads ‘ssayio vg

buysoau6 puo a6uoy> 110 Eq

dn-auna 40,0 ‘2'9}

uono2qnj sissoy9 T'q
sodeededged/ineuededged “q
jesaip/eusjoses -e

woAseyodsues es soised eu jeuosiag “p|
oyseq es ayesewied “E

levonewsaiut -q

awiog ‘e
ouejdosa es ayesewed ‘2
:(Ayj2ads) ed eqi “a
geripad “P

ajofouy “3

Aaudaar-q

sng_‘e|

ayesewed "T

1eIOL

I

‘Tunuend/fouanbaag

waa

Tea es Aoimveddew) elev) UolaW CO)

{eked BuoA\ es eqeg es peeseyeu eu Aedeq eBui Bu eq Aediqdeu eFu Aew Temng FUECTEFEU es (Q)

az

(Ty BuoBbuny Ty ojnu pl ued

30220 g II| og Bun uDjnBospsou od Jpuly joBGuby uoynbospy Bu uDAbo] Buounw 5OM see, )

“oyu [un Sued eq ‘p|

uoneucg “¢|

uornansut snoy8}jas 20 UeYequils eS “Z
0e3 Sueq! es Suojns 0 ojeF2y “T

PUL UL yse uy

waa

TEH es Aojnyeddew) elec) uoeWC)

épounsnwins

eu AeBeq eB es eAlied BuoA) eq AeBjuIq 10 ‘soysewn8 Aew TEMNG CU [] WIE BUEETEFEU CS

‘SU3HLO O1 SNOLLNGINLNOD GNV SL4ID ZH

— eee
¢

Faye “sremoy “suoo}|eq) ed eI 9)

sano} a3ey2ed “S

quauidinba ae sajayyey “2eSn] es eqUaY “y|
“nya ‘suoqem ‘oynjeBex eBui es peAeg “€
ujwinu! eu 3ulsejexeyen *Z

ujunu) ae ujexZed “T|

TEVOIT

q /ouanb
eBejen/oAsaig [ Aavero/ wanbais

(ZH es Aoinsedaew))

een

Buohs es eqeq es peeseyeu eu Aedeq efwi Bu eq Aegiqleu eFw Aew TEMNG EU (9) WINE BUEETEYEN es (q)

(TY

ree)

(222 ‘Siamoy ‘suoo}jeq) ed eqi “9
sinoy a8ey2e¢ °s

quauidinba ye sajqizes “2eBny es eUaY “D|
“212 ‘siowem ‘oynjeser eB es pedeg “¢|
uyuany eu Suysejexexen “Z|

uyuinuy 3e ulended “T

TrevoL)
eBejeH/oAsaud

ueno/Aauanbauy

waa

(aTH es Aojnyedszew)) ele)

wo

dpounsnwins

eu AeBeq ef es eAiiued Buoh! Bue eq Bueynuin 40 soysewnd Aew Temng eu [9] uive HUeeTeyeU es (e)

SNOISV290 ATI TWID3dS “TH
SUNLIGN3dX3 SNOINVTIIISIN “H

il

a

Tis weks Maye “OvayuadIEy es penea) OAs|quas es peAea LZ

(219 saded jem) qyuse8 Sued eqi 9

(222 ‘oqny ‘taaney) sjeayew Bulquinid “s

‘oa JaUUyY “Ys|UZeR QuIed “p|

(219 ‘ujdueyng ‘egest’ouawas) AuoseW “€|

(22 ‘sapperdazas ‘yous ‘sas1m) sjeyarew fe2133913 °Z

(29

‘poomAyd ‘o194 ‘saquiny ‘owed ‘uekemey) sjejsayeus ALUadIeD *T
(18101) edejeH/oAsasg AnuenD wai)

|

(Hes Aoimedgew) elev) uoaWO

SuoA\ es eqeq es peeseyeu eu Aedeq e8w Bu eq Aediqdeu eSw Aew Temng eu (9) Wiue SUEEIEXEU es (q)

(aie “ueAsiunya]> “oseruaduey es peAeq) OASICUaS es peAeA “Z|
(212 saded em) yyuse Sued eqi “9|

(219 ‘ogna ‘oaney) sjeyaayeus Sujquinid *s

“238 ‘“ZaUUTYR ‘YS}UJeA Quied “y|

(212 “urBueyng ‘eqes#'oivawias) ADUOseIN “E
(219 ‘saperdazas ‘yous ‘sauim) sjeuayew 12912998]3 °Z|

(219

‘poomAyd ‘osaA “saquin| ‘oved ‘uekemey) sjelsagew Auuadse> “T|

(ero) eBeren/oks0g ™auend way
(q'25 es Aojmedseyy) elev) uoIaAC)
eu Aedeq efi es eAjjwied Bud! Bue eq Sueynwin 10 soysewnd Aew TEMNG EU (9) WINE BUEETEHEU es (e)
Sulvd3¥ YONIW ONY JONVNJLNIVW 3SNOH “29,
(z9 es Aojmedaew) een

(q) uemnq/———— oueydew “uosan)
Gse8n| Bueq! es Ueyednnui/ueyequasasiu Aeyeq 4uoAey eq ed eq! AEW (q)

(ge) uemng/——— ¢ edn/euas Buasqn - €
(ze) uemng/——— 6 ednnwin - z (o1awnu 6uo uobny1q)
(te) Aeyeq Buijuses - T ueyniun Suedn] 2e Aeyeg (e)
SNISNOH "TD
Sulvd3¥ YONIW ONY 3INVN3LNIVW 3SNOH ‘ONISNOH ‘9D

(7)

(212 "Uoje|OIna4jer1 10) 1U9UIAES “aden 799 AEBUELER 3U991 5 10A1P|
‘aWWON39 ‘2ve2199 yung "axeay1199 a2uapss9s ‘e;npa> Bu ekeBer) saxey adIp Jued eql “b|
‘BSUadI] $,JBALUP 1B S99} 1103 ‘UOIesYSITA4 ajD149/ “E|

xey ayeisa [eau 'Z

xe} BWOIU] *T

(e101) eBeeH/oAsarg wat
(5 es Aoimedsew) een) voran)

épounsnuins

eu AeSeq edu es eAjiwed SuoA! Bue eq Sueynuin 10 soysewin Aew TEMNG eu [5] WUE BUCEIEHEU eS
S3aXVL ‘4

ot

410349/HSV) WLOL

eyeq es ul
sohe-ededied ye peuededsed "y
:(Ajigads) ed eqy >}

ouaulpsey “4

fog/piew “e

sa2insas 29S9W0G *E

Buyueay Aig “Z|
eqejededgeg “T|

Oe] Sueq) ETT)
es ejnw Aeig uo/yse3 up
Des Aomedgen) een) _voraW O
pounsnwins eB Bu eked Suodsiquas
ew Bu eAjimed Suod) es uewnuys Bue eq y1)8ueWN o yweUN Aew TEMNg SUCEIEAEY es (9)

reroL, way

1103Y9/HSWD WLOL

(22 ‘sau0}41puos suqey
‘Araueg ‘oung ‘stjem ‘osodsod)
(Aypads) ed eq

sod “292 ‘sqing)
qua2sapuedyy g quarsaion}d *Z|
jw sazU0poap/sauaysays se “9|
z /rapmod|
uynoas/asueay °s
3/jus 101ey/29)10
oynbsow,/Aeuds s2asut “p|
s/w xem 40014 “€
g ‘Yeas °Z
Es eqejued Suoges “T
0e] Sueqr "pan
eseinw Ae8ig | uo/use> ul be eee way
eBe|eH/oAsaIg
(area es Aojmedaeyy) een) uoraWO

eAeyeq
Suremed es wed ef es exed eAyjued Bud! es uewnuls Bue eq soyseuld Aew TEMNG SUCETEHEU es (e)
NOILWUadO GIOHASNOH “Ea

112

st

sod’

sod

bay

bay

bay

bay

bay

sod

sod

sod

sod

sod

‘23a ‘sojqoage ‘yyeq eunes}

oAsiquas ye uemeyendued sjwed Sued eqi “7
(sadeyp ajqesodsip aynpe) aze> ynpy“9|
(spaau s,Ageq sayn0 pue ‘ajddyu ‘aj330q
‘aujpaay ‘sadeip ajqesodsip) a1e2 Aqeg “S|
(212 ‘anes “anaajey) sa2jaias doysiaqueg “p|

3(238 ‘Ilo 10y ‘Bunand sey) ed eal “P|
aunoipad/aunaiuey “2
wiy/ydn9 “q

(io)nyed) wad/anem pjop “e}
saamuas soed Ayneag “¢|
Aypads ‘siayao a]

Buoked ‘Pp

sojay °2|

“298 “Vayrem ‘BeqpueH -q
seyely“e|

syaya jeuosiag “7

(248 ‘yauAesds ‘128 “ysyod jeu) ed eq *]
42U0;9/pu03 ‘oodweys *y|

Aqued|

alqesodsip/spjaiys Ayued/urjdeu Aseques “f
aysedyyoo,

Jaded anssiy pue 33]101 "y

sem Apog/deos y3eq/191/01 °3|
uye-Bued/apeiq sozey +

sapmog a

oBueged ‘soyauisoo ‘dn-2xew “P|

10 Ageq ‘uo107 |
heads /yuesopoap Apog “q

quaBuryse ‘pinby/weas 3

(revo)
eBejeH/oksag

pauinsuoD

Cem Anuend

TaTo 8s Aoimeddew) een vor O

¢pounsnuins eu AeBeq eB es eAj1wed Buok! Sue eq Sueynwin o soysewnd Aew Temng FUeeIEHEU es (2)

$193443 GNV 3YV) TWNOSU3d ‘T)

¥V3M YaHLO NV YVaMLOOS ‘ONIHLOTD ‘S193443 GNV 3YV2 TWNOSUAd ‘>

9

sod/yunt

yun

wun’

wun’

un

yun’

yun

Tay Tamou ume] "S50
uapied ‘ejed ‘Aexejey ‘Wed ‘weBe] ‘oA UeW)|
51003 pjoyasnoH “Z|

(Aypads) ed eqi “P|

kaudaar/daar °>|

25109 *G

ajAosoyow ‘ajohoun ‘exapysia “2

asn pjoyasnoy 10} quauidinba yodsued, “9
(Ayoads) ed eqy *4|

esqueig *2|

aurysew Sumas ‘P|

49yseol 2

494009 2214 “q|

ey 211998/3 °e

sasueyjdde sou “S|

(212 ‘“aysiod

Joo} ‘sauea> wnnder ‘auiyseu xey) ed eq) “2
auoydiiaa “

Jayndwiop “e

quauidinba pue sesuerdde sofew 13430 “y
(Aypads) ed eqy p

syauiges ‘ewey >|

yas ees “q)

yas Buiuig “e|

aanyuung“€

(Aypads) ed eqi 'y

ayasse o1pey/(uy/we) o1pey *a}

waashs Buoje-Buis/yas oasays “P|

4ahe\d GAG/ADA *>)

Japsozas ayasses oapin ‘q

uossinajay “e|

quawidinba jensia-orpny *z

unr (218 4aAup ysia) ed eqt “P|
yun’ aurysew Buiysenn °2
yun ‘@A0jS/aBueYy Buryj00> “q)
yun’ J979914/10,es9B1yay “e
saouerjdde Aspune pue uay>yy “T}
(e301) pawinsuo>
eBejey/oksaig | {4) 4d WU Anuend Gal
Ta esAoimedsew) een) ula

gehywed Bu0A)

es eqeq es peeseyeu eu Aedeq eSwi Bu eq Aediqdeu eBui Aew Temng eu (9) WUE HUEEIEyEU es (q)

sz

113

sodjwun |

yun’

yun

yun’

yun’

yun’

yun

un

jun’

(339 WaMOW UME} ‘asoy|

apie ‘ejed ‘Aeyejey ‘y1ed “eRe] ‘oA eW)
$1003 pjoyasnoy *Z|

(Ayads) ed eqi ‘pl

Aaudaar/daay°>|

asioy“q

ajokosojow ‘aj2kou9 “erapyisia “e

asn pjoyasnoy 403 yuauidinba yodsues, “9|
(Ayoads) ed eqi

eswueld “|

auiyzew Sumas “p

423se01 "2

484009 a9ny °q

uey 211398) °e|

saoueyjdde soul *s

(218 aysyod
pew xey) ed eq! “>|
auoydiiad “a
Jayndwop ‘e|
quawdinba pue saoueyjdde s0few 19410 “P|
(Aypads) ed eqi-p

syauiges ‘ewey °>}

yes eves “q|

3s Buyuig ‘e|

aanquang “¢|

(Ayads) ed eat

anasses oipey/(wy/we) oipey ‘a|

wayshs Suoje-Buis/yas oaiays “P|

4aheid GAG/Q2A |
Japiozad ayjasse oapiA ‘q|
uorsinajay “e|

quauidinba jensta-orpny °2|
((232 ‘“4aAup ysig) ed eq ‘P|
aurysew Burysem “2
anois/aduey 314003 “q
4879944/10}212314ay “e|
dde Aspune] pue uaya1y “T|

Joo} ‘s9Uea]> wnn2en ‘aI

eBejeH/oAsard

Texel) pawnsuo>

aotig Wu
(d) 294d WUN, Aanuen

way

{423 es Aojnyedgew) een) uoaW CO

gpounsnuins eu Aedeq eB es exed

eyed SuoAt es ‘eASeyeq Bu Sue] peAeqgeu o ‘eq tjnwng Aew Temng &u [o] Wve SUEETEHEU es (e)

AN3WdIND GN aUNLINUNS J1avUNG “73

or

baa

sod

sot

bay

bay

bay

bay

bay

sor

sod

sod

ot

sod

Tara sajqoise Wieq eunes)|

oAsjquas ye uemeyeySued ywed Sued eqh “Z|
(sadeyp aiqesodsip ajnpe) aze3 3Inpy “9
(spaau s,Aqeq sayno pue ‘addju ‘ajn0q
Suipaay ‘sadeip ajqesods}p) aie Aqeg “Ss
(232 ‘aneys ‘snoujey) saayuas doysiaqued “y

(218 “yo 104 ‘Bunana sey) ed eql “P|
aunipad/aunajuew *>)
wii/dng “q|

(2onyed) wuad/anem pio “e
sagjaias sojed Ayneag “€
(Aypads) ed eqi “2

Buoked 'P

sojay °>|

212 “yayjem “Beqpuey “q|
seyely “e

spaya jeuosiag *2|

(212 “yauderds ‘128 ‘ysijod jeu) ed eqi “|
Jauo}puos ‘codweys “y

Aued|

ajqesodsip/spjaiys Ayued/urdeu Aewues “f
aysedyrooy “1

saded anssiy pue 39}!01 “|

wye-Bueg /apejq sozey ‘y
sapmod ‘2
oBueged ‘soaussoo ‘dn-ayew ‘P|

10 Ageq ‘uo07 >|
Aeads/yuesopoap Apog “q|

wi qua8uinse ‘pinbyj/weas Suisueay “e|
sajanue 3a}}03 pue spre Ayneag “T|
Te10L) pauinsuoy
eBejeH/oAsarg ae Anuend at

(Z> es Aoimedsew) een) uo O

deAyjued Buok) es eqeq es peeseyeu eu AeBeq efw Bu eq Aesiqdeu eBw Aew TEMNG BUCEIEAEU es (q)

a

114

SONY ro 4

sojauisy “€°q}

saoys sqqny 7°9|

Sa0ys 2ayIUAS/12y3037 “Tq

rd

SeeyEed UOeT OT) seqequeg q ry Weds) ed eqi |
-(Afizads) od nqi “p'0| od aad q
spjauisy *€°0| od sasea ‘syod samo} “e
saoys saqqny ‘7'D} sBujysjusny pjoyasnoy 42430 *€
saoys nayyuAs/iayreay ‘Te sod (Ayoads) ed eqi “2
ood eAlemnL “P|
; seamoos °2| oe youuny ‘says pag “>|
sd ‘(aypoads) od ogi '€'2) sof ueun 8u epund ‘ueun “q|
sod wing °2'a| :
a oe oquieiny “e
sod ssadoig ‘T'a .
sBujysjuany pue uauy) ployasnoy *Z
sod (22a ‘suoys ‘squpd) od ogy “s'p of (Ayizads) ed eq °9
sod spApawi ‘oAubd ‘p’p| od eujsny/oynjued eu wes “q
sod (21a ‘sanuod) soamuapun ‘€’p| od Jopiuly ‘esesany ‘oseq ‘ore/d “2
sod SUYS ‘SUIYS-L ‘SaSNO} “Z| sajsossaaze pue si)suayn “T
sod 35010 T P| (e201) pawinsuo>
feqeqed uoey 6) aeqea BuRIeqUIED pI eBejen/ossaig | (4) 22¥a wun fos wart
sod (21a ‘opups ‘s1ayoams) sh oq) °S'2| (23 es Aojmeddey) elev) uoEW CO)
sod sofpaw ‘oduod ‘9'2] gehywed Buh)
sod (232 ‘Jataq) soamsapun *€°2 es eqeg es peeseyeu eu AeSeq ew Bu eq Aegiqgeu eSw Aew ‘Uemnq eu (9) wiue BueeleyeU es (q)
sod suiys-1 7]
od suoys ‘uojoyupg *T'9|
eile Dad BE bead 7 od (Ayoads) ed eq "2
sod D “

" e sod saulIndy ‘s1023Q,
eS ca aaeemacie oe sasen od somerset
sod (238} .

‘dys joy ‘osq ‘asiways ‘sayuod) soamsapun ‘pq| , sBuyysiuany aa) ae 7
sod SUnys ‘SuNYs- ‘Sasnojg “€"q base : eke mal a
ic uoyDqupd 2"

o pied nd you ‘seus poe 9
TOes OT) seqequied q sod ueun 8u areca 4

sod {Afjaads) od ogi ’s'0 sd 0
sod spApaul ‘odubd “p'D sBuyysjuany pue uauy ployasnoy -Z|
sod (28 ‘Jauq “ayoddns) soamuapun “¢"0 sod (Ayrzads) ed eqi “2
sod SUIYS OJOd ‘syIYs-1 ‘Z'0} od ny /oynjued eu wwe “q
sod suoys ‘uojojuDd “T'0| sod “esesyny ‘oseq ‘oxeId “2
sod Geeed woe OT) DeeueTe Sa[s0ssaz0e pur S|ISUaIN “T

Jauedde apeus-Apeas sayio pue 4u}42019 “T| Teci) (@) 25g yun | PawNSUOD way
ToL) pauinsuop eBe]eH /oAsaid Ayquend,
(a) a2ug wun way 7
eBe|eH/osaig oy Ayqueno (ataesAoimedsey) een) vorewO

(az9 es Aojmeddew) een) uoraWO

épounsnuins

eu AeBeq e8w es eA\;wed ZuoA! Jue eq Zueynuin o soisewnd Aew ‘GEMNG eu (9) WUE BUEETEREU es (e)

YVaM Y3HLO ONY YV3MLOOS ‘ONIHLON ‘2

épounsnwins eu

Aefeq e8u es edjjwied Sud! Bue eq Sueynuin so soysewind Aew ‘TEMG EU [O] WINE BUCEIEYEN es (e)

SONIHSINUN FIGVYNG-NON ‘TI
AN3WdINDA GNV SONIHSINUN “3

a4

115

yoq/sad
(238 “WHLNI ‘NX ‘ODA) stuaua;ddns poo, °8|
('232 ‘sxojty ‘oAsejogje)|
ueSnsnjeyZued SuoAsjqias 3ued eqi “Z|
sod (238 ‘swopuos ‘si11d) saapdazesquo9 “9|
(Aypads) ed eqi a
aed sassej8aAq "p
sod ani plod 3)
sod sanjsaupe ‘sayseid ‘aZepueg ‘q
yoq loyoaiy “e
sayjddns pue spoo3 jesjpaw 3ued eq °s
(219|
‘sysuap 403 $294 a2|ns9s) sa3se4> [eWUaG *p|
(239 ‘sanympju ‘sasunu
4510320 10} $24 2210195) sa8sey> [e>1paW “E|
ayeaud'q
ugnd *e
safseya woos jexdsoH °2,
yoq/sod (Ayads) ed eq)
yoq/sod sued, “2|
yoq/sad yues0yadxq “p|
yoq/sod 1sadjeuy 2
yoq/sod equy “q|
yoq/sod anoiqnuy ‘e|
saurspawi pue s3nug“T
(revo) pawnsuo>
eBejeH/oAsarg (4) 244 wun Aynuend. we

at
[Se To mcm GT (His "opiaes siaqoamsy (Misads) oT ogis'5|
oe sofpau ‘ofuod ‘y'2)
oof (218 ‘Jauq) soamuapun €2
sof sUnys-1 7
oof swoys ‘uojojuod ‘L'2
eqeqed "UOes 6) Mejel Suevequied =
sod (suoys) pd oq! ‘9°q)
sod s6uyy2035 ‘hung °5°9}
sod “dys yoy ‘oq ‘asiwayo ‘sanuod) soamuapun ‘vg
sod SUIS ‘SUNYs-4 ‘SaSNO}g “EF
sod uojpwuog 74
sod ssa TQ]
seeyed Woes OT) aeqequied G
sod (Afizads) od 091 °s°9]
sod sokpaui ‘ound 'p'0|
sod (218 ‘Jauq ‘“sayoddns) soamsapun £0}
sod sujys ojod ‘syiys-1 ‘Z'0|
sod suoys ‘uojpiupd “T'0|
sod ejejueg €

lauedde apew-Apead 1940 pue 3uj42019 “T|

1230 1)
eBejeH/oAsard
(aes Aojmedaey) ere

PauInsuOD
Aaguend

(d) 224g WUN way

deAijwed Bu0A)
es eqeq es peeseyeu eu Aedeq eS Su eq Aediqdeu eSus Aew ‘TEmMng Cu (9) uue BUeETEREN es (q)

supjewissaig “q|
aieday “e
sa9y anjaias’s|

sod (222 ‘suaddyz ‘sauoanq|
‘wohesey ‘pyinujs) saossaoze Bumas “y
(212 “ej29) sjeyayew Buymas “¢|

(Ajizads) od ogi ‘p'p|

sojaulsy “EP

saoys saqqny 7P|

aed sa0ys 212343UAS/s34I097 “TP

eqeqed uoer 6) seqen suelequied p
aed (Afizads) od 0qj “p'2)
aed sojauisy “E>
aed saoys saqqny 7)
aed saoys 21yayuAs/1ay30a7 “T2

eqeqed TOR) 6) DrejeT SueTequIEg 5

Geshomedsen) elev) vow O
eeAiwied Buoh!
es eqeg es peeseyeu eu AeSeq eSu Bu eq Aediqleu eSw Aew Temng eu (9) wiue BueeIexEU es (q)

way


116

er ww
(212 “VULNI ‘NXG ‘ODA) suaMajddns Pood *8|
(212 ‘Sropty ‘oAsejoqie)
ueSnsnjeySued SuoAs|quas Sued eqi “LZ
Gapedsy ed carp sod (ae “suopu09 ‘siyd) saandasenuoy °9
auyoweL > (Ayioads) ed eq “2
mearel sasse|8ahq ‘P|
pet qn. pio >|
$90) OHA05 “S| sansaype ‘sa,sejd ‘aBepueg “q|
sod (222 ‘ssaddiz ‘sauoyng| x04 joyooiy “e
‘wohesey ‘plinuts) sasossaaze Sumas “py sayjddns pue spoo8 jeopau Sued eqi“s|
(249 ‘ej3) sjeayew Sumas “¢ —— (29|
(Afipads) od ogi ‘yp ‘sysmwuap 405 say aouas) saauey> (eaUad “P|
sojaulss “€| -——— (21a ‘sanmpiw ‘sasunu
sa0ys saqqny ‘2°P) 's103209 404 saaj 221AJ8S) 934242 [e21PIW “E|
sa0ys 2aYIUAS/sa4}097 ‘TP ayeaud “q
TOeT S) Seq BUEIEqUIED B| augnd “e
(Afizads) od ogi ‘y'9 sa81ey> woos jeudson
sojaursy “E> yoq/soe (Ay1pads) ed eq “3
saoys saqqny 7'2 y0q/sod suena “2
saoys anayquAs/18y3037 ‘T'3| yoq/soe quesoyadyg “p
aOeT 6) MEET SuRIEqUIED | y0q/sod aisaajeuy °>
(Afads) od og) “pq yoq/sod prey “q
SojaulsL “E4 yoq/sod anoiqnuy *e
saoys saqqny ‘2°9] saulnpaw pue s8nig “T|
saoys anayquAs/iayi0a7 ‘T'9 220, owns
UOC OT, seeuecilt "a nae (4) aug WU jae way,
nied (Mjivads) od ogi ‘p°0} (Eq es ROMEDHE WN] ee wois Tpounsnuins eu
‘ned spjauisy “€°0| Aefeq eB es edjnued Bu0A! Sue eq Sueynuin 40 soysewinS Aew ‘TEMNG €U (S) WINE BUEEIEREU es (2)
aed saoys saqqny ‘z'0 3UvO TWIG] "EG
sed Sa0ys 213a43UAS/1343097 T’O)
WORT OT) elelued |
aeamqoog "2 a
sod (Afizads) od ogy ‘¢"a “wewejey eu xe)ye;nunweu ‘awed oapir) ed eql “Y
sod qwwog ‘z'a] baa uonduassqns aie “3
od ssadoig ‘T'a| bay suoners Aejd ‘saperay °s|
[OT oy! Bu Bu ureyfed ye siag “a|
sod (syoys ‘syuod) ‘ssayi0 ‘s'P| bay sjood pue pieniq “Buymog “P|
sod sDApawi ‘oAuDd “y'p| bay Sasnoysaag pue sqnjazygiu ‘soasip ‘saaueg “3
sod (212 ‘sanuod) soamsapun ‘€p| bay suey)
sod SUPIS 'SUNYS-1 ‘Sasnojg “z°P| ue sasnoui> ‘Buyxog ‘ijeqieyseq es 394211 “q|
sod ssaig ‘Tp sod $09/aAQ/aDA ‘sade3 oapig “e|
Teqeqed woes 6) seqes Buciequied p :Bu eAe8 uesnyseSey-Seurd Sued eqi S|
pawnsuoy (e301) pawinsuo>
eBe/eH/oksasg Aanuen wail [@ ovawn | _hnvenp | ot |

(panujiio2) NOLvaIae za

if

117

bay ‘Giarey o ueSunges es 399011 “p|
bay ueyauys es 194211 “E|

sod (219 ‘ul
‘sey1n8 ‘ueduo ‘oueld) syuauunysul [eaIsRW “Z|
sod sap/sades yuela 3
sias sas say “2
sias eyereg ‘syas Suolyew “P|
sod eveyes ‘siieg "2
sod ou ede ye exuew -q|
sod sue Aejd ye eyequied Suerayy)sia “e|
sayddns pue spoo8 jeuoea2ay “T

(iea01) awNsuoD,
esejep/otsarg | (2) Ham | PY wend vat

{eq es AomedBew) een

worn

es eqeq es peeseyeu eu AeBeq eu Bu eq Aesiqaeu efw Aew TEMng Eu (9) WUE BUCETEY

eAiuied Buohy
es (a)

(a

(29]
‘vewerey eu yepfeinunwieu ‘owe8 o2pin) ed el “y

bauy uonduasqns ajqe> ‘3|
bay suoners Aed ‘sapeasy +]
04) eu Bu weyBed ye syaq “2
bay sjood pue pieliiiq ‘Suymog “p
bay sasnoysaaq pue sqnjayyaiu ‘soosip ‘saoueg “2
bay suey
pue sasnauta ‘Buixog “yeq1ayseq es 394911 -q|
sod $02/QAG/ADA ‘sadex opin “e|
:3u eAe@ uesnyseey-Seurd Sued eqy “S|
bay e2asey 0 uedunges es 395211 “p|
bay ueyauts es 394911 “€|
sod (21a ‘uyoral
9 ‘uel 0 ‘oueld) sjuauunaysut jeaisnyy °2|
sod sqp/sadey yuelg *y
sias sias ssayp °2|
sas eyereg ‘sias Buolyew “P|
sod eyayeu ‘sje “>|
sod ou eked ye exueW -q
sod suea Aejd ye exequied Bueya[yisig “e|
sayddns pue spood jeuoneas2ay “T
e901) pawinsuo>
eBejep/orsaig | (4) Ud wn Ayqueno weal

(a°20 es Aomedeyy) een
AeBeq eu es eAjtuied Bu0! Bue eq Sueynuun 40 5%

rece) ¢pounsnuins eu
osewund AeusUEMNG €U [o] WIUE BUCETEAEU es (2)
Nowwauoay ‘za

oz

Er) Tnads) ed eqr >)
sod syooqay20d ‘S211 °q
sod sauizefew “sadedsman “e|
sayddns jeuoneonpa 19430 °S|

sod (Asizads) ed eqi “P|
sod gaded ped ‘saded puog °>|
ood uadjog ‘sideyq
od ‘syOoqaion ‘e|
sayddns joys “p|

(72

'5400q 410M ‘salseUOIIDIP 's40OqIXA 1) SHOOK *E|

(t9

a5 ‘sjeyua1 op ydaoxa) ausoy wo4y Aeme
SujApnys saquiaus Ajjuses 205 22UEMO}|y “Z

ayeaud “4

yang ‘e|
(242 599) von ‘eymynew) $225 UONeINPA “T

(d) 22nd wun

eSejeH/oAsad

pauinsuo>
Aunuenn

way

(2a es Aomedaew) een)

uoreWwO

aeAtwed BuoAl

es egeg es peeseyeu eu AeSeq eB Bu eq AeBiqdeu eBw Aew "Wemnq EU [oy Wilue BUEEIExEU es (q)

(Aypads) ed eqi ‘2

sod syoogiay20d ‘s21W09 “q|
sod saurzeew ‘iadedsman “e|
sayddns jeuoneanpa say30 “s
sod (Ay1zads) ed eqh “P|
sod saded ped ‘saded puog “>
sod uadjog ‘side “q}
sod syooqaion ‘e
sayddns joouas “p|
(222
‘s400q 10m ‘satseUONDIp ‘syooqyXa 1) SHOOK “E,
(t9
a5 ‘sjequay wiop ydaoxa) ausoYy Wosy Aeme|
SurApnys saquiaus Ayjuses 405 a2uemojty “2
ayeaud'q
aang “e|
(212 ‘5095 woryn ‘eymyneWw) 5995 UONEINP3 “T
ciemyjtenig | 00 | en a
(1a es Aojmedsew) een) uoreW OC

2pounsnuins eu

Aedeq eu es eAjjwied Suod) Sue eq Sueynuin Jo soyseuind Aew TEMNG EU (9) WUE BUCEIEHEU es (e)

NOLLVONG3 ‘Ta
3YVD Tv21G3W ONY NOILV3¥I3¥ ‘NOILVINGI “a

118

phy o jaw sumed ‘cuneys “MENG

aoosvas
wtepousuoyoncucinio ewes] Svea]!
‘bd wed oun one =| _=|

yun Oued ey 0 oon “send “OD Kecm
een of ove, umicwmurees, hen

utes “weurweus Oy. oie0 sem! os
ySSuegeu (puiy eu eernad Gu un Oued eq

uewetow eu aerud Sued eq 16 eXeded
eu _Goumy “wow ou Bue BGuey

‘Buje; ‘motes ‘pogn Gu eleB se! es
reSuegeu uni ev Anind Cu jn GuEd ea

Gu ekeb sojqraten fem useb ye

es urumimu eu femB fued eq ie
(poo| es weyip) eoWweH “sIOUeD “BSEqEIEY

Ogu un Gued eq ie ‘eqesey ‘iqe6 ‘seie1ed

Oyun BURT Sat Fw RELIED
cmeGny ‘ce|poou ‘Aedaug ‘uuey “SIeV)

Appendix 9: Household Dietary Diversity Score Questionnaire

25800 PZ OU Sedieyeu es eAgwed Guotu Bu Ueuiy Bue ouy *f

Mspeds) ed eq c
vedi yea we qeusO Bue pis pou ~
eBw es enw Ae6iq eps|6uiBued yeqn6unbued
“oksiques 0 ujeyBedanueB “UBUBWE|BY BS 3
Gu wedBadi—(6ed ‘Suein-Bag c UBYEpUS es BABey o

Zekijused Buoku Ou weyfed Bu ueunnyfeurd BulyeunSued Bue auy ‘Z

eeMo |= (UO
(Cuieyeun, Guotia Bu WEP BU jeyNdg 20 jeULOU
es pay Bu oer uiewny ures Bung Yodeyey eq e]S9y 20 UOASEKO KEW *4

rennewesarday proysenoy
— ss1aquiey ployesna} $0 “ON 01 proyesnoy

aujeuuoRsand
euoog Ay syenig A1g}e1g PloyssnoH

TON HID.

119

Appendix 10: Household Dietary Diversity Score Questionnaire Guide

The household dietary diversity score (HDDS) is meant to reflect, in a snapshot form, the
economic ability of a household to access a variety of foods.

A. Dietary Diversity Questionnaire

Coren Pe east [nase [Rea

Please describe the foods (meals and |
snacks) that you ate or drank yesterday |
during the day and night, whether at home
or outside the home. Start with the first
food or drink of the morning.

Write down all foods and drinks
mentioned. When composite dishes are mentioned, ask for the list of ingredients. When
the respondent has finished, probe for meals and snacks not mentioned.

Include foods eaten by any member of the household, and exclude foods purchased and
eaten outside the home.

When the respondent's recall is complete, fill in the food groups based on the
information recorded above. For any food groups not mentioned, ask the respondent if a
food item from this group was consumed.

‘Question YES=1
Sumber | Food group Examples Now
1 [CEREALS corn/msizg rice, wheat, sorghum, mille or|
207 athe piaes or foods mde from these
(Cf read onal, poms ox gir
‘grain products) + foods eg.
_| tigals msbiona, porridge or paste
WHITE ROOTS — | white potstocs, white yam, white cassav
JAND TUBERS __ | or other foods made ftom Toot *
3 |YETAMIN AICH [pumpin caro, squash, ec panto

VEGETABLES — | har bre orange inside + otber|
ANDTUBERS | soailable okamin A rich vegeiablei (ep.
red sweet pepper)

4 [DARK GREEN | dark grecol es, inchoding wild
Leary oem Ps Touly ooclibi vlames 4 8S
VEGETABLES —_| leaves such as amaranth, cassava leaves,

kale, spinach

3 [OTHER other vegetable (c.g tomato, onion,
WeceTastes | cespian athe lataly available
eeperabler

© [YETAMIN A7RICH [pe mango, canulowpe, spice (rah or
ried ay, dried peach, and 100%

a ‘ cde Iron these « atber locally

available vkamin A rich frais

7 [OPHERFRUTTS [othe Guts including wild inate and

100% fruit juice made From these
MEAT | liver, kdacy, Bean or other organ meats or
© [ORGAN Wye dey B ‘organ
beef pork, Lamb, goat rab 3
9 [PLESH MEATS [OckPe' Sucks ede irda ite”
10 |Eces [engs from chicken, dock, guinea fowl or
any other ox
11 |[FISHAND fresh or dried fish or sbeDEsh
SEAFOOD
LEGUMES, NUTS | dried beans, dried peas lentil, ara, sceds
2 TAND SEEDS or foc made frm thexe (bain
Peanut butter)

1) [MILK AND MILK | milly chess, yopurt or other elle
PRODUCTS facts

14 [OILSAND FATS — | oll, (ats or butter added to food or used for
[cooking

13 [SWEETS sugar, honey, rwectmned soda or sweeecned
jute drinks sugary foods much a,
ESsSctae, indict cookies and cubes

te [spre spices (black pepper, sa), condimenss

Sonmbaenrs, | Poy suce hic Hct), cole tex alcoholic
BEVERAGES =

‘Household | Did ta Your bouschald eat anything (meal or
icreloniy_[snaeh) OUTSIDE he howe veneraay®


120

B. Guidelines for using HDDS:

What the tool measures: Household economic access to food (dietary energy).

Respondent Person responsible for food preparation for the household on the previous
ay.

ae of interest: The household (all persons living under the same roof who share

meals).

Includes foods: Prepared in the home and consumed in the home or outside the home or

purchased or gathered outside and consumed in the home.

Does not include foods: Purchased outside the home and consumed outside (Those

foods are not included because the respondent may not know which other household

members purchase and eat outside the home).

Number of food groups included in the score: 12 groups included in the HDDS

C. Additional considerations

« Reference period
FAO uses a reference period of the previous 24 hours. Using one 24-hour recall period
does not provide an indication of an individual's habitual diet, but it does provide an
assessment of the diet at the population level and can be useful to monitor progress or
target interventions.

+ Eating outside the home

The last question of the questionnaire asks if anyone in the household ate anything
outside the home. This question is included to capture information on the purchase and
consumption of meals and snacks prepared outside the home.

¢ Atypical consumption

It is recommended not to use the questionnaire during national holidays/celebrations or
during periods such as Ramadan, in which it is likely that food consumption does not
reflect a typical diet. Questions related to atypical days can be added to the
questionnaire either to screen out households or individuals, or to use in analysis as
appropriate for the purposes of the survey. A question of this type can be worded in the
following way “Was yesterday a celebration or feast day where you ate special foods or
where you ate more, or less than usual?”

¢ Primary source of food procurement

Sometimes it is advantageous to know the primary source of food procurement for the
entire diet or for certain food groups (cereals, fruits or vegetables). If it is desirable for
the purpose of the survey to collect this type of information, the following type of
question and coded responses can be added to the questionnaire:

“Could you please detail the primary source for obtaining food (the below responses can
be listed for each food group of interest) for your household” (example codes below)

1= Own production, gathering, hunting, fishing

2= Purchased

3= Borrowed, bartered, exchanged for labour, gift from friends or relatives

4= Food aid

5= Other

121

. Consumption of fortified foods
Fortified foods are not taken into consideration in the questionnaire. However, it can be

useful to obtain information on the local availability and use of fortified foods, particularly
those fortified with iron or vitamin A.

+ Nutrition and food biodiversity

Food biodiversity is defined as the diversity of plants, animals and other organisms used
as food, covering the genetic resources within species, between species and provided
by ecosystems (FAO, 2010). Information on food biodiversity can be collected by
expanding one or more of the dietary diversity food groups of the questionnaire.

D. Technical issues to discuss prior to beginning data collection

There are a few technical issues that the team should discuss prior to beginning data
collection.

Minimum quantities: the team will have to decide prior to data collection, whether or
not to include foods consumed in very small quantities.

When information is collected at the household level, there is no need to set minimum
quantities below which foods are not considered, so even small amounts of foods (for
example, a very small portion of meat included in a mixed dish) will be counted. This is
because the score is designed to reflect economic access to food, and therefore even
small quantities of a food item reflect some ability to purchase that item.

Individual food items that could be classified into more than one food group: the
team will have to decide on the most appropriate food group classification for foods
which can be classified into more than one food group.

Some common examples of food items that can be classified in more than one food
group are hot pepper, which could be classified as “other vegetables” or “spices,
condiments and beverages”, and fish powder, which could be classified as either “fish
and seafood” or “spices, condiments and beverages”.

These decisions are best made after taking into consideration the particular local
context, including the typical amount of the food consumed. For example, many cultures
use hot pepper as a spice or condiment added to meals. Depending on the context, this
may mean that one small spoonful of dried hot pepper flakes is added to an entire dish,
or that several spoonfuls of fresh hot pepper are eaten as an accompaniment to the
meal. In the first case, the dried pepper is best included in the “spices, condiments and
beverages” food group, while in the second case, as a larger quantity of fresh hot
peppers is consumed, it is more appropriate to include this in the “other vegetable” food
group. Once the decisions have been made, each individual food item for which there
was uncertainty can be listed under the most appropriate group so that all enumerators
are consistent in assigning this food item to the agreed upon food group.

Mixed dishes: the team will need to agree on a way to disaggregate mixed dishes in
order to record all of the individual components in their respective food groups.

As a tule, some basic foods are listed only under their main ingredient. For example,
bread is put into the cereals group even if oil, eggs or sugar are added in small amounts

122

during the making. However, many cultures commonly prepare and eat mixed dishes
(such as casseroles or sauces that accompany a staple). Particular attention should be
given to certain ingredients that may not be spontaneously recalled, such as added fats
or oils, or secondary ingredients such as small amounts of meat or vegetables. Prior to
beginning data collection the team should identify commonly consumed mixed dishes
and practise probing for and recording all ingredients in the mixed dish.

E. Instructions for administering the Questionnaire

The approach for collecting information on dietary diversity described in these guidelines
is a qualitative 24-hour recall of all the foods and drinks consumed by the respondent
and/or any other household member.

If the questionnaire is administered at household level, the Tfespondent should be the
person who was responsible for meal preparation for the household the previous day.
The respondent is asked about all foods eaten inside the home during the previous day
and night, by ANY8 member of the household.

1. Ask the respondent to mention all the foods (meals and snacks) eaten yesterday
during the day and night. Start with the first food/drink consumed the previous
morning. Record these items in the spaces provided at the top of the
questionnaire.

2. After the respondent recalls all the foods and beverages consumed, underline

the corresponding foods in the list under the appropriate food group and write “1”

in the column next to the food group if at least one food in this group has been

underlined. If the food is not listed in any group, write it in the margin and discuss
it with the supervisor.

Probe for snacks eaten between main meals.

Probe for special foods given to children or lactating/pregnant women.

Probe for added foods such as sugar in tea, oil in mixed dishes or fried foods.

If a mixed dish was eaten, ask about and underline all the ingredients of the dish.

Once the recall is finished, probe for food groups where no food was underlined.

It is not necessary to read out to the respondent the exact name of the food

group, but simply ask (for example) about fruits, vegetables or tubers if these

groups were not previously indicated. Write “0” in the right hand column of the
questionnaire when it is certain that no foods in that group were eaten.

NOP w

Question number(s) Food group
F. Analyzing dietary diversity data 1 Cereals
. 2 ‘White tubers and roots
The data collected with the dietary aa Vegeablas
diversity questionnaire can be analyzed in 7 Fast
several ways. A dietary diversity score can d
be created, which is the sum of the 8° Meat?
different food groups consumed. The !° Eggs
scores for different sub-populations, such 11 Fish and other seafood
as urban or rural, can then be analyzed to 12 Legumes, nuts and sceds
provide more information on the diets of 13 Milk and milk products
sub-populations with different “14 Oils and fats
demographic or economic characteristics. {5 Sweets
The population can be stratified according ~; Spices, condiments and beverages
LS

to an indicator of vulnerability, such as

123

categories of a wealth index, and the scores of each group compared.

It also useful to focus on individual food groups of interest in addition to using the
information as a score. For example, the proportion of households consuming vitamin A
ich fruits and vegetables can be calculated.

a. The dietary diversity scores

The HDDS is based on the food groups proposed by FANTA (Swindale and Bilinsky, 2006).
There is no international consensus on which food groups to include in the scores and the results
of new research could justify changing the groups proposed in these guidelines.

The HDDS is meant to provide an indication of household economic access to food, thus items
that require household resources to obtain, such as condiments, sugar and sugary foods, and
beverages, are included in the score.

The potential score range is 0-12 for HDDS (not 0-16 which is the number of questions in the
questionnaire before aggregation into groups to create each score).

b. How to create dietary diversity scores

Dietary diversity scores are calculated by summing the number of food groups consumed in the
household over the 24-hour recall period.

The following steps are included in creating either the HDDS:

1. Create new food group variables for those food groups that need to be aggregated.

2. Create a new variable termed HDDS.

3. Compute values for the dietary diversity variable by summing all food groups included in the
dietary diversity score (12 food groups for household). As a check on the creation of the
variables, all scores should be within the range of 0-12.

c. Using and interpreting HDDS

There are no established cut-off points in terms of number of food groups to indicate adequate or
inadequate dietary diversity for the HDDS. Because of this it is recommended to use the mean
score or distribution of scores for analytical purposes and to set programme targets or goals.

Looking at the percentage of households consuming individual food groups is another important
analytical strategy. Dietary diversity scores and percent households consuming each food group
can be used as a one-time measure or for on-going monitoring.

When interpreting the dietary diversity score, it is important to keep in mind that:

+ The dietary diversity score does not indicate the quantity of food consumed.

+ Diet varies across seasons and some foods can be available in large quantities and at low cost
for short periods.

+ There may be urban/rural differentials in dietary diversity. Variety is often much greater in urban
and peri-urban centres where food markets are adequately supplied and easily accessible.

d. Assessing dietary patterns at different levels of dietary diversity scores

In addition to calculating mean dietary diversity scores, it is also important to know which food
groups are predominately consumed at different levels of the scores. This provides information on
the foods that are eaten by those with the lowest dietary diversity, and which foods are added by
those with a higher score. Dietary patterns are analyzed in this example by looking at the food
groups consumed by at least 50% of households in each tertile.

124

Appendix 11: Family Development Session (FDS) Topics

SL
| any femora a. Pacsa a, SESTON J: WANDA 9A BA KANE? PAGHAMARDA NG PAMILYA

DMOOWUL 2 SUBAAODRN 21, PRGA SERN TAH WA VERNONIA

cee PAGPAPATIBAY NG RELASYONS:

Foreman MOO 2 SU NOOR 24, PA ETON PTBONG NEON

[secnmen MODI SOR IROORIT EA, AT, SNOT F ASTOR PORDAS

Prepared by:

GeTUARAIN C ROMERO
Cy tire
(0949-373- 706

125

Appendix 12: The Creation of Barangay Action Team (BAT)

WJORGRAL, Qmatatives eg telropon bb ag Grpety Act 160 oa ang ange Pammatncoang Lokal
7 Cay varaginin ma pomepwags amg bapa Og RGA SRY a RK,

RAGE op Gap a ay Caguiapng Comiparae & Pagpspase dad (DSWD) ay hevihs ag
Og ma ealapphialan og kaw ln Gaetan ag Ponteesd Pambpang Pipe
Program «a sugkstates® _ “mii ah wate” = ages winioy «2 euro
neriys wun, madens ong once pag ede,

VOPR ang Lata! as Parisien ay eaay togiuéeng byain no ang programme @ ay
STE 6 suaiepuS wey aa ages ay aging Paige of
Ougeccmmiad (ORAM, tatetiot any ae gong crops oy pete at age Boe goerremeret
(Orgasuratom,

LOMA nay, Poms losgmed ag ‘wa Putte ay emey Datong te, Arms a Baum at
J tts (talon (7.658) apstsierg bemepesarye ma eetaictat 2 hetemagel Peomg (7)
No leon ote canals ony Ratan a Kamae oy Laagemer am oe Caggalimapay Famgramze:
‘ Pagpapauriad (ISW0) 2 &o pag sheep pa S CULzgE pay pag mE
prog aa,

OME aihinika omy PoateA cane \umgsoat og Soe Fabio oe reas ape qpekthoeg
chtiht 0 peed ay progam G ay ag Foam ot mg moTyER
Barangoy.

OME ONTO, AED S WOENTE G AMMETTE, FUNONS UNEGSOD WS SAN PREC, SA
SAMAR? AG RG LIP RENTERS EARN SA ORES ORG TAS, AY PUA RTOS OF
STS DEA SEER TIO

126

Cosgint | COMAOSRS RON - Pagiacotag ag Barangay Acton Tea (BAT) ne bebuor og
Tg umes :

Jagagnameuac Pumong Bar angsy

22 Tagapang@éo | SB Ohara on Corremitee on Weilare, | amity, Chskdren,
Semor Clvre ond Dilevertty Abird Persons

Knap Prune ges or eepreventatear trom Schoo
Raat arggay esaithy Wows
Barangay Satinteon Schetars

Scag fh Ati: NURS AT SESPOREELIAD Ang Saag Action Tea (BAT)
a magiaiarnon mg mp2 waned oo teraghadn at regan vabdintod

Duero sa oNga oryentavyon papaanay, pagpupulong at @e pang tata mo
aienied 2 caghieaw ng kaayesan ng Panto Carndpang Piblegeno Progy ae,

Traits: on Gatun ng Srl WA na DENg barangey,

Tngsion m2 may moahagpet nakporthr2 wom 2t pag GEN SyEN S23 pagan ng ngs City
Cambs at Local Gowerrement User (LGU) Links.

belts Cty tinks 2 loc Goweeeeet Uh §G) leis ag om
retlarnovthmsng ao gagtateag sam hordisyoe og program

Turedéomg «2 paghhenad ag mge atid og Pantemd Parsi Pigpmo
Program 2 tamiang barangay

Saieyaayan a gabayan ang mgs wrbahayang benepsyayo cg Pantie
Pandya Pipmo Progam so ™g@ waging moy tinzomen 2 resonable
pagpapamp, Suid labor, drug aiuse, pagarugel, matubhang pag-arcem 2 cb
paghupand 1.2 oga aahurciswn oy progr

Magsieng tagapag-eyas ng sgaict (Grievance Gedres: Committee) a2 7
berensyaryony sun UmgiE <2 pugftabag 2 mga io ndivpor, « dhuing to v2 Cty
ockesooy Commnitre tung saiateg hand manckragon an ang canaibereg appar a

127

© Penk 2 lyaing Cagagst 2 EESRUNg pUNgaNge! angan ng mga bemeysyaTVO
ang pr ang tarskang eutatanggap w programe

- lsewtha ng oyga tent at tapespahang & tats we Pampongeeearg
Latina, 60 ne TRON 2 pon eas og Kae eg On

Pamghat @ THERETARYAS Ang Purest Leuter/s og Gomi Castes ang wyamyg auktD
kam Setyetaryat ag Bararyay Acuon Teor (BAT) Saale ang caper reporsblie
qugtotta sy Lathitan ng Pudong at pag emgut og tats 2 doi erento ng Barangzy Acbon
Team.

Pagiat |= PRGPUPULONEG - Ang Borage Acton lean (BAT) 2y magpupuiorg
imams sa toch og Gateeerg (27) og bee, o os maint fog hing’ og
agian

Pmgiat ¥  FORDD - Ang pomp em gagenom ~ pagpepaiged ng oprrzyon ng
Bavamgzy Actos Team (BAT) 2y maaoomy tame @ pore ng barangzy 0 pagtaaun ng
iauiudeng Malwgp Gar sv amily Lamang RET e spo

Pamgiet Vi PRGEARARGA Aeg Pompengeieceg Utos me fo vy lagyt
ugaaiahess ural Nanong queue amg Panam! Parrelyang Pips Program
toga ag Sar Palio

PURAGTRAY 2 Lange ag Som Pablo, idomige ng Lage. ngeyorg Bo 6 mg
Santyernire, 2012

Petsa Moerenbes & A712

128

Appendix 13: WHO Conceptual Framework on Childhood Stunting

Concurrent pro

lems & short-term c

nsequen

Health Developmental Economic Health Economic
Mortality 4+ Cognitive, motor, | | t Healthexpenditures 4+ Adult stature 4 School performance | | + Work capacity
+ Morbidities and language Opportunity costs Obesity and 4+ Leaming capacity | | + Work productivity
development for care of sick child assodated unachieved
co-morbidities potential
4 Reproductive

Consequences

Stunted growth and development

Causes t

Household and family factors Inadequate complementary feeding Breastfeeding

‘Maternal factors Poor quality foods | [ imadequate practices | [ Food and water Inadequate practices | [ Clinical and

+ Poor nutrition : resaeen dad child + Poormicronuatrient ||. Infrequentteeding || safety + Delayedinitation | | subclinical infection
during pre stimulation and quality « Inadequate feeding || = Contaminated food |]. Non-exchsive + Enteric infection:
conception, activity + Low dietary diversity |] during and after and water breastfeeding Diareal disease,
pregnancy and + Poor care practices | | andintake of itness + Poor hygiene aca coalenet environmental
oe + Inadequate animal-source foods | | . Thin food practices breastteeding eterpaty

+ Short matemal sanitation and water | | + Anti-nutrient consistency + Unsafe storage and
ed supply content + Feeding insufficient preparation of foods + Respiratory

+ Infection + Food insecurity + Lowenergy content |] quantities mae

+ Adolescent + Inappropriate intra | | ofcomplementary ||. Non-responsive + Malaria
pregnancy household food foods feeding + Reduced appetite

+ Mental health allocation due toinfection

+ IUGR and preterm | | - Low caregiver + Inflammation
birth ‘education

+ Short birth spacing

+ Hypertension

Context t
[Potitical econormy Health and Healthcare Education Society and Culture Agriculture and Food

+ Food prices and trade | | - Access to healthcare + Access to quality + Beliefs and norms Systems
policy + Qualihed healthcare ‘education + Social support networks | | + Food production and

+ Matketing regulations providers + Qualified teachers + Child caregivers (parental | | Processing

+ Political stability + Availability of supplies | | + Qualfed health and non-parental) + Auaiabilty of

‘ micronutrient rich foods

+ Poverty, income and + Infrastructure educators + Womeris status rea bag eee
wealth + Health care systems and | | + Infrastructure (schools us y

«+ Financial services policies and training institutions)

+ Employment and
liveliboods


129

Appendix 14: Qualitative Interpretation of Correlation Coefficient

Absolute Value of the Correlation
Coefficient

Strength of Linear Relationship

Very weak

Moderate

Very Strong

