Sse
Eanes

=

—
esto

DOST-STII LIBRARY

O00 00 1.

STI-19-1859

ewe eee

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS

Master of Science in Soil Science

QUINCY ESTOPIN YBANEZ

SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF NANO ZINC OXIDE
FOLIAR FERTILIZER AND ITS EFFECT ON YIELD AND
POSTHARVEST QUALITY OF TOMATO

PEARL B. SANCHEZ, Ph.D.

Adviser

Date:

[ This thesis can be made available to the general public YES
This thesis can be accessed only after consultation with the author and YES
thesis adviser

YES

This thesis can be accessed only by those bound by confidentiality |
agreement

QUINCY E. YBANEZ

PEARL B. SANCHEZ, Ph.D

SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF NANO ZINC OXIDE
FOLIAR FERTILIZER AND ITS EFFECT ON YIELD AND
POSTHARVEST QUALITY OF TOMATO

QUINCY ESTOPIN YBANEZ

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF THE GRADUATE SCHOOL
UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE
DEGREE OF

MASTER OF SCIENCE
(Soil Science)

JUNE 2018

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BANOS

Master of Science in Soil Science

QUINCY ESTOPIN YBANEZ

SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF NANO ZINC OXIDE
FOLIAR FERTILIZER AND ITS EFFECT ON YIELD AND
POSTHARVEST QUALITY OF TOMATO

PEARL B. SANCHEZ, Ph.D.

Adviser

Date:

This thesis can be made available to the general public

This thesis can be accessed only after consultation with the author and
thesis adviser

This thesis can be accessed only by those bound by confidentiality
agreement

BEE

a

PEARL B. SANCHEZ, Ph.D


The thesis attached hereto, entitled “SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF
NANO ZINC OXIDE FOLIAR FERTILIZER AND ITS EFFECT ON YIELD AND
POSTHARVEST QUALITY OF TOMATO”, prepared and submitted by QUINCY
ESTOPIN YBANEZ in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of MASTER
OF SCIENCE IN SOIL SCIENCE is hereby accepted.

JOSEPHINE U. AGRAVANTE RODRIGO B. BADAYOS
Member, Guidance Committee Member, Guidance Committee
Date Signed Date Signed

PEARL B. SANCHEZ
Chair, Guidance Committee

Date Signed

Accepted in partial fulfillment of requirements for the degree of
MASTER OF SCIENCE (SOIL SCIENCE)

PEARL B. SANCHEZ
Director, Agricultural Systems Institute

Date Signed

JOSE V. CAMACHO, Jr.
Dean, Graduate School
University of the Philippines Los Bafios

Date Signed

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

The author is a researcher in the Division of Soil Science, Agricultural Systems
Institute - College of Agriculture and Food Science (ASI-CAFS), University of the
Philippines Los Bafios since January 2018. He graduated with a B.S. Chemistry degree in
the Institute of Chemistry, University of the Philippines Los Bafios in October 2011, and
earned his Chemist’s license in 2012. He was previously employed in the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations as a Provincial Field Officer in Eastern
Samar and as a Provincial Programme Officer in Leyte under the Coconut-Based Farming
Systems Program for Typhoon Yolanda-affected areas in the Eastern Visayas Region. The
author was also previously employed as a University Researcher in DOST-GIA-funded
projects implemented by UPLB, particularly the MODECERA Program, and the FertiGroe
Program.

The author was born and raised in Tacloban City, Leyte, where he finished his
secondary education in the Philippine Science High School — Eastern Visayas Campus. He

is the second among four siblings of Danilo Ybafiez and Maggie Ybaifiez.

QUINCY E. YBANEZ

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

I would like to express my sincerest gratitude to the following individuals and institutions
for their invaluable contributions to the accomplishment of this research work. First, to
my thesis adviser, Dr. Pearl B. Sanchez, for her unwavering guidance throughout my thesis
study. To the members of my thesis guidance committee: Dr. Josephine U. Agravante and
Dr. Rodrigo B. Badayos for their valuable inputs that were instrumental in the
accomplishment of my work. To the DOST-ASTHRDP for providing me with the much
needed funds for my thesis. Dr. Emmanuel Florido, from the UPLB Institute of Physics
for providing me with the nano and non-nano ZnO standards. To my co-researchers in the
FertiGroe Program for helping me out in the set-up and foliar application of my greenhouse
experiment. To all the laboratory staff of ASI-CAFS Soils ASL and in PHTRC-UPLB for
assisting me in the chemical analyses of my samples. To my parents and siblings for their
continued moral support. Finally, to the omnipotent man above, through Him all hurdles
can be overcome no matter how difficult when you have faith.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

IPR PAGE
TITLE PAGE
APPROVAL PAGE
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LIST OF TABLES
LIST OF FIGURES
LIST OF APPENDICES
ABSTRACT
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Objectives
Conceptual Framework of the Study
CHAPTER 2. REVIEW OF LITERATURE
Nanotechnology in Agricultural Research
Nano Zinc Oxide
Soil Micronutrients
Zinc role in plants
Zinc chemistry in soils
Boron role in plants

Boron chemistry in soils

vi

PAGE

vi

xiii
xv

xvi

Zinc and Boron deficiency in Philippine soils
Sources of Zn and B fertilizer
Zinc and Boron critical levels and deficiency symptoms in tomato
Foliar Application of nano ZnO and B
Factors affecting foliar fertilization
Effect of pre-harvest factors on chemical properties of tomato
Effect of B and Zn on Tomato Postharvest Quality
Biochemical changes during tomato fruit ripening
Cultural Management Practices of Tomato

Growth stages of tomato

Tomato Varieties

Climate and soil requirements of tomato

CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS

Time and Place of Study
Activity 1. Synthesis and characterization of Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles

Activity 1.1. Optimization of Starting Material for Zinc Oxide
Nanoparticles

Method 1: Direct Precipitation Method using Zinc sulfate
heptahydrate and Ammonium Hydroxide as precursors.

Method 2: Synthesis of nano ZnO using ZnClz and NaOH as
precursor.

Activity 1.2. Optimization of synthesis parameters for nano ZnO

Activity 2. Application of nano-ZnO and B foliar fertilizer for pot-grown
tomato

Treatments and Experimental Design

vii

17

20

21

23

23

25

26

27

27

27

28

30

30

30

30

31

31

33

34

34

Preparation of foliar solutions containing Zn and B
Tomato Variety

Potting Soil

Experimental Lay-out.

Initial Soil Characterization

Cultural management practices for tomato

Growth parameters gathered

Plant tissue analysis

Yield and yield components

Activity 3. Evaluation of postharvest quality of harvested tomato as
influenced by nano ZnO foliar fertilizers

Firmness
Total Soluble Solids (TSS)
Juice pH
Titratable Acidity (TA)
Ascorbic Acid Content

Statistical analysis

CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Optimization Study 1: Synthesis Method for Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles

Optimization study 2: Optimization of synthesis parameters for nano ZnO
using optimized starting material from study 1.

Characterization of the synthesized ZnO nanoparticles

Scanning Electron Microscopy — Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy
(SEM-EDS)

X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) Spectroscopy

viii

35

36

36

36

38

38

41

41

42

42

44

44

44

44

45

47

48

48

50

53

53

56

Fourier Transform — Infrared Spectroscopy (FT-IR).

Activity 2. Application of nano-ZnO and B foliar fertilizer for pot-grown

tomato

Initial Soil Characterization

Application of Zn and B foliar treatments
Plant height of tomato

Number of clusters per plant

Number of leaves per plant

Number of flowers

Percent fruit set and number of fruits per plant
SPAD units

Biomass Production and Total Nutrient Uptake
Zn and B uptake

Yield components

Soil final characterization

Postharvest Quality of Tomato

CHAPTER 5. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

LITERATURE CITED

APPENDICES

60

61

63

65

66

67

68

69

70

72

74

75

75

78

80

90

TABLE

20
21

22

LIST OF TABLES

Physical properties of ZnO nanoparticles.

Effect of the temperature on water solubility and the first
dissociation constant Ka, of Boric Acid.

Summary of soil and environmental conditions leading to Zn
and B deficiency.
Commonly used Zn fertilizers.

Commonly used B fertilizers.

Factors affecting efficiency of foliar fertilization
Horticultural characteristics of ‘Marimax’ tomato variety.
Varieties of Tomato in the Philippines.

Optimum temperature for tomato growth.

Treatments based on source and rate of fertilizer application.

Guide for fertilization of tomato using conventional
fertilizers.

Peel color index (PCI) for tomato.
Visual quality rating (VQR) for tomato.

Method parameters for synthesis of ZnO nanoparticles.

Optimization of synthesis parameters for ZnO nanoparticles
Elemental composition of ZnO samples using EDX.
XRF results for nano ZnO.

Physical and chemical properties of soil collected from
Sariaya, Quezon.

Treatments based on source and rate of fertilizer application.
Amount of Zn supplied per plant using different Zn sources.
Amount of B supplied per plant using Boric acid.

Above-ground biomass and Dry Matter Yield of tomato as
influenced by varying foliar treatments.

PAGE

9
15

18
19
20
23
28
28
29
34
39

B
B
48

50
55
57

61

62
63
63

71

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

Tomato Stem Zn concentration as influenced by varying
foliar treatments.

Tomato Leaf Zn and B concentration as influenced by
varying foliar treatments.

Total N uptake of tomato as influenced by varying foliar
treatments.

Yield data of tomato as influence by varying foliar
treatments.

Postharvest parameters of tomato as influenced by varying
foliar treatments.

Plant height of tomato as influenced by varying foliar
treatments.

Number of clusters per tomato plant as influenced by varying
foliar treatments.

Number of leaves per tomato plant as influenced by varying
foliar treatments.

Number of flowers per tomato plant as influenced by varying
foliar treatments.

Number of fruits per tomato plant as influenced by varying
foliar treatments.

Percent fruit set per tomato plant as influenced by varying
foliar treatments.

SPAD units per tomato plant as influenced by varying foliar
treatments.

Soil pH as influenced by varying foliar treatments.

Soil Zn concentration as influenced by varying foliar
treatments.

Soil Fe, Cu and Mn concentration as influenced by varying
foliar treatments.

Tomato Stem Mg and Ca concentration as influenced by
varying foliar treatments.

PAGE

72

73

73

714

77

90

91

91

92

92

93

93

94

94

95

95

xi

TABLE

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

Tomato Stem Mn and Fe concentration as influenced by
varying foliar treatments.

Tomato Leaf Fe, Cu and Mn concentration as influenced by
varying foliar treatments.

Total N in tomato leaf and stem as influenced by varying
foliar treatments.

Total P in tomato leaf and stem as influenced by varying foliar
treatments.

Total K in tomato leaf and stem as influenced by varying
foliar treatments.

Yield data of tomato as influence by varying foliar
treatments.

Soil total N as influenced by varying foliar treatments.

PAGE

96

96

97

97

98

98

99

xii

FIGURE

10

11

LIST OF FIGURES

Conceptual Framework of the Study.

The two common forms of Zinc oxide in terms of crystal
structure.

Tomato fruits of “Marimax” variety (Source:
www.eastwestseed.com/philippines).

The growth stages of tomato (FAO, 2000).

Experimental lay-out of the tomato greenhouse experiment.
Tomato fruits arranged according to PCI 1 to 6 (left to right).
SEM image of ZnO nanoparticles prepared from ZnCl2 + NaOH.

SEM image of ZnO nanoparticles synthesized from ZnSO4 +
NHsOH.

SEM image of ZnO nanoparticles prepared from ZnClz2 +NaOH
+ CTAB; at pH 7.7, & calcined at 200 °C for 2 hrs.

SEM image of ZnO nanoparticles prepared from ZnCl2 + NaOH
+ CTAB; adjusted pH from 7.5 to 11.5 & calcined at 200 °C for
2 hrs.

EDX spectrum of nano ZnO (ZN1).

EDX spectrum of nano ZnO (ZN2).

XRF Spectra for synthesized ZnO nanoparticles (ZN1).

FT-IR Spectra of two different ZnO nanoparticles (ZN1 and ZN2)
synthesized at varying reaction conditions.

FT-IR Spectra of ZnO nanopowder (<100 nm, Sigma-Aldrich,
~80% Zn basis).

Plant height of tomato as influenced by varying foliar
treatments.

Number of clusters per tomato plant as influenced by varying
foliar treatments.

xiii

PAGE

25

24
37
43
49

49

54

54

55

56

57

58

59

64

65

FIGURE

18

20

21

22

Number of leaves per tomato plant as influenced by varying
foliar treatments.

Number of flowers per tomato plant as influenced by varying
foliar treatments.

Percent fruit set per tomato plant as influenced by varying foliar
treatments.

Number of fruits per tomato plant as influenced by varying foliar
treatments.

Leaf SPAD readings of tomato plants as influenced by varying
foliar treatments.

xiv

PAGE

66

67

68

70

FIGURE
1

2

LIST OF APPENDICES

Summary of Data Tables

Procedures for Soil and Plant Tissue Analyses

PAGE
89

100

xv

xvi

ABSTRACT

YBANEZ, QUINCY ESTOPIN. University of the Philippines Los Bafios. May 2018.
Synthesis and Characterization of Nano Zinc Foliar Fertilizer and Its Effect on Yield
and Postharvest Quality of Tomato.

Major Professor: Pearl B. Sanchez, Ph.D.

This research work primarily aimed to optimize the synthesis parameters of nano
zinc oxide using a simple precipitation technique that is ideal for large-scale and cost-
effective production. The results of the characterization tests verified the successful
synthesis of nano-sized ZnO (45 nm via SEM-EDX Spectroscopy) with low degree of
aggregation and high chemical purity (59% Zn via EDS; 90.39% ZnO via XRF
Spectroscopy). FT-IR spectroscopy confirmed the presence of the Zn and O bonds. The
synthesized nano ZnO (SNZ) was therefore an ideal source of Zn foliar fertilizer for
tomato.

The performance of SNZ as foliar fertilizer was tested on pot-grown tomato (var
‘Marimax’), and compared with bulk-size ZnO (BZ), commercial nano ZnO (CNZ), and
granular Zinc sulfate (ZS). Boric acid was incorporated to a separate set of the Zn foliar
treatments in order to determine the synergistic effects of Zn and B on the yield and
postharvest quality of tomato. The SNZ+B treatment resulted in a positive response in
terms of plant height, number of clusters per plant, SPAD units, number of leaves, flowers,
and fruits per plant, percent fruit set, Zn and B uptake, dry matter yield and marketable
yield. Foliar application of SNZ+B also led to significant improvements in fruit quality,

including higher TSS, %TA, and Vitamin C content.

CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION

Micronutrient deficiency is one of the major limiting factors for crop production,
particularly in vegetable production. Tomato, being the second most important vegetable in the
Philippines and planted to an estimated 17,000 ha with a volume of production of 176,000 MT
valued at more than 4 billion pesos (www.bas.gov.ph), is susceptible to micronutrient
deficiency. Among the microelements, boron and zinc play important roles directly and
indirectly in improving the yield and quality of tomato, in addition to lowering disease incidence
and physiological disorders (Magalhaes et al., 1980).

Zinc mainly functions as the metal component of a series of enzymes. Zinc deficiency
is known to restrict RNA synthesis, which in turn inhibits the synthesis of proteins that are
involved in many biochemical pathways, and even affecting photosynthesis (Tsonev and Lidon,
2012). Inadequate Zn levels in crops can manifest as stunted plant growth, decreased number
of tillers, chlorosis and smaller leaves, increased crop maturity period, spikelet sterility and
inferior quality of harvested products. (Hafeez, 2013). Boron deficiency, on the other hand,
contributes to carbohydrate metabolism, nucleic acid synthesis, meristem growth, and therefore
affects fruit shape, yield, and shelf life (Demoranville & Deubert, 1987).

Zn and B can be supplied to tomatoes as dry fertilizer in the soil. However, dry
formulations are difficult to manage because typically very small amounts, usually in ppm, are
required. Thus, these nutrients are subject to loss by leaching, and the range of deficient to toxic
levels of these heavy metals in soil is very narrow (Reisenauer et al., 1973). Farmers are using

both sulfates and chelated Zn (with EDTA) for soil and foliar applications of Zinc. However,

xvii

As evident from the results of the pot experiment, SNZ enhanced the agronomic
effectiveness of Zn foliar fertilizers. Nano-scaling has made ZnO more available to
nanoscale plant pores and therefore resulted in efficient nutrient use. The decreased
particle size also resulted in increased number of particles per unit weight of applied Zn,
while increasing the specific surface area of the fertilizer, which increased the inherently
low dissolution rate of ZnO in water thus enhancing the uptake by the plant. The ultimate
result was the enhanced growth yield and postharvest quality of tomato. The addition of
Boron on the Zn foliar fertilizer also resulted to a significant improvement in the

effectiveness of the foliar fertilizers.

the efficacy is low. Therefore, an efficient mechanism to reduce the amount of Zn and B
fertilizer application without compromising the plant growth and yield is very essential. Foliar
fertilization has the advantage over soil application in terms of low application rates, uniform
distribution and quick plant responses to applied nutrients (Umer et al., 1999; Mengel, 2002).

Nanotechnology is the design, characterization, production and application of structures,
devices and systems by controlling shape and size at nanometer scale. In recent years, the
application of nanoparticles of plant nutrients is being preferred to enhance the uptake by plants.
Particle size may affect agronomic effectiveness of Zn and B fertilizers. Decreased particle size
results in increased number of particles per unit weight of applied Zn and also increases the
specific surface area of a fertilizer, which will increase the dissolution rate of fertilizers with
low solubility in water such as Zn oxide (ZnO) (Mortvedt et al,1992).

In this study, it was hypothesized that ZnO nanoparticles in combination with Boron, is
more efficient as foliar fertilizer for tomato in terms of improving growth and yield, compared
to the conventionally used ZnSO4. The second hypothesis for this study was that the application
of nano ZnO and B can improve the postharvest quality of tomato. Therefore, this study
primarily aimed to generate new information on the effectiveness of nano zinc oxide in

combination with Boron on the growth, yield, and postharvest quality of tomato.

OBJECTIVES

The general objective of this study was to synthesize Zinc oxide nanoparticles, and
utilize it in combination with Boron as foliar fertilizer for tomato in order to enhance the plant
growth, yield and postharvest quality.

Specific Objectives:

Activity 1. Synthesis and characterization of zinc oxide nanoparticles.

The first part of the study aimed to accomplish the following:
1. to produce nano-sized ZnO particles in the laboratory using a simple precipitation

method that is ideal for low-cost, large scale production;

2. to characterize the properties of ZnO nanoparticles in terms of particle size, chemical

purity, percent yield, and surface morphology using instrumentation techniques;

Activity 2. Application of synthesized nano-ZnO as foliar fertilizer for tomato

The second part of the experiment aims to accomplish the following:

1. to formulate foliar fertilizer suspensions using ZnO nanoparticles and Boron;

2. to determine the growth and yield response of tomato to the varying formulations of

nanofoliar fertilizers applied.

3. to compare the nanofoliar versus conventional foliar fertilizer; in terms of their effect

on growth and yield parameters.

Activity 3. Evaluation of postharvest quality of harvested tomato as influenced by nano

ZnO foliar fertilizers

The third and final part of the experiment aimed to accomplish the following:
1. to evaluate the physical and chemical characteristics of the harvested tomatoes; and
2. to determine the effect of varying formulations of the foliar fertilizers on the

postharvest qualities of tomato.

Conceptual Framework of the Study

This study was divided into three activities namely: Synthesis and characterization of
zinc oxide nanoparticles (Activity 1); Application of synthesized nano-ZnO as foliar fertilizer
for tomato (Activity 2) and; Evaluation of postharvest quality of harvested tomato as influenced
by nano ZnO foliar fertilizers (Activity 3). Activity 1 aimed to optimize the synthesis method
parameters for nano zinc oxide and to characterize the synthesized nano zinc oxide
nanoparticles in terms of particle size, chemical purity, percent yield, and surface morphology.
Activity 2 was the testing of the performance of the synthesized nano ZnO and B on pot-grown
tomato wherein initial soil characterization was done before the implementation of treatments.
During the treatment implementation, optimum field management was observed to cancel the
effect of other factors.

Growth and yield parameters were measured which reflect the response of the tomato
plants to the treatments applied. The postharvest parameters i.e. juice pH, Total Soluble Solids
(TSS), titratable acidity (“TA), firmness and Vitamin C, as affected by the treatments were
also assessed in Activity 3. The growth parameters, yield components, and postharvest quality
were used to determine the effectiveness of the treatments applied in improving the yield and
quality of tomato.

Understanding the characteristics and chemistry of the foliar fertilizers applied such as
nano ZnO and B is important especially their mechanism of absorption and mode of action that
influences several physiological processes such as photosynthesis, which ultimately affects crop

yield and quality.

Activity 1 > Nano Zinc Oxide Synthesis

Optimization Study 1: Syuthesis Method for Zinc Oxide Nanopartieles
Optinization Study 2. Synthesis parameters for nano ZnO using ZnCl, as starting material

Activity 2 Application of nano-ZnO and B foliar fertilizer for pot-grown tomato

Initial Soil Characterization
Imposition of Zn and B fohar treatments

Activity 3 —-| Assessment of Postharvest Quality of
Tomato

Data Gathered
* Growth Parameters
* Yield Parameters

Data Gathered
* Juice pH
TSS. Bux
TA
Firmness
Vitamin C

coer

Figure 1. Conceptual Framework of the Study.

CHAPTER 2

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

Nanotechnology in Agricultural Research

Nanotechnology is the study of manipulating matter on an atomic and molecular scale.
Generally, nanoparticles are defined as particulate dispersions or solid particles with a size in
the range of 10-1000 nm (Mohanraj & Chen, 2006). Nanotechnology involves developing
materials or devices within that size range. At the nanoscale, the matter presents altered
properties which are novel and very different from those observed at macroscopic level, often
displaying improved properties at a very dramatic degree. For instance, nanoparticles exhibit
extremely high surface area to volume ratios and outstanding barrier properties when good
dispersion is achieved, as compared to the same particles when in macroscale. The change in
properties is due to the reduced molecular size and also because of changed interactions between
molecules (Lagashetty & Venkataraman, 2005).

Nano-scaling, in theory, should make fertilizer nutrients more available to nanoscale
plant pores and therefore result in efficient nutrient use (Suppan, 2013). In order to produce
nano-scale particle size, often a high-speed homogenization or ultrasonication may be employed
(Zambaux et al. 1998). The major goals in designing nanoparticles as a fertilizer delivery
system are to control particle size, surface properties and release of nutrients in order to achieve
the optimal rate and dose regimen (Mohanraj & Chen, 2006).

Despite of several advantages of using nanoparticles, nanoparticles do have limitations.
For example, their small size and large surface area can lead to particle-particle aggregation,

making physical handling of nanoparticles difficult in liquid and dry forms (Mohanraj & Chen,

2006). This can be resolved by using cationic surfactants, such as cetyltrimethylammonium
bromide, or CTAB (Li, 2003).

The zeta potential of a nanoparticle is commonly used to characterize the surface charge
property of nanoparticles. It reflects the electrical potential of particles and is influenced by the
composition of the particle and the medium in which it is dispersed. Nanoparticles with a zeta
potential above (+/-) 30 mV have been shown to be stable in suspension, as the surface charge
prevents aggregation of the particles (Covreur et al., 2002).

A study by Behnassi et al. (2011) observed that the size reduction in adsorbent (natural
zeolite) from micro to nano-dimension coincided with an increase in N content by 33.3%. The
phenomenal increase was attributed to the extensive surface area exhibited by nano-based

formulations that facilitates adsorption processes.

Nano Zinc Oxide
Zinc Oxide (ZnO) in its simplest form shows tetrahedron geometry in which each ion is
enclosed by four counter ions pointing towards corners of a tetrahedron. Its physical and
chemical properties are summarized in Table 1. Zinc oxide exists in two common crystalline
forms: wurtzite (Figure 2a) and zincblende (Figure 2b). The wurtzite structure is more stable
under ambient conditions. In a ZnO nanoparticle, the Zn atom has an atomic number 30 and
belongs to the d-block, whereas the O atom has an atomic number 8, belonging to the p-block

in the periodic table.

raw
«i ot e4
\\,

D>

(a) Hexagonal Wurtzite structure (b) Zincblende structure

Figure 2. The two common forms of Zinc oxide in terms of crystal structure.

Table 1. Physical properties of ZnO nanoparticles.

Physical Appearance White, colorless, odorless solid
Crystalline structure Wurtzite or Zincblende
Molecular weight 81.38 g/mol

Melting point 1,975°C

Density 5.47 g/cm?

Standard molar entropy 43.9 J/(K-mol)

Standard enthalpy of formation -348.0 kJ/mol

Source: UI hag et al., 2017

The synthesis of ZnO nanostructures can be accomplished by physical and chemical
routes. However, chemical methods are more suitable for the production of ZnO on an
industrial scale due to low cost and efficiency in obtaining nanostructures with uniform size and
morphology. Among the chemical methods, the solochemical technique stands out for its

simplicity, quickness and low cost in the production of ZnO nanocrystals with high quality.

10

Moreover, this method uses milder reaction conditions than those employed by most chemical
methods proposed in the literature. The method involves a reaction between a heated alkaline
solution, such as NaOH solution, and another containing the precursor, such as ZnCl solution,
at room temperature. Therefore, a decomposition reaction of the reactants is initiated causing
the immediate formation of ZnO nanocrystals (Vaezi & Sadrnezhaad, 2007).

In chemical synthesis of ZnO nanoparticles, capping agents and stabilizers are
extensively used in order to control the size and to avoid agglomeration (UI hag et al., 2017).
In this study, CTAB was used as a stabilizer, or a surfactant for the synthesis of the ZnO
nanoparticles.

ZnO is described as a functional, strategic, promising and versatile inorganic material
with a broad range of applications. Zinc oxide nanoparticles typically have neutral hydroxyl
groups attached to their surface, which plays a key role in their surface charge behavior (Qu &
Morais, 2001). In aqueous medium and at high pH, the chemisorbed protons (H*) move out
from the particle surface leaving a negatively charged surface with partially bonded oxygen
atoms (ZnO°). At lower pH, protons from the environment are likely transferred to the particle
surface, leading to a positive charge from surface ZnOH2* groups. The isoelectric point of 9-
10 (Degen & Kosec, 2000) indicates that ZnO nanoparticles will have a strong positive surface

charge under physiological conditions.

Soil Micronutrients

A fertilizer is technically defined as any material of natural or synthetic origin (other
than liming materials) that is applied to soils or to plant tissues (usually leaves) to supply one

or more plant nutrients essential to the growth of plants. Fertilizers contain beneficial nutrients

11

including macronutrients and micronutrients. Macronutrients include nitrogen, phosphorus,
and potassium which are added to soil in quantities from 0.2% to 4.0% (on a dry matter weight
basis) and are more essential than micronutrients. Micronutrients, on the other hand, are
elements that are applied to soil in much smaller amounts, ranging from 5 to 200 ppm, or less
than 0.02% dry weight (Das, 2014). These elements could be sulfur (S), boron (B), copper (Cu),

iron (Fe), manganese (Mn), molybdenum (Mo), or zinc (Zn).
Zinc role in plants

Zinc (Zn) is an essential micronutrient for humans, animals and plants. It is the second
most abundant transition metal in organisms, next only to iron (Fe), and the only metal
represented in all six enzyme classes (oxidoreductases, transferases, hydrolases, lyases,
isomerases and ligases) (Auld, 2001). Zinc is generally taken up by higher plants as a divalent
cation, Zn?*, which acts either as the metal component of enzymes or as a functional structural
or a regulatory co-factor of many enzymes (Prasad et al., 2012).

A number of published researches have reported the essentiality and role of zinc for
plant growth and yield (Marschner, 1993; Brown et al., 1993; Fageria et al., 2002). Early reports
of severe Zn deficiency symptoms included impaired stem elongation in tomato (Skoog, 1940),
and reduced protein and starch synthesis while sugar content was unaffected (Marschner, 1995).

Zinc plays a crucial role in the germination, pollen function, biomass production, and
chlorophyll synthesis in plants (Kaya and Higgs, 2002). Zn is also known to reduce the negative
effects of Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) in environmental stresses and its deficiency
decreases plant resistance (Cakmak and Marschner, 1988).

Zn acts as co-factor for some of the important antioxidant enzymes like super oxide

dismutase (SOD), and peroxidase whose activity depends on the co-factor supply of Zn nutrient

12

(Misra and Srivastava, 2010). In a study by Cherif et al. (2011) on Zn-treated tomato, the
superoxide dismutase, CAT and ascorbate peroxidases activities were found to increase
significantly. Elmer and White (2016) have also reported the pesticidal properties of ZnO. It
was noted that foliar application of ZnO on tomato and eggplant reduced disease by 28%.

Zn is also essential in the synthesis for tryptophan, a precursor of indole acetic acid
(IAA). Physiological disorders such as "little leaf disease" in fruit trees are attributable to Zn
and IAA deficiencies. Zn deficiency symptoms are easily identified by mottled leaves, highly
reduced leaf size, and often dieback of twigs and small misshapen fruit (Spiegel-Roy and
Goldschmidt, 2008).

Carbonic anhydrase is a Zn-containing enzyme involved in photosynthesis. In a study
by Qiao et al. (2014), foliar application of Zn enhanced carbonic anhydrase activity in rice

leaves and hence, increased photosynthesis.

Zinc chemistry in soils

The average concentration of Zn in the lithosphere is 80 mg kg “! (Lindsay, 1979). The
chemical composition of the parent material primarily dictates the concentration of Zn in natural
(unfertilized and uncontaminated) soil. Total Zn concentrations in uncontaminated soils vary
widely and can range from 10 to 100 mg kg “! (Mertens and Smolders, 2013).

Soil solution Zn represents a small proportion of total Zn in the soil, but it is of critical
importance as it is from this pool that plants absorb Zn. The concentration of Zn in soil solution
is normally low, and can range from 4 x 10°'° to 4 x 10° M (Barber, 1995). Zinc concentration
in soil solution is negatively correlated to soil pH, which can be explained by the stronger

sorption on the solid phase at high pH values (Jeffery and Uren, 1983).

13

In addition to the total concentration, the speciation of Zn in solution may affect its
bioavailability. In the soil solution, Zn occurs in the form of free hydrated [Zn(6H20)**] and
complexed species. Solution Zn speciation depends on pH as well as the abundance of ligands
and competing ions in solution (Degryse et al., 2009). At high pH values (pH above 7.7), the
free hydrated Zn ion can hydrolyze and form “hydroxy-complexes,” that is, ZnOH* and
Zn(OH) (Lindsay, 1979).

Zinc in soil solution can form soluble complexes with inorganic (eg, sulfate, phosphate,
nitrate, chloride) and organic (eg, fulvic and humic acids) ligands. Zinc complexes with
inorganic ligands are usually of lesser importance. Complexation with dissolved organic matter
(OM) (humic, fulvic acids) increases with increasing pH (Weng et al., 2002).

Soil pH is the most important soil property determining the adsorption of Zn in soils,
which can be attributed to the increasing negative charge on the soil surface as pH increases.
The term adsorption refers to the transfer of Zn from the solution to the solid phase and includes

precipitation (McBride et al., 1997).
Boron role in plants

The adequate supply of boron (B) in plants is essential for the germination of pollen
grains, the elongation of pollen tube, fruit set and yield. It is also indirectly involved in the
activation of dehydrogenase enzymes, sugar translocation, uptake of calcium, nucleic acids and
plant hormones (Bose and Tripathi,1996; as cited by Davarpanah et al., 2016).

As with other nutrients, B has a pronounced effect on the production and quality of
tomato. Boron also plays an important role in flowering and fruit formation (Nonnecke, 1989).

Boron deficiency affects the growing points of roots and youngest leaves. The leaves become

14

wrinkled and curled with light green color. Its deficiency affects translocation of sugar,
starches, nitrogen and phosphorus, synthesis of amino acids and proteins (Stanley et al., 1995).
In B-deficient plants the youngest leaves become pale green, losing more color at the base then
at the tip. Boron deficiency symptoms will often appear in the form of thickened wilted, or
curled leaves, a thickened, cracked, or water soaked condition of petioles and stems, and
discoloration, cracking or rotting of fruit, tubers or roots. (Tisdale et al., 1985).

The requirement of plant for B is higher during the reproductive growth or seed
production stage than it is in the vegetative stage. As a result of the general immobility of B,
which is a characteristic of most plant species, and the higher B requirements during
reproductive stages of growth, plant require a continuous supply of B from soil or foliar for
their entire growth cycle (Mozafar, 1993). Naz et al (2012) observed that 2 kg B ha’! resulted
in maximum number of flower clusters per plant, fruit set percentage, total yield, fruit weight
loss and total soluble solid in Rio Grand cultivar of tomato. This treatment showed significant
effect on all parameters. It was found that 2 kg B ha” significantly affected flowering and

fruiting of Rio Grand cultivar.

Boron chemistry in soils

The amount of boron in soils ranges from 2 to 100 mg/kg with an average of 30 mg/kg.
High-boron-content soils (10-100 mg B/kg) are usually associated with volcanic activity. Most
soils, however, have a low boron content (<10 mg B/kg). Boron does not exist in in its free
form in nature, but it invariably occurs as the oxide B2O3 in combination with the oxides of
other elements to form borates of greater or lesser complexity. The first discovered borate

mineral is sodium tetraborate decahydrate Na2B407:10H2O or borax. Boron is an essential

15

micronutrient for plants and consequently is included in many fertilizers at levels ranging from
0.01 to 0.06 wt.%, most commonly in the form of borax (Kochkodan et al., 201 5).

In nature, boron is released from rocks and soils through weathering, and subsequently
ends up in the aqueous environment as boric acid B(OH); or borate ion B(OH) 4. Boric acid
can be prepared from borax by the action of hydrochloric acid, via the following reaction:

Na,B,07+10H,0 + 2HCl > 4H3B03+ NaCl+5H,0 £q.1

It crystallizes from aqueous solutions normally as white, shining, waxy plates of orthoboric
acid, H3BO3. On heating above 100°C, the orthoboric acid gradually loses water, and changes
to metaboric acid HBO2:

H3B03 > H3B0,+ H,0  Eq.2
At higher temperatures, all the water is lost, and anhydrous boric oxide is formed:

2H3B03 > B,03+ 3H,0 Eq.3
Crystalline boric acid consists of layers of H3BO3 molecules held together by hydrogen bonds
(Figure 2). The solubility of boric acid in water increases rapidly with temperature at
atmospheric pressure (Table 2). Boric acid dissolved in water is uncharged and has a trigonal

structure.

Table 2. Effect of the temperature on water solubility and the first dissociation constant
Ka, of Boric Acid.

TEMP (°C) SOL’Y OF B(OH)s (wt%) Ka X 10”

0 2.70 :

15 4.17 4.72
20 4.65 5.26
25 5.44 5.79
50 10.24 8.32
75 1741 :

100 27.53 :

(Source: Kochkodan et al., 2015)

16

Boron occurs in aqueous solutions as boric acid, B(OH)3 and borate ions, B(OH)"
(Evans and Sparks, 1983). Boric acid is a very weak, monobasic acid that acts as a Lewis acid

by accepting a hydroxyl ion (OHY to form the B(OH)s (Goldberg, 1993).

H3B03 + H,0 > B(OH), + H2,0 Eq.4

The equilibrium constant for the hydrolysis reaction of boric acid is 5.75 x 107° or pKa
= 9.24 at 25° C (Basset, 1980). Thus, below pH 9.24, the uncharged species is predominant,
while above 9.24, the borate anion is predominant. Kochkodan et al., (2015) also reported that
boric acid dissociates into borate ions at pH 8.5 and above, peaking at pH 10.5. At pH > 10,
B(OH), is the main form of Boron that is present in solution. Boric acid, the uncharged
molecule, is the main chemical form of B taken up by plants (Marschner, 1986).

The storehouse for most of the boron in soils is soil organic matter. Asa result, most of
the available boron is in the plow layer, where OM is highest. Soils low in OM are deficient in
boron more often than soils with high OM content. When the surface soil dries out, plants are
unable to feed in the zone where most of the available boron is present. This can lead to boron
deficiency. When rain or irrigation moistens the soil, the plants can again feed from the surface
soil and the boron deficiency often disappears.

Somewhat like nitrates, boron is not readily held by the soil particles and moves down
through coarse-textured soils, often leaching below the root zones of many plants. Because less
leaching occurs on fine-textured silts and clays, these soils are not boron deficient as often as
sands. Soils with a pH of 7.0 or above are more apt to be deficient in boron than are acid soils.

This is one reason for not applying lime when the pH of the soil is above 6.8.

17

Sah and Brown (1997) investigated the different techniques for boron determination in
plant and soil samples. Boron present in soils is commonly divided into three categories: (1)
total B, (2) acid-soluble B and (3) water-soluble B. Total B content of a soil is not a reliable
indicator of available B or the need for B. The acid-soluble B content of a soil is a better
indicator but is not a reliable index of plant available B, especially in calcareous soils that
neutralize the acidity of extractant. Berger and Truog (1940) proposed a hot water extraction
(HWE) for 5 min (with refluxing) as an index of available B in the soil. The HWE method has
been widely used and B extracted by this method often correlates well with plant B uptake
(Shuman et al., 1992). The HWE method however is time consuming, tedious for routine and
reproducible usage. Several convenient alternative methods to estimate the amount of plant
available B in soils have been cited by Sah and Brown (1997). These include (1) microwave
heating of the soil sample and the extractant in sealed plastic pouches, (2) extraction with water
or 2mM DTPA at room temperature, (3) extraction with water or a solution of BaCl2 and
microwave heating (4) extraction with hot 0.01 M CaCl or extraction with 1.0 N NH4OAC (pH

7.0) (Sakal et al., 1993).

Zinc and Boron deficiency in Philippine soils

Zinc deficient areas in the Philippines are those land planted with rice usually submerged
into water or frequently flooded. Five different rice-growing regions in Luzon were identified
by BSWM as zinc deficient soils: Alaminos, Pangasinan (Region I), Jaen, Nueva Ecija (Region
III), Naujan, Mindoro (Region IV-B), Banga and New Washington, Aklan (Region VI) and
Victoria, Laguna (Region IV-A) (BSWM, 2016). A study by Yoshida et al., 1973 also

concluded that soils in San Juan, Batangas and San Pablo, Laguna are Zinc-deficient, and

18

responsive to Zn fertilization. Sariaya sandy loam in Sariaya, Quezon province, has also been
previously documented to be deficient in Zinc. Table 3 summarizes the soil and environmental
conditions leading to Zn and B deficiency. Zinc-deficient soils have typically neutral to alkaline
pH, high CaCO; content, high OM content (peat soils), high oxide content, high P phosphorus,

sandy texture, or have been subjected to prolonged waterlogging (Alloway, 2009).

Table 3. Summary of soil and environmental conditions leading to Zn and B deficiency.

Parameters Zn-deficient B-deficient
Soil pH Gigber ther pet =e Alkaline
Texture Coarse (Sandy) Coarse (Sandy)
OM High Low
N No significant effect High
P High No significant effect
K No significant effect High
oxides High No significant effect
CaCO3 High High
Drainage Poor (waterlogged) No significant effect
Climate High rainfall, warm T Drought
Soil practices aaa anor noe Liming

Zinc deficiency is also associated with a high bicarbonate content, a Mg to Ca ratio in
soils which is greater than 1, and high levels of available phosphate and silica. The critical
deficiency limit in Philippine soils is 1.0 mg kg™! Zn by extraction with 0.05M HCI and 0.5-
1.15 ppm mg kg" Zn by extraction with DTPA. Zinc extracted from the soil solution of deficient
paddy fields is generally in the range of 0.05 - 0.25 mg L"! (BSWM, 2016).

Boron in soils typically has a concentration between 2 to 100 mg kg" with an average

of 30 mg kg". Boron, like Zinc, becomes less available to plants as soil pH increases.

19

Therefore, the practice of applying lime to improve the uptake of other important nutrients can
cause B deficiency (Bunt, 1956 and Fleming, 1980 as cited by Davis et al., 2003). Adams
(1978) also observed that B deficiency can occur readily in tomatoes grown in areas with acid

sandy soils and heavy rainfall, because such conditions result to leaching.

Sources of Zn and B fertilizer

The common sources of Zinc and B fertilizers are summarized in Tables 4 and 5. The
application of 20 to 50 kg ha’! of zinc sulfate to the soil is the most common way of correcting
zinc deficiency among farmers. Likewise, treating seeds with zinc materials before sowing in
nursery beds or direct seeded field is the common practice among farmers. Borax and boric acid
are the two most common sources of Boron fertilizers for farmers. In this study, the sources of
Zn foliar are ZnSO« and nano ZnO (synthesized and commercial), and bulk ZnO, whereas for

Boron source, Boric acid will be used as foliar spray.

Table 4. Commonly used Zn fertilizers.

,
Zn SOURCE FORMULA ne Ny an ONTENT
Zinc sulfate monohydrate ZnSO, + H20 Soluble 36

Zinc sulfate heptahydrate ZnSO, + 7H20 Soluble 23

Zinc oxide ZnO Insoluble 50-80
Zinc carbonate ZnC03 Insoluble 50-56
Zinc chloride ZnCl Soluble 50

Zinc nitrate Zn(NO3)2*3H,0 Soluble 23
Basic zinc sulfate ZnSO,°4Zn(OH)2 — Slightly soluble 55

Source: Mortvedt and Gilkes (1993) as cited by Montalvo et al., 2016.

20

Table 5. Commonly used B fertilizers.

B SOURCE FORMULA SOL’YIN WATER  B CONTENT (%)
Borax Na2B407.10H20 Soluble 11%B
Boric acid H3BO3 5.44% at RT 17.5% B

Zinc and Boron critical levels and deficiency symptoms in tomato

In tomato, boron and zinc are the micronutrients that play an important role in improving
the yield and fruit quality, in addition to checking various diseases and physiological disorders
(Magalhaes et al., 1980). In Philippine soils, Zinc concentration is considered as low when the
value is between the range of 0.5 — 1.15 ppm (via DTPA extraction), and very low when the
concentration is below 0.5 ppm (Pantastico, 1973 as cited in Phil. Bureau of Soils and Water
Management Handbook). Below these Zn concentrations, tomato is expected to manifest
deficiency symptoms. On the other hand, B deficiency occurs when the level in the tomato
tissue falls below 19 mg kg” Gallagher (1972). The deficiency can be reduced by spraying
borax solution in the foliage at 0.5 mg L"! or applying borax in the soil at 22 kg ha’.

Severe Zn deficiency is characterized by root apex necrosis (‘dieback’), whilst sub-
lethal Zn deficiency induces spatially heterogeneous or interveinal chlorosis (‘mottle leaf’), the
development of reddish-brown or bronze tints (‘bronzing’), and a range of auxin deficiency-
like responses such as internode shortening (‘rosetting’), epinasty, inward curling of leaf lamina
(‘goblet’ leaves) and reductions in leaf size (‘little leaf”). In most crops, the typical leaf Zn
concentration required for adequate growth is 15—20 mg Zn kg”! dry weight (Marschner, 1995).

In Boron-deficient tomato, the petioles are brittle and break off suddenly, which results

to lower yield. Fruits are not marketable because of their chapped surface. Roots are short and

21

with thickened necrotic tips. With severe B deficiency, the growing points of main shoot and
laterals die and the crop is lost. The younger leaves remain small, are curled inwards and
deformed. They show chlorotic spots between the veins which are yellow to orange and the

veins themselves can become yellow or purple. The older leaves appear yellowish green.

Foliar Application of nano ZnO and B

The most important application of nanotechnology in agricultural crop production is the
field of nano-fertilizers, which can feed plants gradually in a controlled manner, conversely to
what occurs in the case of common fertilizers. Nano-materials can be used for designing new
Zn fertilizers, with the solubility, diffusion and availability of Zn to plants being affected by the
nano-particulate Zn characteristics (size, specific surface area and reactivity) (Davarpanah et
al., 2016).

Foliar application of Zn has been used as an agronomic practice to supplement soil Zn
fertilizer applications during plant growth stages of high Zn demand, particularly when soil and
climatic conditions may limit the availability of soil-applied Zn (Fernandez and Brown, 2013).
Foliar Zn application is considered more effective than soil Zn applications to alleviate Zn
deficiency symptoms when they appear during the crop cycle. However, the disadvantage of
foliar Zn is that multiple applications may be required to correct Zn deficiency due to the limited
mobility of foliar-absorbed Zn to non-sprayed new leaves and roots (Swietlik, 2002). Also a
yield penalty may be incurred by the time the symptoms of Zn deficiency are diagnosed and a
foliar spray program initiated. Brennan (1991) showed that in a Zn-deficient soil banding ZnSO4
at sowing resulted in higher wheat grain yield compared to a foliar Zn spray. The limited re-

translocation of foliar-applied Zn to other organs of the plant is related to poor penetration of

22

the nutrient into the leaf or to the high binding capacity of Zn to leaf tissues, rather than limited
phloem mobility (Fernandez et al., 2013).

A study by Davarpanah et al (2016) was carried out to assess the effects of the foliar
application of nano-fertilizers of zinc (Zn) and boron (B) on pomegranate fruit yield and quality.
The effect was not as large with Zn as with B. Fertilization with the highest of the two doses
led to significant improvements in fruit quality, including 4.4-7.6% increases in TSS, 9.5—
29.1% decreases in TA, 20.6-46.1% increases in maturity index and 0.28-0.62 pH unit
increases in juice pH, whereas physical fruit characteristics were unaffected. Changes in total
sugars and total phenolic compounds were only minor, whereas the antioxidant activity and
total anthocyanins were unaffected. The study by Panwar et al, (2012) revealed that tomato
plant exposed to a concentration of 20 mg L"! ZnO nanoparticles exhibited maximum growth
and biomass production. ICP-OES analysis showed significant concentration of Zn in the
digested plant material confirming the penetration of Zn NPs in tomato plants. SEM
assessments of tomato leaves revealed stomata as the preferred site for the penetration of ZnO
NPs.

In a recent study, Du et al. (2015) used X-ray fluorescence microscopy for in situ
examination of the absorption and relocation of foliar-applied Zn to either the adaxial or abaxial
surface of leaves from Zn-sufficient and Zn-deficient tomato and citrus plants. Results from this
study showed that the concentration of Zn in the underlying tissue increased by up to 600-fold
in tomato but only up to 5-fold in citrus.

The most common Zn sources used for foliar fertilization are soluble salts and chelates.
Surfactants and adjuvants are also included in the formulation to aid on penetration of the

nutrient through the cuticle Crowley et al. (1996).

23

Factors affecting foliar fertilization

The major factors that affect the absorption and translocation of foliar-applied nutrients
are the timing of application, the physicochemical properties of the formulation, the
environmental conditions during application, and the particular characteristics of the plants
(Fernandez and Brown, 2013). The other factors affecting the efficiency of foliar fertilization

are presented in the following table.

Table 6. Factors affecting efficiency of foliar fertilization

PLANT ENVIRONMENT SOLUTION
Type of cuticle Temperature Concentration
Leaf age Light Rate

Number of stomas Photoperiod Application
Presence of trichomes Wind intensity Chemical form
Turgor Relative humidity Adjuvants
Surface moisture Drought pH

CEC Schedule Polarity
Nutritional status Nutritional stress Hygroscopicity
Growth stage Interactions

Source: Camargo and Silva, 1975

Effect of pre-harvest factors on chemical properties of tomato

Tomato is defined as a vegetable, but botanically is a fruit. It is among the most
popularly consumed fruits in the world and as such could be considered as an important source

of ascorbic acid and dietary antioxidants.

24

Figure 3. Tomato fruits of “Marimax” variety (Source: www.eastwestseed.com/philippines)

Lycopene, phenolics, flavonoids and vitamins C and E are mainly responsible for the
antioxidant activity of raw tomatoes and processed tomato products (Lenucci et al., 2006).
Lycopene is the most abundant carotenoid present in red tomatoes, comprising up to 90% of the
total carotenoids present. The taste, color, and nutrient qualities of tomatoes can depend on
their antioxidant contents (Dumas et al., 2003). However, there is limited information on the
effect of different forms of fertilizers on the antioxidant components of tomatoes. The data
available on the effect of fertilizers on the production of phenolic substances and other
antioxidant components of tomato are either rare or not very reliable or applicable.

Tomatoes are grown by using both conventional as well as organic fertilizers. They are
considered as heavy consumers because of their rapid growth and long production season.
Production of one ton of tomato fruit removes 1.4 - 3.6 kg nitrogen, 0.2 - 1.4 kg phosphorous,
and 2.2 - 5.4 kg potassium from the soil (Sandoval-Villa et al., 1999).

Nitrogen (N) is one of the major macronutrients in improving the yield of tomato (Zhu

etal., 2012). High N levels in greenhouse plantation will produce a high yield of tomato (Zhang

25

et al., 2005). However, excessive N fertilizer is a common occurrence in conventional tomato
cultivation and this practice degrades soil and water quality by increasing NO3-N concentration
in topsoil and groundwater (Sainju et al., 2001).

Nitrogen fertilizers at high rates tend to decrease the vitamin C content in many fruits
and vegetables. Vitamin C content of many crops can be increased with less frequent irrigation.
Temperature management after harvest is the most important factor to maintain vitamin C of
fruits and vegetables; losses are accelerated at higher temperatures and with longer storage

durations (Lee & Kader, 2000).

Effect of B and Zn on Tomato Postharvest Quality

A study by Salam et al., (2011) showed that tomato fruits which were produced with 2.5
kg B + 6 kg Zn tons ha’! gave the highest fruit pulp weight among all treatments. In contrast,
it was the lowest (76.7% lower than best treatment) in treatments without boron, and zinc. This
can be accounted to the higher accumulation of assimilates to the fruits with higher Zn
treatment. Dry matter content of the tomato fruits also increased progressively with increased
doses of boron and zinc. The fruits produced with 2.5 kg B + 6 kg Zn ha’! gave the highest TSS
content (4.60%), but the lowest TSS content (3.80%) was found in without boron and zinc. The
effect of Zn on total sugars can be due to its role in the starch and nucleic acid metabolism, and
also to the activities of various enzymes involved in these biochemical reactions (Alloway,
2009). The fruits produced with that same treatment also gave the highest (11.20 mg 100g!)
ascorbic acid. On the contrary, the lowest value was recorded in without application of boron

and zinc.

26

In terms of chlorophyll content, the fruits which were produced without boron and zine
had less chlorophyll-a content. Singh and Singh (2004) reported that zinc application not only
increased chlorophyll content, but also raised the concentration of Zn, Ca, Mg, K, and P in
tissues.

At 30 days after storage, percent marketable fruit was gradually increased with the
increased quantity of boron and zinc. This could be attributed to the reduction in microbial
activities as a consequence of balanced boron, zinc, and cowdung. Kocevski et al. (1997) stated
that boron influenced the defenses against plant diseases. Shelf life was also gradually increased

with the increased doses of boron and zinc.

Biochemical changes during tomato fruit ripening

During ripening of tomatoes, several important changes occur in their chemical
structure, such as synthesis of pigments (e.g. lycopene), production of flavor and aroma
compounds, and increase in the ratio of citric to malic acid (Toor & Savage, 2006). There are
also studies that reported an increase in ascorbic acid content of tomatoes during their ripening
(Abushita et al., 1997). Total phenolics and flavonoids have also been reported to increase
during the ripening of tomatoes (Cano et al., 2003). Lycopene, which is responsible for the red
color of tomatoes, is regarded as an antioxidant with high biological activity in the body
(Javanmardi & Kubota, 2006). Lycopene content varies considerably between cultivars, stage
of maturity and growing conditions (Dumas et al., 2003). The metabolism of tomatoes
continues, even after their detachment from the plant, when fruits have reached their red stage.
They continue to ripen and finally deteriorate to a point where they become non-marketable

(Toor & Savage, 2006).

27

Cultural Management Practices of Tomato

Growth stages of tomato. Tomato completes a life cycle, from seed to seed, in one
season (Figure 4). The general growth stages for tomato are: seed, seedling stage, vegetative
stage, flowering stage, fruiting stage, and harvesting stage. The seedling stage is usually the
period from emerging seed to transplanting to the main field. Vegetative stage is the period
from transplanting until the first flower buds develop. Flowering stage is when the plant with
flower buds and open flowers. The fruiting stage is the period when plant yields mature fruits.
Finally, the maturity stage or the harvesting stage is the period when plant yields mature fruits

(FAO, 2000).

These growth stages are overlapping in time: harvesting stage
fruiting stage 55+DAT
flowering stage | 45+DAT

seedling stage vegetative stage 24-45 DAT
045 DAS 0-25DAT

sowing transplanting

DAS = Days after sowing
DAT = Days after transplanting _

Figure 4. The growth stages of tomato (FAO, 2000).

Tomato Varieties. Presented in Table 7 are the different varieties of tomato in the
Philippines. For this study, the variety used was “Marimax”, which is a product of East-West
Seed company. The horticultural characteristics of Marimax tomato is summarized in Table 7.
This variety has a relatively shorter postharvest life (32-33 days) as compared to other hybrid

varieties (Table 8).

Table 7. Horticultural characteristics of ‘Marimax’ tomato variety.

CHARACTERISTICS ‘MARIMAX' (HYBRID)
a) Yield (t/ha)
Wet season 15
Dry season 14.3
b) Maturity: days to 50% flowering
(DAT)
Wet season 41
Dry season 38
c) Maturity: days to 1st harvest (DAT)
Wet season 69
Dry season 65
d) Weight/fruit (g)
Wet season 18.4
Dry season 24.5
e) Shelf life: days to shriveling (DAH)
Wet season 32
Dry season 33
Source: (Narciso & Balatero, 2008)
Table 8. Varieties of tomato in the Philippines.
VARIETY MATURITY (DAT) VARIETY MATURITY (DAT)
Diamante 55 Mapula 60
Marimax 60-65 Marilag 60
Maxima 55-60 Marikit 60
Improve pope 60-65 BPI Claveria 60
Cardinal 70 VC48 - 1 60
Apollo 60 CA 633 60
Tabeth F1 65 CA 530 60

28

Climate and soil requirements of tomato. Tomato is a day neutral plant. Its fruits

contain higher ascorbic acid with high light intensity. It also needs different temperatures for

each growth development stage (Table 9). High day temperatures (>40°C) can abort the flowers

due to physical destruction of pollen grains. Tomato thrives on many soil types. It grows best

29

in fairly fertile, well-drained sandy loam soil or heavier soils and soil free from root-knot
nematodes and bacterial wilt organisms. The soil organic matter must be at least 1.5%, with a
pH of 4.3 — 8.7 (growth is optimum at pH 5.5 — 6.5). Tomato is moderately tolerant to acidity

(Rasco, 2014).

Table 9. Optimum temperature for tomato growth.

GROWTH STAGE TEMPERATURE
Seed germination 26 - 32°C
Seedling growth 25 — 26°C
Pollen germination & pollen tube growth 22 — 27°C
Fruit setting 18 — 20°C
Fruit ripening 24 - 28°C

(Source: Hanson et al., 2001)

This study primarily aimed to investigate the efficacy of ZnO nanoparticles in
combination with Boron, on the growth, yield, and fruit quality of tomato. One of the major
objectives of this study is to determine the effect of nano ZnO and Boron foliar fertilizers on
the major carpometric characteristics, antioxidant components and antioxidant activity of the

greenhouse-grown tomatoes.

30

CHAPTER 3

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Time and Place of Study

The synthesis of the nano Zinc and Boron fertilizers was conducted at the Soil Chemistry
laboratory, Division of Soil Science, Agricultural Systems Institute - College of Agriculture and
Food Science (ASI-CAFS), University of the Philippines Los Bafios. The pot experiment for
testing of the nanofertilizers on tomato was done in the experimental screen house in ASI-
CAFS, UPLB. The third and final part, which involved the postharvest quality of the harvested
tomatoes, was conducted at Postharvest Horticulture Training and Research Center (PHTRC),
Institute of Crop Science, College of Agriculture and Food Science, University of the

Philippines Los Bafios. The duration of the entire study is from June 2017 to March 2018.

Activity 1. Synthesis and characterization of Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles
The first part of this thesis study focused on the synthesis and characterization of the
Zinc oxide nanoparticles that will be used in combination with Boron as foliar fertilizers for the

tomato pot experiment.

Activity 1.1. Optimization of Starting Material for Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles

Two different synthesis methods were compared in the preparation of ZnO
nanoparticles. The objective of this activity was to determine the most suitable starting material
for the ZnO nanoparticles. The products formed from both methods were characterized in terms

of yield and chemical purity. The synthesis method that produced nano ZnO with the desired

31

characteristics was used for the production of the final nano ZnO that was used for the actual

pot experiment.

Method 1: Direct Precipitation Method using Zinc sulfate heptahydrate and
Ammonium Hydroxide as precursors. The method used by Sadraei (2016) for synthesis of
nano ZnO nanoparticles was adapted for the first method. Zinc sulfate heptahydrate
(ZnSO4(H20)7) and Ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH), both technical grade, were used as the
starting materials for this method. Zinc sulfate heptahydrate (2.9386 g) was dissolved in 100
mL deionized water. A mother solution was then prepared from 25 mL of the Zinc sulfate
solution (0.2 M) and 50 mL of purified water. The alkali solution, ammonium hydroxide, 25
mL (NH,OH, 25%) with an approximate rate of 5 mL per minute was added dropwise into the
mother solution. The magnetic stirrer/heater for vigorous stirring was used at the temperature
of about 50-60°C. The precipitates derived from the reaction between the Zinc sulfate and
Ammonium hydroxide solution were collected by filtering, and then rinsed three times with
distilled water by centrifugation. The final ZnO precipitates were then collected after drying at

60, 100, 200, and 300 °C (for optimization) in a laboratory drying oven for 8 hours.

Method 2: Synthesis of nano ZnO using ZnCl: and NaOH as precursor. For the
second synthesis method of ZnO nanoparticles for this study, the precipitation technique used
by Awodugba & Ilyas (2013) was adapted, with some modifications. Zinc oxide nanoparticles
were synthesized using Zinc Chloride (ZnCl2) and Sodium Hydroxide (NaOH), both technical
grade, as precursors. The concentration ratio between the ZnCl2 and NaOH was determined

using the chemical equation formula shown below:

ZnCl, + 2NaOH > Zn(OH), + 2NaCl

32

Initially, 0.4 M aqueous methanol solution of ZnCl2 was kept under constant stirring
using magnetic stirrer to completely dissolve the zinc chloride and 0.8M aqueous methanol
solution of NaOH was also prepared in the same way and kept under stirring. The speed of
stirring of the ZnCl: was increased after its complete dissolution, and 0.8M aqueous solution of
NaOH was added dropwise for 20 minutes. The cationic surfactant, Cetyltrimethyl ammonium
bromide (CTAB), 0.5 g, was added into the resulting solution. Surfactants have the ability to
control the morphology and size distribution of nanoparticles.

The white-colored solution obtained after complete addition of addition of NaOH and
CTAB was constantly stirred in a magnetic stirrer for 2 hrs, and later sealed and kept overnight.
At high pH values (pH above 7.7), the free hydrated Zn ion can hydrolyze and form “hydroxy-
complexes,” that is, ZnOH* and Zn(OH)2 (Lindsay, 1979). The pH of the solution was varied
in order to determine the optimum pH that yielded the nano Zinc oxide with the desired
characteristics.

Zinc hydroxide with some impurities such as NaCl settled at the bottom and the excess
mother liquor obtained on top was discarded. The residue was washed five times with deionized
water and methanol or ethanol to remove the by-products such as NaCl which are bound with
the Zinc hydroxide, and then dried in air atmosphere at 60, 100, 200, and 300 °C (for
optimization).

Synthesis products from both methods were subjected to Scanning Electron Microscopy
for particle structure elucidation and Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy analysis for

elemental analysis.

33

Activity 1.2. Optimization of synthesis parameters for nano ZnO

The starting material that was selected based on the result from the initial optimization
experiment was then used to optimize the synthesis parameters, particularly the pH of the
solution, mixing time, and calcination temperature and duration.

The synthesized ZnO was compared to commercial nano ZnO (technical grade Sigma
Aldrich) in terms of the following characterization methods:

Mineralogical Analysis by Fluorescence Spectroscopy. Mineralogical analysis of the
nano ZnO samples was performed by X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) spectroscopy to determine
the average mineral composition.

Particle Size Determination. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) analysis was
performed on the submitted samples to characterize the surface structure and measure average
particle size in powder form.

Molecular structure by Infrared Spectroscopy. The identification of the atomic
arrangement and the concentrations of the chemical bonds present in the samples was carried
out using Fourier Transform-Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR), in which percentage transmission
and wave number are the output. In the spectrogram for ZnO nanoparticles, there is a
characteristic sharp peak at around 400-470 cm"! which can be attributed to Zn-O stretching
vibrations, but depending on synthesis and other experimental conditions, weak bands
positioned at 520 cm’!, 566 cm’! and 665 cm! are also possible to appear in the FT-IR spectrum
(Hernandez et al., 2007).

Elemental Characterization. Energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis was performed
to determine elemental composition (%Zn, %O) in the synthesized samples, and measure zeta

potential, which is related to the degree of agglomeration of the nanoparticles.

34

Activity 2. Application of nano-ZnO and B foliar fertilizer for pot-grown tomato

The second major activity of the thesis study was the formulation of the foliar fertilizers
containing nano ZnO and B, and testing their performance on greenhouse-grown tomato. The

effect of the foliar treatments on growth and yield parameters of tomato was evaluated.

Treatments and Experimental Design

The treatments for this study consisted of four sources of zinc and one source of boron
as foliar fertilizers. There were nine (9) treatment combinations, laid out in a Randomized
Complete Block Design (RCBD) with three (3) replications and four (4) pots per replication

(Table 10). Tomato (var. ‘Marimax’) was used as the test crop.

Table 10. Treatments based on source and rate of fertilizer application.

NT! IN.
NO. CODE DESCRIPTION CONCENTRATION, ppm

FLOWERING FRUITING PRE-MATURITY

1 CTRL Control - - -
Synthesized A

2 SNE 7nO 300 300 600
Commercial

3 CNZ ho 7n0 200 200 400

4 BZ Bulk ZnO 200 200 400

5 ZS Zinc sulfate 700 700 1400
Synth.

6 SNZ+B LO . oa 300 Zn +0.2%B 300Zn+0.3%B 600Zn+0.4%B
Comm.

7 CNZ+B Fa rayon 200 Zn+0.2%B 2002Zn+0.3%B 400Zn+0.4%B
Bulk Zinc

8  BZ+B oxide + 200 Zn+0.2%B 200Zn+0.3%B 400Zn+0.4%B
H3BO3

9 ZS+B aso * 700 Zn+0.2%B 700Zn+0.3%B 700Zn+04%B

——

35

The foliar fertilizers were applied during three critical growth stages of the tomato: (i)
before flower initiation; (ii) after fruit set when it becomes approximately marble sized; and (iii)
at 20 days interval of second spray (Sultana et al., 2016). In addition to the levels of boron and
zinc under investigation, NPK and organic fertilizers were applied to the soil uniformly, based

on recommended rates, for all the pots.

Preparation of foliar solutions containing Zn and B

Zinc oxide has an inherent low solubility in water, thus a heterogeneous suspension is
formed when it is added to water. If the suspension is to be used as a foliar spray, the solids
should be dissolved thoroughly, or dispersed evenly in the solution. Prior to spraying, the
suspensions were subjected to ultra-sonication (15-30 minutes) in order to disperse the particles
uniformly in the solution. The foliar solution for the commercial zinc oxide nanopowder (80%
Zn, Sigma-Aldrich™), were prepared in the same manner. The other source of zinc is technical
grade zinc sulfate (ZnSOq .7H20) containing 23% Zn. The foliar solutions of ZnSO4 were
prepared by manual stirring. Zinc sulfate is soluble in water, thus no sonication is required.

The foliar spray for B were prepared using technical grade boric acid (H3BO3), which
contains 17.5% B. Boric acid has a water solubility of 5.44% at 25°C, thus a homogenous
solution was obtained in preparing the foliar solutions for boric acid. At a pH of 9.24, the
uncharged species of boric acid is predominant, while above 9.24, the borate anion is
predominant. Boric acid, the uncharged molecule, is the main chemical form of B taken up by
plants. Thus the pH of the foliar solutions were maintained at values below 9.24.

The total volume for each foliar spray was 50 mL, and was applied in such a way that it

will completely wet the tomato plant. All foliar solutions were added with Polysorbate-20 or

36

Tween-20, as wetting agent at the rate of 0.01 % for reducing contact angle between the liquid
and leaf surface (Sajid et al., 2010 as cited by Sultana et al., 2016). The surfactant will limit
water loss during the spray process, and ensure that the nutrients will adhere to the leaf surface,

thus maximizing uptake by foliage.

Tomato Variety. Tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill. var. “Marimax”), purchased
from EastWest Seed Company, was used as the test crop, and grown in pots inside the
experimental screen house of Agricultural Systems Institute — University of the Philippines Los

Baijios.

Potting Soil. The potting soil used in the experimental pots was collected from Brgy
Canda, Sariaya, Quezon province on January 2018. The freshly collected soils were brought to
the Plant Pathology Division, Institute of Biological Sciences, UPLB, for sterilization in order
to minimize disease incidence, particularly bacterial wilt. The soils were heated over fire using
a halved drum, continuously for 3 days at 8 hours per day. The soils were subjected to physical

and chemical characterization prior to planting.

Experimental Lay-out. Randomization was done using Statistical Tool for Agricultural
Research (STAR) software according to a Randomized Complete Block Design (RCBD) with
three (3) replications and six (4) pots per replication (Figure 5). A total of 108 pots were used
in the study. Each experimental pot measured 10x10x13 inches, and contained eight (8)

kilograms of pre-weighed dry Sariaya sandy loam soil.

rz]
a_i]
a FE
ea] Be] “3
Hi
ee] a
BM 36

ra

Zz a7
15 16
T6
17 18
19 20

T4
37
= a

HH HH
ee] 7 ee] a
in| sr s_|
eS] a

5s |

Figure 5. Experimental lay-out of the experiment.

fad a
By * 3

ae] Te rir

ite
i a 105 106
T7

89 90

LEGEND:

REPLICATES

R1_: Replicate 1

R2_ : Replicate 2

R3__: Replicate 3
TREATMENTS

Tl: Control

T2 : Synthesized nano ZnO

T2 : Commercial nano ZnO

T4 : Bulk ZnO

TS: Zine sulfate

T6  : Synth. nano ZnO + H3BO3
T7 _: Synth. nano ZnO + H3BO3
T8 : Bulk Zinc oxide + H3BO3
T9 : Zine sulfate + H3BO3

37

38

Initial Soil Characterization. Composite soil samples were collected and were
analyzed for physical and chemical properties. The pH of soil was determined in a ratio of 1:2.5
soil: distilled water suspension and 0.01 M CaCl solution using a glass electrode (Black, 1965).
Soil organic carbon was determined using the method by Walkley and Black (1934). Total N
was determined using Kjeldahl method, available P using Bray No. 2 method, exchangeable K
using flame photometer method, and soil CEC by leaching with ammonium acetate buffer
adjusted to pH 7.0 followed by steam distillation (Black, 1965). The soil texture was
determined using hydrometer method (Tan, 2005). Soil Zn levels were analyzed using AAS
while soil B levels were analyzed via Inductively Coupled Plasma — Optical Emission

Spectroscopy.

Cultural management practices for tomato:

a. Seed sowing. Tomato seeds (var. Marimax) purchased from East-West Corp were sown
directly into the prepared pots. Two seeds were sown directly into the pots, then the
seeds were covered lightly with soil after sowing. The seeds were hand watered. The
potting soils weree saturated with water for three days. After germination, watering
was. A week after sowing, the germinated seedlings were drenched with 1.0 tbsp of
dissolved complete fertilizer in 1.6 L of water. Drenching was done early in the morning
or late in the afternoon to avoid leaf burning(www/eastwestseed.com).. The distance

between pots was 0.75 meters.

b. Thinning. Seedlings growing almost in the same way were chosen for research and the

other seedlings were thinned out. Thinning was done 3-4 weeks after sowing. Each pot

39

contained one tomato seedling. Each treatment replicate had 6 pots. In all cases, plant

age was expressed in days after planting (DAP).

Fertilization. In addition to the levels of boron and zinc under investigation, NPK and
organic fertilizers were applied to the soil uniformly, based on recommended rates, for
all the pots. Among the three major nutrients (NPK), lesser potassium (K) is required
than nitrogen (N) and phosphorous (P) in vegetable. However, K is usually applied to
tomatoes because of their high requirement. Based on the results of the soil analysis,
the recommended fertilizer rate (NPK) that was used for tomato is 200-220-300 (N-
P20s-K20) kg/ha. This rate was calculated using the assumption that the planting
distance is 0.5 x 0.75 meters. Therefore, it was assumed that an area of 0.4 sq m will be
occupied by each plant in a hill, and there is a total of 25,000 hills per hectare. The
following table summarizes the amount and type fertilizers that was applied uniformly

to each pot.

Table 11. Guide for fertilization of tomato using conventional fertilizers.

MODE OF TIMING FERTILIZER &
APPLICATION RECOMMENDED RATE*
Basal At transplanting 10.0 g (14-14-14)

2nd sidedressing 4 weeks after transplanting 15.0 g (14-14-14) + 5.0 g (0-0-60)/plant
3rd sidedressing 6 weeks after transplanting 15.0 g (14-14-14) + 5.0 g (0-0-60)/plant

(Source: www/eastwestseed.com/philippines)

d.

Calcium Application. Tomatoes perform best when their soil has a pH level of 6.5 to 7.2.
Based on the soil analysis, the pH of the Sariaya sandy loam is at 5.92, which is acidic.
Lime was therefore added to the soil to increase the pH. Liquid lime was also added to
the soil as a drenching solution in order to have a more rapid effect, since agricultural

lime would have more time to incorporate into the soil.

40

e. Irrigation. Distilled water was used in irrigating all pots throughout the growing period
of the tomato. Newly transplanted seedlings were watered daily until they have
recovered (1-2 weeks). Tomato is most sensitive to water deficit during flowering,
somewhat sensitive immediately after transplanting and during fruit development and
least sensitive during vegetative growth. After seedling recovery, irrigation was done
only when the soil gets dry.

f. Staking/Trellising. Tomato plants were staked 3-4 weeks after transplanting. The
tomato plants were trellised with wooden stakes to keep the fruits and foliage off the
ground.

g. Pruning. Pruning, or the selective removal of side shoots, results to earlier maturity,
bigger size, uniformed fruits and ensures proper fruit color as it allows the sun to reach
the fruits. Pruning was done regularly, starting at an early stage because when done later
in the season, it becomes difficult to distinguish between the main stem and the suckers
(Hanson et al., 2001).

h. Pest and Diseases. Tomatoes are susceptible to diseases. Damping-off bacterial wilt,
bacterial spot, fusarium wilt, late blight, nematodes and a number of viral diseases are
some of the diseases that could infect tomatoes. High population of cutworm and
armyworm can also contribute to the loss in production, as well as the attack of whitefly
that carries viral diseases. The damage on the leaf of leafminer also affects the ability
of the plant to manufacture food, thus reducing the capacity to develop fruits (FAO,
2000). Tomato plants were given ample spacing to allow for proper air circulation,
which helps the foliage dry faster. Irrigation was done at the base of the tomato plant.

When blight or powdery mildew has infected leaves, these were immediately removed

41

and destroy them to help prevent the disease from spreading (Hanson et al., 2001; FAO,
2000).

i. Harvesting. Fruits were harvested at the mature green stage. Tomatoes harvested at
the mature green stage will ripen into a product indiscernible from vine-ripened fruit.
Yields reported were marketable fruit or total yield (marketable plus culls). Fruits were
culled for cracks, deformity, blossom end rot and other damage. All culled fruit were

weighed.
Growth parameters gathered

The growth parameters that were measured at a weekly interval were the following: plant
height (cm), number of leaves per plant, number of clusters per plant, number of buds per plant,
number of flowers per plant, number of fruits per cluster, and SPAD readings using a handheld

Chlorophyll meter.
Plant tissue analysis

At 54 DAP, one representative plant was randomly selected from each treatment replicate
and harvested for destructive analyses. After air drying for 24 hours, the roots, stem, and leaves
were separated and oven dried at 80°C for 72 hours. The above-ground biomass was determined
and the plant tissue samples were prepared for tissue analysis of total N (Kjeldahl method),
Total P (Vanadomolybdate method), Total K (Flame emission photometry), and Zn, B, Ca, Mg,
Mn, Cu, and Fe analyses via Inductively-Coupled Plasma — Optical Emission Spectroscopy
(ICP-OES). Laboratory samples were digested using a microwave digester. All tissue analyses
were performed in the Soils Chemistry Laboratory and Analytical Services Laboratory,

Division of Soil Science, Agricultural Systems Institute - College of Agriculture and Food

42

Science (ASI-CAFS), University of the Philippines Los Bafios. During harvest (74 DAP),

another set of plant tissue samples were subjected to the same methods of analyses.
Yield and yield components

Fruits were harvested during color break, or at Peel Color Index 2 (Green with a tinge of
orange). During harvest, the fruits were sorted in terms of quality (marketable and non-
marketable). The yield data that were gathered during and after harvest period were the
following: marketable yield (kg per plant, t ha‘'), non-marketable yield (kg/plant, t ha’), fruit

length and diameter (mm), and single fruit weight (g).

Activity 3. Evaluation of postharvest quality of harvested tomato as

influenced by nano ZnO foliar fertilizers

The newly harvested tomatoes were distributed according to the fertilizer treatments.
Their maturity were first checked in order to ensure uniformity. For all the postharvest analyses,
tomatoes with Peel Color Index 2 (definite break in color but not > 10%) (Table 15, Figure 6)
and Visual Quality Rating of 9-8 (excellent, field fresh), were selected for uniformity. The
tomatoes were then washed and then air dried prior to analysis. Each treatment type comprised
of three fruit replicates. All postharvest analyses were performed in the Postharvest
Horticulture Training and Research Center, Institute of Crop Science, University of the

Philippines Los Banos.

43

Table 12. Peel color index (PCI) for tomato.
PCI DESCRIPTION

1 Completely green

Breaker, definite break in color but not > 10%
Turning, more green than yellow, orange or pink
Green = yellow, orange, pink or red

More yellow, orange, pink or red than green

a nun & WB N

Fully red or yellow or orange or pink

Figure 6. Tomato fruits arranged according to PCI 1 to 6 (left to right).

Table 16. Visual quality rating (VQR) for tomato.

VOR QUALITY DESCRIPTION
9-8 Excellent, field fresh
7-6 Good, defects minor
5-4 Fair, defects minor, limit of marketability
3 Poor, defects serious
2 Limit of edibility

1 Non-edible under usual conditions


44

Data were collected on the following postharvest parameters:

a. Firmness. Fruit firmness was determined by puncture tests using a penetrometer.
Results were expressed in kg-force as the mean of two (2) random measurements taken

along the equatorial region of each tomato fruit.

b. Total Soluble Solids (TSS). 1n order to determine the TSS, thirty (30) g tomato fruit
flesh was homogenized in 30 mL distilled water and filtered using cotton. TSS,
expressed as “Brix, of the fruit extract (filtrate) was measured using a portable handheld

refractometer.

Total soluble solids (Brix) = Refractometer reading in “Brix x DF
Where: DF = dilution factor

Vuz0 in mL

=1+

fresh weight of sample in g

c. Juice pH. Using the filtrate from the TSS analysis, the juice pH was measured using a
Horiba™ table-top digital pH meter. Means of two readings were recorded per fruit

juice extract.

d. Titratable Acidity (TA). Titratable acidity of tomato was determined using standardized
0.1N NaOH solution as titrant and phenolphthalein as indicator. A 5 mL of the tomato
extract was titrated using 0.1N NaOH until the faint pink endpoint. The fruit extract was
obtained by homogenizing thirty (30) g of fruit pulp using a blender with 30 mL distilled

water. The mixture was then blended at high velocity using a blender, then filtered

45

through a cotton. The results were expressed as percentage of malic acid (mg/100g of

fresh weight) (Wanitchang et al., 2010).

(meq NaOH) x (meg Malic acid)

7 ; - x 100
weight equivalent of aliquot

%Titratable acidity =

Where:

meq NaOH = milliequivalents of NaOH (Normality of std. NaOH x
Volume NaOH used in mL)

Meg Malic acid = milliequivalent weight of Malic acid (0.067 Meq)

Weight equivalent of aliquot (pulp analysis), g =

fresh weight of sample in g

x Vay
fresh weight ofsample + Vaomo  2#4¥ot

j. Ascorbic Acid Content. Tomato pulp (30 g) was crushed to a paste-like state for
approximately two (2) minutes (with intermittent stops to minimize heating) using a
blender. Vitamin C content of the fruit was determined by redox titration of ascorbic acid
with 2,6-dichloroindophenol (DICP) as titrant. The reaction involves the oxidation ascorbic
acid present in the fruit extract by DCIP until all ascorbic acid have been oxidized resulting
to an excess of the titrant. Any slight excess of unreacted DICP will result to a change in
color of solution from red to brown which is considered the end point of titration.
Standardization of indophenol blue solution:

Five (5) mL metaphosphoric acid—acetic acid solution and 2.0 mL ascorbic acid standard
solution was poured into each of three 50-mL Erlenmeyer flasks. Using a funnel, the buret
was filled with indophenol solution (dye) and the initial buret reading was recorded.

Titration was done by slowly adding indophenol solution with constant swirling to standard

46

ascorbic acid solution until a light but distinct rose-pink color persists for >5 s (takes about
15-17 mL). The final buret reading was recorded and the volume of dye used was
calculated. Blanks were prepared by pipetting 7.0 mL metaphosphoric acid-acetic acid
solution into each of three 50-mL Erlenmeyer flasks. Same volume of distilled water
approximately equal to the volume of dye used above (i.e., average volume of dye used to
titrate three standard samples) were added.

Titration of tomato extract:

Titration followed the same procedure as described above. The initial and final buret
readings for each titration of the blank were recorded and the volume of the dye used was
calculated (Nielsen, 2010). Another 5 mL metaphosphoric acid-acetic acid solution and 2
mL tomato juice extract was placed into a 50-mL Erlenmeyer flask. Each samples was
titrated with the standardized indophenol dye solution until a light but distinct rose-pink
color persists for >5 s. The initial and final readings were recorded and difference was

calculated to determine the amount of dye used for each titration (Nielsen, 2010).

mg ascorbic acid in volume of standard solution titrated
[(average volume dye solution to titrate standards) —
(average volume dye used to titrate blank)

Titer =F =

mg ascorbic acid
Se) 2mL

mg ascorbic acid in volume of standard solution titrated = ( Te
m

_ acid F V
mg ascorbic —- = (X-B)x (=) x (5)

E Y,

Where: X= average mL for sample titration

B= average mL for sample blank titration


47

F= titer of dye(=mg ascorbic acid equivalent to 1.0 mL

indophenol standard solution)
E= mL assayed (=2mL)
V= volume of initial assay solution (=7 mL)

Y= volume of sample aliquot titrated (=7 mL)

Statistical analysis

All results were presented as means of treatments. The Analysis of variance (ANOVA)
was computed for the measured traits as affected by each treatment using the Statistical Tool
for Agricultural Research (STAR) developed by the Biometrics and Breeding Informatics of
the Plant Breeding, Genetics and Biotechnology Division (PBGBD) of the International Rice
Research Institute (IRRI). Comparison among means was done using the Tukey’s honesty

significant different (HSD) test.

48

CHAPTER 4

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Optimization Study 1: Synthesis Method for Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles

In this study, two different synthesis methods were compared in terms of efficiency in
the preparation of ZnO nanoparticles. In each method, the precursor for Zinc oxide and the type
of precipitating agent were varied, as well as the temperature during drying, which has a direct
implication on crystal formation of ZnO (Table 14). This part of the study was done primarily

to determine the most suitable starting materials for the ZnO nanoparticles.

Table 14. Method parameters for synthesis of ZnO nanoparticles.

Method Zinc source Precipitating Temp and duration of drying

no. agent
1 ZnSO4(H20); NH4OH 60°, 100° 8h

2 ZnCh NaOH 60°, 100°, 200°, 300° (2-4 h)

The synthesis products QZ1 and QZ2 were subjected to characterization test using Scanning
Electron Microscopy to determine the particle size and morphology of the nanoparticles. The
images in Figure 7 and Figure 8 were generated using a Hitachi™ TM4000 Scanning Electron
Microscope (SEM) and analyzed in Nanotech Analytical Services and Training Corp (NASAT
Corp.), Muntinlupa City, Philippines. Both SEM images show the synthesized nano ZnO at
10,000x magnification. The ZnO appear as rod-shaped, or strand-like, with at least one
dimension measured at less than 100 nm. However, the nanoparticles appear to be aggregated,
or agglomerated to one another. This is an inherent property of nanoparticles, owing to their

extremely large surface area to volume ratio. The ZnO generated from ZnCl2 and NaOH

49

appeared to be less aggregated and had a smaller average particle size as compared to the ZnO

produced from Zn sulfate + NHsOH.

Figure 7. SEM image of ZnO nanoparticles prepared from ZnCl2 + NaOH.

Figure 8. SEM image of ZnO nanoparticles synthesized from ZnSO4 + NH4OH.

50

From this optimization study, it was therefore concluded that, Zinc chloride was a better
starting material as compared to Zinc sulfate in the synthesis of nano ZnO, since the former
produces crystals that are not only smaller in size, but also less aggregated and less clustered
with one another as compared to the latter. In the preparation of foliar fertilizer, these properties
are desirable, since more uniform dispersion and more absorption of the ZnO can be achieved

when using less aggregated and smaller sized particles.

Optimization study 2: Optimization of synthesis parameters for nano ZnO
using optimized starting material from study 1.

In order to produce smaller-sized and less aggregated nano ZnO, a second optimization
study was conducted by varying the reaction conditions, particularly the pH and temperature of
the reaction mixture, and temperature during drying and calcination (furnace) of the precipitate.

The effect of adding a cationic surfactant was also tested (Table 15).

Table 15. Optimization of synthesis parameters for ZnO nanoparticles.

Volume of Vol of NaOH Drying/ Surfactant Appearance _ Product

ZnCl, (0.4M) (0.8 M) P Calcination of product Code

100.0 25.0 7.5 400°C, 6hrs None pele -
precipitate

100.0 25.0 7.5 400°C, 1 hr None ve -
precipitate

50.0 25.0 75 400°C,1hr None Yellow -
precipitate

50.0 30.0 11.5 200°C,2hrs CTAB White NZI
precipitate

50.0 30.0 7.7 200°C,2hrs ~CTAB Kate NZ2

precipitate


51

Zinc chloride reacts with sodium hydroxide to form a white colored Zinc hydroxide
precipitate, while leaving sodium chloride in the aqueous state, as shown by the following

equation:
ZnCl, + 2NaOH > Zn(OH)2 + 2NaCcl
After drying, Zn(OH)2 was completely converted to into ZnO, as illustrated by the equation:

Zn(OH), + high temp + CTAB — nano ZnO, + H2,0

Temperature had a clear effect on the growth rate of salt crystals. Based on classical
nucleation theory, the variables that effect the nucleation rate are the supersaturation,
temperature, and interfacial tension. Increases in temperature or supersaturation, or a decrease
in the interfacial tension are expected to produce an increased nucleation rate (Mullin, 1993).
In theory, high temperature grows crystals faster as compared to room temperature and cold
temperature conditions. This is because a higher temperature increases the rate of evaporation
of the solvent, thereby speeding up the rate of growth. Different temperatures produce different
amounts of crystals. Colder solutions contract, forcing minerals closer together, thus creating
bonds, but catching impurities in their crystal lattice at the same time. These impurities interrupt
the crystal pattern, forming a larger number of smaller crystals. In warmer temperatures, the
distance between molecules is greater, which allows crystals to form larger, purer shapes at a
much more uniform rate than can occur at colder temperatures. This is the reason why the
temperature during crystal growth was kept higher than room temperature, at a minimum of 80

degrees Celsius.

In order to decrease the interfacial tension, CTAB was introduced into the solution in

the nano ZnO synthesis as a cationic surfactant. The growth process of ZnO in the presence of

52

CTAB is completely different as compared to when CTAB is not added. CTAB is an ionic
compound, which ionizes completely in water. The resulting cation is a positively charged
tetrahedron with a long hydrophobic tail, while the growth unit for ZnO crystal is considered to
be Zn(OH)2—4Zn(OH)4-, which also has a tetrahedron geometry, but it is negatively charged.
The positively charged CTAB ions passivate the ionized oxygen O on the surface of ZnO seeds
by electrostatic interaction, which suppresses the growth of ZnO crystal. Thus, the ZnO nano
particles with smaller size are obtained in the presence of CTAB. The influence of CTAB on
ZnO morphology can also be attributed to the reduction of surface tension of solution by CTAB,
which lowers the energy to form a new phase and ZnO crystal. Therefore, nanocrystals could
form in a lower super saturation. Moreover, CTAB could also be considered to influence the
erosion process of Zinc and the growth process of ZnO by the electrostatic and stereo-chemical

effects.

The synthesis optimization parameters were narrowed down to two different methods:
NZ1 and NZ2 (Table 16), since the other methods produced yellow-colored precipitate,
implying the presence of impurities in the precipitate. Pure zinc oxide appears as white crystals
in nature. The two methods that produced pure white crystals were labelled ZN1 and ZN2. The
only parameter that differed between the two methods was the solution pH during

crystallization.

Both NZ1 and NZ2 were synthesized using the same starting materials: ZnCl2 and
NaOH; but under different reaction conditions. NZ1 was synthesized at pH 7.0, whereas NZ2
was synthesized at pH 7.5 but the resulting solution was adjusted to pH 11.5 using 1.0 N NaOH.
A cationic surfactant, CTAB, was added, in order to promote dispersion between the nano ZnO

particles.

53
Characterization of the synthesized ZnO nanoparticles

The ZnO nanoparticles synthesized from the second optimization study were subjected
to characterization tests using standard instrumentation techniques for nanoparticle studies.
ZnO synthesized from different methods were compared in terms of particle size and
morphology, degree of aggregation, and chemical purity. Technical grade zinc oxide was also
analyzed using the same instrumentation techniques, and results were compared with that of the

synthesized nano ZnO.

Scanning Electron Microscopy — Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy (SEM-
EDS). In order to characterize the particle size and elemental composition, the ZnO
nanoparticles were subjected to SEM-EDS analysis. The images shown in Figures 9 and 10
show ZnO nanoparticles at 15,000x and 20,000x magnification, respectively, using a Hitachi™

TM4000 Scanning Electron Microscope with Bruker™ Energy Dispersive X-Ray accessory.

The SEM images for the ZnO samples produced from ZN1 and ZN2 show that the rod-
shaped ZnO particles are less than 100nm in size, thus satisfying the size requirement for
nanoparticles. In terms of particle size, the average particle size from six readings (measured
in the smaller dimension) for ZN1 is 45.65 nanometers, whereas that of ZN2 is 45.35

nanometers.

The property that distinguished ZN1 from ZN2 was the degree of aggregation of the
nanoparticles. ZN1 had more dispersion of nanoparticles than ZN2, as evident from the SEM
images showing more discernable individual particles in ZN1 than ZN2. Nanoparticles, owing
to their extremely high surface area, tend to aggregate with each other. It was therefore verified

that more dispersed nano ZnO can be achieved by precipitation at pH 7, as compared to pH 11.

Figure 9. SEM image of ZnO nanoparticles prepared from ZnCl2 +
NaOH + CTAB; at pH 7.7, & calcined at 200 °C for 2 hrs.

Figure 10. SEM image of ZnO nanoparticles prepared from ZnCl2 +
NaOH + CTAB; adjusted pH from 7.5 to 11.5 & calcined
at 200 °C for 2 hrs.

54

55

In terms of elemental composition via EDX analysis (Table 16, Fig 10-11), ZN1 (pH 7)
produced a higher Zn% (59.96%) as compared to ZN2 method (pH 11.5), at 41.45%. The
percentage of oxygen was also higher in ZN1 (26.83%) relative to ZN2 (5.61%), which could
indicate that more ZnO molecules were produced in ZN1 method. Moreover, ZN2 had more
chloride impurities (52.95%) as compared to ZN1 (13.21%). The Cl impurities from the ZnCl2
starting material may have been trapped within the crystal lattices during crystal growth, or
could be adhered onto the surface of the crystals. This was addressed by washing the ZnO

precipitate more liberally using hot deionized water during filtration, and prior to calcination.

Table 16. Elemental composition of ZnO samples using EDX.

MASS %
ELEMENTS
ZN1 ZN2
Zn 59.96 41.45
oO 26.83 5.61
cl 13.21 52.95
Total 100.00 100.00
cps/eV
40 ah
7 ai
i A
2 4 6 8 10 12 14

Figure 11. EDX spectrum of nano ZnO (ZN1).

56

Figure 12. EDX spectrum of nano ZnO (ZN2).

X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) Spectroscopy. The ZnO products were also subjected to
X-ray fluoresence (XRF) spectroscopy in order to quantify the percentage of Zinc oxide in the
sample. XRF is a non-destructive analytical technique used to determine the elemental
composition of materials. XRF analyzers determine the chemistry of a sample by measuring
the fluorescent (or secondary) X-ray emitted from a sample when it is excited by a primary X-

ray source.

In this study, the model of XRF that was used to characterize the samples was a MESA-
50 Horiba Scientific X-ray Fluorescence Analyzer. The XRF results, summarized in Table 18
show that the ZnO composition of the synthesized material was 90.39% (Table 17, Fig. 13).
The Chloride ions that were detected in the XRF Spectra (Figure 13) were the aforementioned
impurities from the Zinc chloride starting material. The characterization test using XRF
Spectroscopy therefore confirms the purity of the synthesized nano ZnO. The obtained purity
of 90.39% in the synthesized nano ZnO is comparable with the technical grade nano ZnO

(Sigma-Aldrich), which is at 99% purity.

57

Table 17. XRF results for nano ZnO.

Mee Concentration, %
Elements
ZnO 90.3915
cl 9.5758
Fe 0.0152
Ni 0.0175

Figure 13. XRF Spectra for synthesized ZnO nanoparticles (ZN1).

Fourier Transform — Infrared Spectroscopy (FT-IR). The identification of the
atomic arrangement and the concentrations of the chemical bonds present in the samples was
carried out using Fourier Transform-Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR), wherein the percentage
transmission and wave number are the output. Ideally, in the spectrogram for ZnO
nanoparticles, there is a characteristic sharp peak at around 400-470 cm™! which can be
attributed to Zn-O stretching vibrations, but depending on synthesis and other experimental
conditions, weak bands positioned at 520 cm”!, 566 cm’! and 665 cm’! are also possible to appear
in the FT-IR spectrum (Hernandez et al., 2007). The FT-IR spectra for sample ZN1 and ZN2

are shown on Figure 14.

58

Figure 14. FT-IR Spectra of two different ZnO nanoparticles (ZN1 and ZN2) synthesized at
varying reaction conditions.

The FT-IR spectra of samples ZN1 and ZN2 are shown in Figure 11. An overlay of the
red and blue-colored line shows the spectra for ZN1 and ZN2, respectively. The distinct peaks
at 506.33 cm"! and 515.19"! for ZN1 and ZN2, respectively, matches the characteristic peak of
ZnO. As reference, an FT-IR analysis was also conducted for a technical grade ZnO
nanopowder, and the FT-IR spectrum is shown in Figure 15. A distinct peak was also observed
in the spectrum at 502.89 cm’! due to the ZnO bond. This therefore confirms the presence of

Zn=O bonds in the synthesized nano ZnO.

59

Figure 15. FT-IR Spectra of ZnO nanopowder (<100 nm, Sigma-Aldrich, ~80% Zn basis).

The solution pH had a notable effect upon the number of crystals produced during
precipitation. In this study, it was observed via SEM imaging that at the solution pH of 7.7,
remarkably more crystals were produced as compared to the solution pH of 11.5. This is in
accordance to a study by Judge et al. (1999), where it was recorded that as the pH increased
from 4.4 to pH 4.6 the crystal number dropped by a factor of 1.5, whereas the change of pH
from 4.6 to 4.8 resulted in a drop by a factor of 20. This is a significant change over a very
narrow pH range. The effect of pH on number of crystals produced can be attributed to changes
in charge at localized areas on the molecule’s surface, indicating that macromolecule nucleation

rates may be very sensitive to changes in molecular charge distribution brought about by

60

changes in solution conditions. The precipitation of nano ZnO for the foliar fertilizer was
therefore carried out at pH 7.7 rather than at 11.5 as the latter is a more efficient method in
terms of producing higher number of crystals produced, smaller-sized crystals, higher ZnO

purity, and less aggregated nanocrystals.

The results of the characterization tests are sufficient evidence to conclude that ZnO
nanoparticles with high chemical purity, and desirable characteristics as nanoparticles, was
successfully synthesized using ZnCl. and NaOH as starting materials. The synthesized nano

ZnO were then used to prepare foliar fertilizers for the second part of the study.

Activity 2. Application of nano-ZnO and B foliar fertilizer for pot-grown tomato

Initial Soil Characterization

Based on the results of the initial soil characterization (Table 19), it was established that
the soil collected from Sariaya, Quezon was sandy loam. The total N and exchangeable K were
both found to be at intermediate levels, whereas the available P (Bray method) was high. A
high available P in soil, coupled with a sandy soil texture, are conditions that result to Boron
deficiency in the soil. Zinc levels were also found to be below the critical levels in soil. Thus,
the Sariaya sandy loam was an ideal potting mixture to observe the effect of the foliar Zn and
B fertilizers on tomato. The fertilizer recommendation of 200-220-300 (N-P20s-K20) kg/ha
was formulated based on this soil analysis. Soil pH was found to be acidic, thus lime was
applied prior to planting, and frequently throughout the growing period in order to supply
Calcium into the soil. During destructive analysis at 58 DAP and at maturity (74 DAP), the

soils were subjected again to characterization of N, P, K and Zn content.

Table 18. Physical and chemical properties of soil collected from Sariaya, Quezon.

METHOD

PARAMETERS USED VALUES INTERPRETATION
Hyd ; %Sand — 66.89
Soil Texture hed Tr _-¥Silt 30.48 Sandy Loam
metho %Clay — 2.63
pH dH20 5.06 + 0.01 Acidic
OM Walkley & 3.31% + 0.80 Intermediate
Black
CEC Ammonium 0.1062 meq/100g + Intermediate
acetate 0.003
Total N Kjeldahl 0.0721% + 0.008 Intermediate
Avail P Bray 208 ppm + 15 High
Avail K ua 0.461 cmol/kg+ 0.019 _ Intermediate
Photometer
Zn* AAS 0.735 ppm Low
Mn** AAS 4.895 ppm Low
Cu*** AAS 1.46 ppm Low

*Critical deficiency limit for Zn for Phil. Soils: 0.5-1.15 ppm.
**Critical deficiency limit for Mn for Phil. Soils: 5-55 ppm.

*** Critical deficiency limit for Cu for Phil. Soils: 1-5.9 ppm.
(Source: BSWM, 2013)

Application of Zn and B foliar treatments

61

The Zn and B foliar treatments were applied at 40 DAP, 54 DAP, and 68 DAP (Table

19). These dates correspond to critical stages for Zinc requirement during growth period of

Marimax tomato: (i) flower initiation; (ii) after fruit set when it becomes approximately marble

sized; and (iii) at 2 weeks interval of second spray, or the reproductive stage of the tomato

(Sultana et al., 2016). The amount of Boron was increased in subsequent applications since B

62

requirement is higher during the reproductive growth or seed production stage than it is in the

vegetative stage.

Table 19. Treatments based on source and rate of fertilizer application.

SOLUTION CONCENTRATION, ppm

NO. CODE DESCRIPTION FLOWER FRUITING
INITIATION (MARBLE-SIZE) Beet ae
(40 DAP) 54 DAP
1 CTRL Control - - =
2 snz Synthesized 300 300 600
nano ZnO
3 cnz Commercial 200 200 400
nano ZnO
4 BZ Bulk ZnO 200 200 400
5 ZS Zinc sulfate 700 700 1400

Synth. nano 0
6 SNZ +B ZnO + HsBOs 300 Zn +0.2%B 300Zn+03%B 600Zn+04%B

Comm. nano

0, 9, 0,
7 CNZ+B FONm NaN -200Zn+0.2%B 200 Zn+03%B 400 Zn +0.4%B
8  BzZ+B Bulk Zinc 200 Zn +0.2%B 200Zn+03%B 400 Zn +0.4%B
oxide + H3BO3
9 ZS+B neo * 700 Zn+02%B 700Zn+03%B 700 Zn+0.4%B

In calculating for the total amount of Zn and B that will be supplied to each plant, the
following factors were considered: desirable levels of Zn and B in tomato plant tissue, the purity
of the Zn and B source, and the percent Zn and B content, as summarized in Tables 20 and 21.

The amount of boron that was added was the same for all foliar solutions from Treatments 6-9.

According to a study by Marschner (1995), the leaf concentration of Zinc that is required
for adequate growth of tomato is 15-20 mg Zn kg! DW of plant, whereas for Boron, the

desirable concentration is 40-60 mg B kg"! DW of plant (Sainju et al., 2012). In the soil, the

63

desirable concentration range for Zinc is at 10 to 100 mg kg “' with average at 80 mg kg =
whereas for Boron, the optimum concentration range is at 2 to 100 mg kg “| with an average of

30 mg kg”.

Table 20. Amount of Zn supplied per plant using different Zn sources.

CODE %Zn %PURITY AMOUNT SUPPLIED/ PLANT, mg

40DAP S54DAP 68DAP TOTAL

SNZ 60 90 8.1 8.1 16.0 32
CNZ 80 99 8.0 8.0 16.0 32
BZ 80 99 8.0 8.0 16.0 32
ZS 23 99 8.0 8.0 16.0 32

Table 21. Amount of B supplied per plant using Boric acid.

B SUPPLIED/PLANT, mg
40DAP 54DAP 68DAP TOTAL
17.5 99 18 27 35 80

%BORON PURITY

Plant height of tomato

Plant height of tomato was significantly different among treatments starting at 46 DAP
(vegetative stage). The SNZ+B treatment was significantly taller than the control treatment,
but was not significantly different with the rest of the treatments during the vegetative stage

(Figure 16). The differences in plant height were not significant during the flowering stage (53

64

DAP), but at 64 DAP and 74 DAP, which marked the fruiting and maturity stages, respectively,
the SNZ+B treated tomatoes were significantly taller than the control. During this period,
maximum plant height was observed in the SNZ+B treatment, followed by the SNZ treatment,
and CNZ+B treatment, whereas the lowest plant height was observed in the control. This
implies that the combination of Zn and B application has resulted to a significant increase in
plant height for tomato. These results are in accordance to the results in a study by Hatwar et
al. (2003), where plant height of tomato also increased due to the foliar application of Zn and
B. Zinc is a component of several enzymes and therefore affects many metabolic processes in
the plant. Zinc is an essential component in the synthesis for tryptophan, a precursor of indole
acetic acid (IAA), which plays a key role in both root and shoot development. Zinc helps on
auxin synthesis and in association with boron helps on cell wall development and cell

differentiation of plants (Basavarajeswari et al., 2008).

VEGETATIVE FLOWERING FRUITING maturity

Figure 16. Plant height of tomato as influenced by varying foliar treatments.

65
Number of clusters per plant

During the vegetative and flowering stages, no significant differences in terms of
numbers of clusters per plant were observed between the treatments. At 64 DAP, which marked
the fruiting stage of the tomato, the SNZ+B treatment had a significantly higher number of
clusters as compared to the control (Fig. 17). During maturity (74 DAP), the SNZ+B treatment
had the highest number of clusters (5.43), followed by SNZ (5.00), and CNZ+B (4.67) and BZ

(4.67). The control treatment had the lowest number of clusters (3.33) during the maturity stage.

ant

eee
‘
1

VEGETATIVE FLOWERING FAUMNG maturity

Figure 17. Number of clusters per tomato plant as influenced by varying foliar treatments.

The application of synthesized nano ZnO with Boron therefore significantly increased
the number of clusters per tomato plant. A high number of clusters in plants is advantageous
since more flower buds can be produced, and therefore more flowers can bloom and eventually

these flowers will develop into fruits. This could be attributed to the key role of Zn and B in

66

RNA synthesis and DNA formation in plants. Zinc also affects the indole acetic acid content
in plants which is important for regulation of plant growth. Thus, the concentration of Zn and

B in the plant is directly proportional to leaf growth and development in tomato.

Number of leaves per plant

The difference in the number of leaves per plant was highly significant (P<0.01) among
treatments at 64 DAP (fruiting stage), where SNZ+B treatment had the maximum number of
leaves (14.14), followed by SNZ (13.78), CNZ (12.67), CNZ+B (12.00), while the control
treatment was the minimum (11.00) (Fig. 18). During the maturity stage (74 DAP), maximum
number of leaves (average) was observed in SNZ+B treatment, at 15.90, which was found to be
significantly higher than that in control treatment (11.58) and the ZS treatment (12.22), but not
statistically higher with the rest of the treatments. The trend in the results for the number of
leaves per plant are in accordance to a study by Singh and Tiwari (2013), where number of

leaves of tomato also increased due to the foliar application of Zn and B.

Figure 18. Number of leaves per tomato plant as influenced by varying foliar treatments.

67

Number of flowers

During the flowering stage of tomato, the maximum number of flowers was recorded in
SNZ treatment. During the fruiting stage (64 DAP), maximum number of flowers per plant was
recorded in the SNZ treatment at 18.11, followed by SNZ treatment at 16.56. The lowest
number of flowers per plant was observed in the ZS+B treatment (10.89). The same trend was
observed during the maturity stage (74 DAP) (Figure 19). Statistical analysis however revealed
that the difference in number of flowers between treatments was not significant across all
sampling periods. Boron plays a significant role in the pollination and reproductive growth of
tomato, and when present in adequate amounts, can positively influence the production of
tomato flowers and fruits. Zinc, on the other hand, is responsible for the metabolism of RNA,
stimulates carbohydrates, proteins and the DNA formation, thereby increasing the potential of

the plant to produce flowers and eventually fruits.

VEGETATIVE FLOWERIN FRUITING MaTuRITY

Figure 19. Number of flowers per tomato plant as influenced by varying foliar treatments.

68

Percent fruit set and number of fruits per plant

Highest percent fruit set among treatments was recorded in SNZ+B in all sampling
periods (Figure 20). The number of fruits per plant was not significantly different among
treatments during the first 3 sampling periods. At 64 DAP, SNZ+B treatments had significantly
higher number of fruits as compared to the control and the rest of the treatments except SNZ.
At 74 DAP, the maximum number of fruits was observed at SNZ+B treatment, followed by
SNZ, CNZ, CNZ+B, and BZ+B (Figure 21). Previous studies have already reported that the
combined application of zinc and boron increased the number of fruits per plant in tomato
(Yadav et al, 2001). Boron is known to be involved in flowering and fruit formation, thus its

deficiency can affect fruit set and yield in tomato.

|
|

Figure 20. Percent fruit set per tomato plant as influenced by varying foliar treatments.

69

Figure 21. Number of fruits per tomato plant as influenced by varying foliar treatments.

SPAD units

SPAD readings were measured using a chlorophyll meter in order to determine the effect
of the foliar treatments on the relative chlorophyll content of the plants. Marked difference
among treatments were observed during the vegetative (46 DAP), flowering (53 DAP), and
maturity stage (74 DAP). Maximum values of SPAD readings for all treatments were observed
during flowering stage and decreased during the subsequent sampling periods (Figure 22).
During maturity stage, the highest SPAD readings were recorded in plants from SNZ+B
treatment (Table 28). Statistical analysis revealed significant differences between treatments

during the flowering and maturity stages only.

Zinc is known to play a key role in chlorophyll synthesis in plants. As a component of

enzymes, zinc catalyzes the synthesis of fructose-6-phosphate, an important metabolite in

70

glycolysis and therefore photosynthesis. Zn increases the biosynthesis of chlorophyll and
carotenoids ultimately proving beneficial for the photosynthetic machinery of the plant system

(Aravind & Prasad, 2004).

VEGETATIVE FLOWERING FRUITING MaTURITY

Figure 22. Leaf SPAD readings of tomato plants as influenced by varying foliar treatments.

Biomass Production and Total Nutrient Uptake

During the first destructive sampling at 58 DAP, the SNZ+B treatment produced the
highest amount of above-ground biomass, at 0.42 tons per hectare while the minimum was
recorded in the control treatment at 0.20 tons per hectare. However, the aboveground biomass
production was not significantly different among treatments at 58 DAP. The dry matter yield
during harvest was highest in SNZ+B treatment, and this was significantly different compared
to all other treatments. The lowest amount of dry matter yield was recorded in the control

treatment. These results are in accordance to the study by Panwar et al, (2012), which also

71

revealed that tomato plant exposed to a concentration of 20 mg/L ZnO nanoparticles exhibited
maximum growth and biomass production. It was also reported by Alloway (2009) that dry

matter content of the fruits increased progressively with increased doses of boron and zinc.

Application of B and Zn to tomato therefore resulted in a significant response in terms
of total dry weight of plant at harvest. This trend can be attributed to the role of Zinc in
promotion of shoot elongation and fruit set, and therefore in the production of biomass. Zinc
is a co-factor for carbonic anhydrase, an essential enzyme for photosynthesis because of its
property to convert CO2 to HCO3" reversibly. Carbonic anhydrase plays an important part in
stomatal closure, which has an effect on photosynthesis. Thus, the deficiency of Zinc can

influence the biomass production and yield of tomato.

Table 22. Above-ground biomass and Dry Matter Yield of tomato as influenced by varying

foliar treatments.
ABOVE-GROUND BIOMASS, tons ha!
TREATMENTS (FLOWERING STAGE) (MATURITY STAGE)
58 DAP 74 DAP
CTRL 0.20 1.37 be
SNZ 0.30 1.90 b
CNZ 0.36 1.94b
BZ 0.28 1.73 be
zs 0.29 1.93 b
SNZ+B 0.42 2.59 a
CNZ+B 0.35 1.54 be
BZ+B 0.31 1.71 be
ZS+B 0.34 1.21¢
%CV 22.57 11.55
Mean 0.32 1.77
Significance ns **

Means within the same column followed by different letters are significantly different (P<0.05, HSD).
ns = not significant; * significant at P<0.05; ** significant at P<0.01.

72

Zn and B uptake

Tomato plants treated with the nano-sized ZnO (SNZ+B) had a significantly higher Zn
uptake in both stem and leaves as compared to those treated with bulk ZnO, and granular Zinc
sulfate (Table 23-24), This is because particle size can influence agronomic effectiveness of
Zn fertilizers. Decreased particle size results in increased number of particles per unit weight
of applied Zn, and also increases the specific surface area of the fertilizer, which should increase
the dissolution rate of fertilizers with low solubility in water such as zinc oxide (ZnO)

(Mortvedt, 1992).

Since the individual ZnO nanoparticles weigh less than bulk-sized ZnO and granular
ZnO, smaller ZnO particles were used for the same weight, thus resulting in a better distribution
of Zn when applied, and the higher surface area of contact of Zn fertilizer resulted in better Zn

uptake.

Table 23. Tomato Stem Zn concentration as influenced by varying foliar treatments.

[Zn], mg kg {B], mg kg"
TREATMENTS | FLOWERING MATURITY FLOWERING MATURITY
(58 DAP) (74 DAP) (58 DAP) (74 DAP)
CTRL 10.57 b 9.34 1.34 b 1.65 b
SNZ 17.07 ab 26.22 2.78 ab 4.01 b
CNZ 16.65 ab 25.37 2.96 ab 3.72 b
BZ 19.57 a 19.34 2.68 ab 2.51 b
ZS 19.76 a 18.87 2.92 ab 2.03 b
SNZ+B 22.57 a 24.04 4.92 a 6.60 b
CNZ+B 16.30 ab 19.71 3.07 ab 13.34 ab
BZ+B 20.19 a 14.60 4.76 a 7.22 b
ZS+B 21.35 a 15.56 3.55 ab 740 b
%CV 13.16 37.05 32.76 36.94
Mean 18.23 19.23 3.22 5.39
Significance ** ns a **

Means within the same column followed by different letters are significantly different (P<0.05, HSD).
ns = not significant; * significant at P<0.05; ** significant at P<0.01.

Table 24. Tomato Leaf Zn and B concentration as influenced by varying foliar treatments.

[Zn], mg kg! [B], mg kg"
TREATMENTS | FLOWERING | MATURITY | FLOWERING | MATURITY
(58 DAP) (74 DAP) (58 DAP) _ (74 DAP)
CTRL 7.81 b 16.44 d 2.47 b 16.44 d
SNZ 49.06 a 47.76 b 2.75 b 47.76 b
CNZ 33.86 ab 45.20 bed 1.12 b 45.20 bed
BZ 27.61 ab 17.85 cd 1.20 b 17.85 cd
ZS 40.35 ab 45.48 be 1.39 b 45.48 be
SNZ+B 47.17 a 79.12 a 20.61 ab 79.12 a
CNZ+B 42.89 ab 65.46 ab 35.11 a 65.46 a
BZ+B 36.74 ab 49.63 b 28.29 a 49.63 b
ZS+B 47.94 a 61.48 ab 19.70 ab 61.48 ab
%CV 34.52 20.86 55.60 20.86
Mean 37.05 47.60 12.51 47.60
Significance i ae Lh a

Means within the same column followed by different letters are significantly different (P<0.05, HSD).
ns = not significant; * significant at P<0.05; ** significant at P<0.01.

Table 41. Total N uptake of tomato as influenced by varying foliar treatments.

TOTAL N UPTAKE, kg ha"!
TREATMENTS FLOWERING MATURITY
(58 DAP) _____(4DAP)
CTRL 3.98 b 21.83 d
SNZ 7.83 ab 30.42 bed
CNZ 10.58 a 37.75 ab
BZ 6.97 ab 26.03 ed
VAS 7.16 ab 34.56 be
SNZ+B 11.30a 48.70 a
CNZ+B 8.16 ab 35.74 be
BZ+B 7.93 ab 38.61 ab
ZS+B 7.09 ab 35.42 be
%CV 20.24 11.08
Mean 7.89 34.34
Significance ** “

Means within the same column followed by different letters are significantly different (P<0.05, HSD).
ns = not significant; * significant at P<0.05; ** significant at P<0.01.

Yield components

73

74

The fruits were harvested at 80-85 DAP, at the breaker stage, or at Peel Color Index 2,
which is green with a tinge of orange color. The SNZ+B treatment produced the highest
marketable yield at 14.28 tons ha’, followed by SNZ (12.99 tons ha”), CNZ (11.49 tons ha"),
while the control treatment produced the lowest yield (4.99 tons ha’!) (Table 26). Statistically,
the differences between treatments were significant in terms of the marketable yield of tomato.
The single fruit weight was also found to be significantly different between treatments, with
maximum values from SNZ+B treatment at 47.23 g, followed by CNZ (43.47 g) and SNZ
(42.75), while the lowest values in fruit weight was observed in the control treatment (32.27 g).
A similar trend was also observed in fruit length, where control treatment had the lowest values.
In terms of fruit diameter or width, the control treatment was significantly lower (P<0.05) as

compared to the rest of the treatments, which were all statistically similar in terms of width.

Table 26. Yield data of tomato as influence by varying foliar treatments.

TREATMENTS MARKETABLE SINGLE FRUIT FRUIT FRUIT
YIELD, tons/ha WEIGHT, g LENGTH,mm WIDTH, mm
CTRL 4.99 b 32.27 ¢ 35.85 d 32.42 b
SNZ 12.994 42.75 ab 45.32 abc 41.0l a
CNZ 11.49 ab 43.47 ab 46.41 ab 42.90 a
BZ 8.39 ab 39.64 abc 43.34 abc 40.23 a
ZS 11.73 ab 36.39 be 44.28 abc 40.63 a
SNZ+B 14.28 a 47.23 a 47.40a 39.21 a
CNZ+B 9.69 ab 39.92 abc 41.76 be 41.68 a
BZ+B 8.70 ab 33.14 ¢ 40.49 cd 39.81 a
ZS 6.04 b 36.99 be 44.16 abc 39.61 a
%CV 24.01 7.57 4.15 4.36
Mean 12.27 39.09 43.22 39.72
Significance ** ek ak *

Means within the same column followed by different letters are significantly different (P<0.05, HSD).
ns = not significant; * significant at P<0.05; ** significant at P<0.01.

75

The improvement in yield in tomatoes treated with nano Zinc oxide and Boron can be
attributed to the synergistic effects of Zn and B on fruit development in tomato. Zinc is
essential for synthesis of the carbonic anhydrase enzyme and photosynthesis, resulting in
increase in translocation of photosynthates in fruits; and positive effect on retaining flowers and
fruits. Boron, on the other hand, also plays a key role on accumulation of photosynthates that
has correlation with fruit weight. The reduced size of nano ZnO also may have improved the
agronomic effectiveness of the foliar fertilizer, resulting to enhanced yield and fruit quality.
Higher yield due to the application of B and Zinc have also been reported in previous studies

involving vegetable crops (Shukha, 2011).
Soil final characterization

Soil parameters particularly pH, total N, available P (Bray), exchangeable K, and
organic matter were determined after harvest. Soil pH was found to be acidic for all treatments,
and no significant difference was observed statistically. Total N, exchangeable P, exchangeable

K, and organic matter content were also found to be statistically similar for all treatments.
Postharvest Quality of Tomato

The postharvest parameters of the harvested tomatoes are presented in Table _. Total
Soluble Solids (TSS) is a refractometric index that indicates the relative proportion (%) of
dissolved solids in a solution. It is the sum of sugars (sucrose and hexoses), acids (citrate
and malate) and other minor components (phenols, amino acids, soluble pectins, ascorbic
acid and minerals) in the tomato fruit pulp (Beckles, 2012). The total soluble solids (TSS)
was highest in SNZ+B treatment at 6.06 °Brix, which was found to be significantly higher than

the control and the rest of the treatments, except for the SNZ treatment, which had the second

76

highest value, followed by the CNZ+B treatment. The positive effect of Zn on total sugars can
be attributed to its role in the starch and nucleic acid metabolism, and also to the activities of
various enzymes involved in the biochemical reactions during ripening (Alloway, 2009). In
terms of juice pH and firmness, no significant difference was observed among the treatments.
Titratable acidity was highest in SNZ+B, followed by CNZ+B, both of which were significantly

different with the control treatment.

Because acids influence the perception of sweetness, another useful indicator of tomato
taste is the TSS-to-titratable acid (TSS/TA) ratio (Beckles, 2012). There are two primary acids
in tomato, citric and malic (Beckles, 2012). A minimum TSS of 5 and a minimum %TA of 0.4,
respectively (TSS:TA of 12.5), is considered desirable to produce a good-tasting table tomato
(Kader et al., 1977). Only the SNZ+B and SNZ treated fruits had a TSS value of more than
5 and %TA of at least 0.4%. This implies that even without sensory testing, these tomatoes can

be judged as palatable and having a good balance of sweetness and sourness.

In terms of Vitamin C content, maximum values were recorded in the SNZ+B treatment
at 8.60 mg 100g", which was significantly higher than the control treatment but not with the
rest of the treatments. CNZ+B had the second highest vitamin C content at 6.32 mg 100g"
followed by SNZ at 5.97 mg 100g”. This is in accordance to a previous study by Lee and Kader
(2000), where pre-harvest factors including the Zn fertilization had a positive effect on ascorbic

acid content of tomato fruits.

Zinc plays an essential role in ATP and protein synthesis. Zinc is a key component of

RNA polymerase which catalyzes RNA synthesis, which in turn affects production of proteins

77

and manufacturing of carbohydrates. The amount of Zinc therefore directly affects the amount

of sugars in the tomato fruits.

Table 27. Postharvest parameters of tomato as influenced by varying foliar treatments.

TREATMENTS JUICE reg eprixy %TA tssra  FIRMNESS, eis
pH (kg/m?) _mL)
CTRL 4.26 2.89 c 0.22 ¢ 13.58 16.93 2.64 b
SNZ 4.16 5.39 ab 0.41 abc 13.58 28.20 5.97 ab
CNZ 4.27 3.55 be 0.25 ¢ 14.34 21.77 2.55 b
BZ 4.08 3.62 be 0.26 be 13.81 19.84 5.06 ab
ZS 4.45 3.95 be 0.35 abc 12.88 18.88 4.45 ab
SNZ+B 4.19 6.06 a 0.48 a 12.83 28.08 8.60a
CNZ+B 4.13 4.94 abc 0.46 ab 10.84 22.50 6.32 ab
BZ+B 4.27 3.65 be 0.27 be 14.41 18.65 5.36 ab
ZS+B 4.28 3.61 be 0.21¢ 18.30 18.72 4.61 ab
%CV 4.36 16.95 21.59 21.40 22.01 28.38
Mean 4.23 4.18 0.32 13.84 22.12 5.06
Significance ns ae Ls ns ns ae

Means within the same column followed by different letters are significantly different (P<0.05, HSD).
ns = not significant; * significant at P<0.05; ** significant at P<0.01.

78

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

The synthesis method parameters for Zinc oxide nanoparticles were optimized in the
study. Nano zinc oxide was successfully synthesized via a simple alkaline precipitation
technique using Zinc chloride as starting material and sodium hydroxide as the precipitating
agent. The characterization test using SEM-EDX Spectroscopy verified that the synthesized
nano ZnO was less than 100 nm in size, and contained 59% Zinc content with a low degree of
aggregation. XRF Spectrosocopy further revealed that the synthesized nano ZnO was
chemically pure (90.39% ZnO), while FT-IR Spectroscopy analysis confirmed the molecular
structure of ZnO using a commercial technical grade nano ZnO as standard. These results were
sufficient to conclude that the nano ZnO was an ideal source of zinc as foliar fertilizer.

Foliar solutions containing the synthesized nano ZnO and Boric acid as Boron source
were prepared and tested on pot-grown ‘Marimax’ tomato in order to investigate the synergistic
effect of Zn and B on plant growth, yield and postharvest quality.

It was evident from the study that application of the synthesized nano ZnO, in
combination with Boron (SNZ+B treatment), had positive effects on plant height, number of
leaves per plant, number of fruits per plant, clusters per plant, SPAD readings, dry matter yield
and marketable yield. Fertilization with the treatments containing both Zn and B also led to
significant improvements in fruit quality, including higher TSS, %TA, and Vitamin C content,
whereas juice pH, and firmness were unaffected. Among the all treatments, the lowest
performance was recorded in the control treatment.

Zinc and boron improves fruit growth and yield since these micronutrients play key roles

in the synthesis of essential enzymes and growth regulators involved in photosynthesis and

79

carbohydrate synthesis, thereby influencing shoot growth, biomass production, fruit quality,
and yield. Owing to the small size of the ZnO nanoparticles, the particles can easily penetrate
the stomates as they are applied as foliar spray and therefore resulted in more efficient nutrient
use as compared to the commercial ZnO and granular zinc sulfate. Nano-sizing on ZnO also
increased the number of particles per unit weight of applied Zn, while increasing the specific
surface area of the fertilizer, which increased the solubility rate of ZnO in water thereby
enhancing plant uptake. It was therefore concluded that the use of nano ZnO has resulted to a
significant improvement in the effectiveness of the foliar fertilizers and in combination with

Boron at calculated dosages, has enhanced growth yield and postharvest quality of tomato.

80

LITERATURE CITED

ABUSHITA AA, HEBSHI EA, DAOOD HG, BIACS PA. 1997. Determination of antioxidant
vitamins in tomatoes. Food Chemistry, 60: 207-212.

ADAMS P. 1978. Tomatoes in peat. Part I. How feed variations affect yield. Grower 89: 1091,
1093-1094.

ALI MR, MEHRAJB H, JAMAL UDDIN AFM. 2015. Effects of foliar application of zinc and
boron on growth and yield of summer tomato. J. Biosci. Agric. Res. 06(01): 512-517

ALLOWAY BJ. 2009. Soil factors associated with zinc deficien cy in crops and humans.
Environ. Geochem. Health 31: 537-548.

AULD DS. 2001. Zinc coordination sphere in biochemical zinc sites. Biometals. 14: 271-313.

ARAVIND P, PRASAD MNV. 2004. Zinc protects chloroplasts and associated photochemical
functions in cadmium exposed Ceratophyllum demersum L., a freshwater macrophyte.
Plant Science, 166: 1321-1327.

AWODUGBA AO, ILYAS AO. 2013. Synthesis and Characterization of ZnO Nanoparticles
With Zinc Chloride as Zinc Source. Asian Journal of Natural & Applied Sciences, 2: 41-
44,

BARBER §&. 1995. Soil Nutrient Bioavailability, second ed. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New
York, NY.

BASAVARAJESWARI CP, HOSAMNI RM, AJJAPPALAVARA PS, NAIK BH, SMITHA
RP, & UKKUND. 2008. Effect of foliar application of micronutrients on growth, yield
components of Tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill). Karnataka J. Agri. Sci., 21(3),
428-430.

BECKLES DM. 2012. Factors affecting the postharvest soluble solids and sugar content
of tomato fruit. Postharvest Biology and Technology, 63, 129-140

BEHNASSI M, SHAHID AS, D’ SILVA J. 2011. Sustainable Agricultural Development.
Springer Science Business Media, London, 171-184.

BERGER KC, TRUOG E. 1940. Boron deficiencies as revealed by plant and soil tests. J. Am.
Soc. Agron. 32: 297-301.

81

BOSE US, TRIPATHI SK. 1996. Effect of micronutrients on growth, yield and quality of
tomato cv. Pusa Ruby. Crop. Res. Hisar. 12(1): 61-64.

BRENNAN R. 1991. Effectiveness of zinc sulfate and zinc chelate as foliar sprays in alleviating
zinc deficiency of wheat grown on zinc-deficient soils in Western Australia. Aust. J. Exp.
Agric. 31: 831-834.

BROWN PH, CAKMAK I, ZHANG Q. 1993. Forms and function of zinc in plants. In: Zinc in
Soil and Plants, ed. A. D. Robson, Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Kluwer Academic
Publishers pp. 93-106.

BUREAU OF SOILS AND WATER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK. 2013.

CAKMAK I, MARSCHNER H. 1988. Zinc-Dependent Changes in ESR Signals, NADPH
Oxidase and Plasma Membrane Permeability in Cotton Roots. Physiol Plant., 73: 132-
186.

CHERIF J, MEDIOUNI C, AMMAR WB, JEMAL F. 2011. Interactions of zinc and cadmium
toxicity in their effects on growth and in antioxidative systems in tomato plants (Solanum
Lycopersicum). J Environ Sci. 23: 837-844.

CHOO WS, YONG WK. 2011. Antioxidant properties of two species of Hylocereus fruits.
Advances in Applied Science Research, 2(3): 418-425.

COUVREUR P, BARRATT G, FATTAL E, LEGRAND P, VAUTHIER C. 2002. Nanocapsule
technology: a review. Crit Rev Ther Drug Carrier Syst, 19: 99-134.

CROWLEY DE, SMITH W, FABER B, MANTHEY JA. 1996. Zinc fertilization of avocado
trees. HortScience 31, 224-229.

DAS SK. 2014. Role of Micronutrient in Rice Cultivation and Management Strategy in Organic
Agriculture—A Reappraisal. Agricultural Sciences 5: 765-769.

DAVARPANAHA S, TEHRANIFARA A, DAVARYNEJADA G, ABADiAB J,
KHORASANI R. 2016. Effects of foliar applications of zinc and boron nano-fertilizers
on pomegranate (Punica granatum cv. Ardestani) fruit yield and quality. Scientia
Horticulturae 210: 57-64

DAVIS JM, SANDERS DC, NELSON PV, LENGNICK L, & SPERRY WJ. 2003. Boron
Improves Growth Yield, Quality, and Nutrient Content of Tomato. J. Amer. Soc. Hort.
Sci. 128(3):441-446.

DEGEN A, & KOSEC M. 2000. Effect of pH and impurities on the surface charge of zinc oxide
in aqueous solution. J Europena Ceramic Society, 20: 667-73.

82

DEGRYSE F, BAIRD R, MCLAUGHLIN M. 2015. Diffusion and solubility control of
fertilizer-applied zinc: chemical assessment and visualization. Plant Soil 386: 195-204

DU Y, KOPITTKE PM, NOLLER BN, JAMES SA, HARRIS HH, XU ZP, LI P, MULLIGAN
DR, HUANG L. 2015. In situ analysis of foliar zinc absorption and short-distance
movement in fresh and hydrated leaves of tomato and citrus using synchrotron-based X-
ray fluorescence microscopy. Ann. Bot. 115: 41-53.

DUBE BK, PRATIMA S, CHATTERJEE C. 2004. Effects of boron and zinc on the yield and
quality of tomato. Indian J. Hort. 61(1): 48-52.

DUMAS Y, DADOMO M, LUCCA G, GROLIER P, DI LUCCA G. 2003. Effects of
environmental factors and agricultural techniques on antioxidant content of tomatoes.
Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 83, 369-382.

ELMER WH, WHITE JC. 2016. The use of metallic oxide nanoparticles to enhance growth of
tomatoes and eggplants in disease infested soil or soilless medium. Environmental
Science: Nano, Vol. 3, 6: 1072-1079.

FAGERIA NK, BALIGAR VC, CLARK RB. 2002. Micronutrients in crop production.
Advances in Agronomy 77: 189-272.

FAO. 2000. Tomato Integrated Pest Management: An Ecological Guide. Training Resource
Text on Crop Development, Major Agronomic Practices, Disease and Insect Ecology,
Insect pests, Natural Enemies, and Diseases of Tomato.

FERMIA AM. 2016. Administering soil ameliorant to combat Zinc deficiency in Aklan. In:
BSWM website http://www.bswm.da.gov.ph/news/0056/administering-soil-amcliorant-
to-combat-zinc-deficiency-in-aklan, Accessed 12 July 2017.

FERNANDEZ V, BROWN PH. 2013. From plant surface to plant metabolism: the uncertain
fate of foliar-applied nutrients. Front. Plant Sci. 4: 289.

FERNANDEZ V, SOTIROPOULOS T, BROWN PH. 2013. Foliar Fertilization: Scientific
Principles and Field Practices, first ed. IFA, Paris, France.

FISH WW, PERKINS-VEAZIEA P COLLINS JK. 2002. Quantitative assay for lycopene that
utilizes reduced volumes of organic solvents. J. Food Comp. Anal., 15 (3): 309-317.

FLEMING GA. 1980. Essential micronutrients, p.155. In: B.E. Davies (ed.) Boron and
molybdenum. Applied soil trace elements, Wiley, New York.

GALLGHER PA. 1972. Potassium nutrition of tomatoes. Proc. Provisional Glasshouse
Conference, Dublin, England. pp. 13-18.

83

GRAHAM RD, WELCH RM AND BOUIS HE. 2000. Addressing micronutrient nutrition
through enhancing the nutritional quality of staple foods. Advances in Agronomy, 70: 77-
161.

HANSON JT, CHEN CG, KUO R, MORRIS R, OPENA RT. 2001. Suggested cultural
practices for tomato [Online]. AVRDC — the World Vegetable Center. Retrieved from:
http://www.agrifoodgateway.com/articles/suggested-cultural-practices-tomato [27
January 2017].

HATWAR GP, GONDANE SM, URKADE SM, & GAHUKAR OV. 2003. Effect of
micronutrients on growth and yield of chilli. Soils and Crops, 13(1), 123-125.

HERNANDEZ A, MAYA L, SANCHEZ-MORA, SANCHEZ EM. 2007. Sol-Gel Synthesis,
Characterization and Photocatalytic Activity of Mixed Oxide ZnO-Fe20s3. Journal of Sol-
Gel Science and Technology, 42(1): 71-78.

JEFFERY J, UREN N. 1983. Copper and zinc species in the soil solution and the effects of soil
pH. Soil Res. 21: 479-488.

JUDGE RA, JACOBS RS, FRAZIER T, SNELL EH, PUSEY ML. 1999. The Effect of
Temperature and Solution pH on the Nucleation of Tetragonal Lysozyme Crystals.
Biophysical Journal. 77:

KAYA C, HIGGS D. 2002, Response of tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) culture at low zinc.
Scientific Horticulture. 93: 53-64.

KOCEVSKI GV, JAKIMOV NI, JEKIC MM, KOLEVA RL. 1997. The effect of NPK. Mg and
B on the yield, morphological characteristics and quality characteristics of industrial
tomatoes. Acta Hort. 462: 183-186.

KOCHKODAN V, DARWISH NB, HILAL N. 2015. The Chemistry of Boron in Water, In:
Boron Separation Processes. 2: 35-64.

LAGASHETTY A, VENKATARAMAN A. 2005. Polymer Nanocomposites. School of
Chemistry and Biochemistry, Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology.

LARBAT R, LE BO J, BOURGAUD F, ROBIN C, ADAMOWICZ S. 2012. Organ-specific
responses of tomato growth and phenolic metabolism to nitrate limitation. Plant Biol.
(Stuttg) 14 (5): 760-769

LEE SK, KADER AA. 2000. Pre-harvest and postharvest factors influencing vitamin C content
of horticultural crops. Postharvest Biology and Technology, 20: 207 — 220.

LI Z. 2003. Use of surfactant-modified zeolite as fertilizer carriers to control nitrate release.
Microporous and Mesoporous Materials, 63,181—188.

84

LINDSAY WL. 1979. Chemical Equilibria in Soils. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York.

MAGALHAES JR. IC, SOLWA DC, MONNERAT PH. 1980. Levels and methods of boron
application in tomatoes. Pesquisa Agropecuria Brasilesia 10 (2): 153-157 as cited from
Hort. Abstr. 50(4): 2031, 19811.

MARSCHNER H. 1995. Mineral Nutrition of Higher Plants. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

MCBRIDE M, SAUVE S, HENDERSHOT W. 1997. Solubility control of Cu, Zn, Cd and Pb
incontaminated soils. Eur. J. Soil Sci. 48: 337-346.

MERTENS J, SMOLDERS E. 2013. Zinc. In: Alloway, B.J. (Ed.), Heavy Metals in Soils, 22.
Springer, Netherlands, pp. 465-493.

MISRA A, AND NK SRIVASTAVA. 2010. Value addition of essential monoterpene oil(s) in
Geranium (Pelargonium graveolens) on leaf positions for commercial exploitation.
African Journal of Agricultural Research. 15: 2077-2079.

MOHANRAJ VJ, CHEN Y. 2006. Nanoparticles-A Review. Tropical Journal of
Pharmaceutical Research, 5 (1): 561-573.

MONTALVO D, DEGRYSE F, DA SILVA RC, BAIRD R, MCLAUGHLIN MJ. 2016.
Agronomic Effectiveness of Zinc Sources as Micronutrient Fertilizer. Advances in
Agronomy, Volume 139: 215-263.

MORTVEDT JJ. 1992, Crop response to level of water soluble zinc in granular zinc fertilizers.
Fertilizer Research. 33: 249-255.

MORTVEDT JJ, GILKES RJ. 1993. Zinc fertilizers. In: Robson, A.D. (Ed.), Zinc in Soils and
Plants, 55. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, Netherlands, pp. 33-44.

MOZAFAR A. 1993. Role of Boron in seed production, p. 186-206, In U.C. Gupta, (ed.) Boron
and its Role in Crop Production. ed. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida.

MULLIN JW. 1993. Crystallization, 3rd Ed. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford,
England. 176, 194.

NARCISO JO, BALATERO CH. 2008. ‘Rica’: a New Off-Season Tomato Variety
(Lycopersicon esculentum L.). Philippine Journal of Crop Science, 33(3): 94-96.

NAZ RMM, MUHAMMAD §S, HAMID A, BIBI F. 2012. EFFECT OF BORON ON THE
FLOWERING AND FRUITING OF TOMATO. Sarhad J. Agric. Vol.28, No.1, 37-40.

NIELSEN SS. 2010. Food Analysis Laboratory Manual. 2nd Ed. USA: Springer Science
Business Media, LLC. p 55.

85

NONNECKE IBL.1989. Vegetable Production. Avi Book Publishers. New York, USA. pp.200-
229.

NURLIYANA R, ZAHIR IS, SULEIMAN KM, AISYAH MR, RAHIM KK. 2010. Antioxidant
study of pulps and peels of dragon fruits: a comparative study. International Food
Research Journal, 17, 367-375.

OTAKAR R, REZNICEK V, VALSIKOVA M, JURIKOVA T, MLCEK J, KRAMAROVA D.
2010. Antioxidant properties of European Cranberry bush fruit (Viburnum opulus var.
edule). Molecules 15: 4467-4477.

PANWAR J, JAIN N, AKHTAR MS, YUN YS. 2012. Positive effect of Zinc Oxide
nanoparticles on tomato plants: A step towards developing “Nanofertilizers”.

PRASAD TNVKV, P. SUDHAKAR, Y. SREENIVASULU, P. LATHA, V. MUNASWAMY,
REDDY KR, SREEPRASAD TS, SAJANLAL PR, & PRADEEP T. 2012. Effect of
Nanoscale Zinc Oxide Particles on the Germination, Growth and Yield of Peanut, Journal
of Plant Nutrition, 35:6, 905-927

QIAO X, HE Y, WANG Z, LI X, ZHANG K, ZENG H. 2014. Effect of foliar spray of B
carbonic anhydrase expression and enzyme activity in rice (Oryza sativa L.) leaves. Acta
Physiol Plant. 36:263-272.

QU F, MORAIS PC. 2001. The pH dependence of the surface charge density in oxide-based
semiconductor nanoparticles immersed in aqueous solution. IEEE Transactions on
Magnetics, 37: 2654-6.

RASCO AO. 2014. Seed Production of Solanaceous Crops. Institute of Plant Breeding-Crop
Science Cluster, College of Agriculture, University of the Philippines Los Bafios.

REISENAUER HM, WALSH LM, HOEFT RG. 1973. Testing soils for sulfur, boron,
molybdenum, and chlorine. p. 173 In: L.M. Walsh and J.D. Benton (eds.). Soil testing and
plant analysis. Soil. Sci. Soc. Amer., Madison, Wis.

SADRAEI R. 2016. A Simple Method for Preparation of Nano-sized ZnO. Research &
Reviews: Journal of Chemistry. 5: 45-49.

SAH RN, BROWN PH. 1997. Techniques for boron determination and their application to the
analysis of plant and soil samples. Plant and Soil, 193: 15-33.

SAKAL R, SINGH S P, SINGH A P AND BHOGALN S. 1993. Evaluation of soil test methods
for response of chickpea to boron in calcareous soil. Anal. Agric. Res. 14: 377-387.

86

SANDOVAL-VILLA M, WOOD CW, GUERTAL EA. 1999. Effects of nitrogen form,
nighttime nutrient solution strength, and cultivar on greenhouse tomato production.
Journal of Plant Nutrition, 22: 1931-1945.

SHUKHA AK. 2011. Effect of foliar application of calcium and boron on growth, productivity
and quality of Indian gooseberry (Emblica officinalis). Indian J. Agric. Sci., 81(7), 628-
632.

SHUMAN L M, BANDEL VA, DONOHUE SJ, ISAAC RA, LIPPERT RM, SIMES JT,
TUCKER MR.1992. Comparison of Mehlich-1 and Mehlich-3 extractable soil boron with
hot-water extractable boron. Comm. Soil Sci. Plant Anal. 23: 1-14.

SAINJU UM, SINGH BP, WHITEHEAD WF. 2001. Comparison of the effects of cover crops
and nitrogen fertilization on tomato yield, root growth, and soil properties. Scientia
Horticulturae, 91, 201-214.

SALAM MA, SIDDIQUE MA, RAHIM MA, RAHMAN MA, GOFFAR MA. 2011. Quality
of Tomato as Influenced by Boron and Zinc in Presence of Different Doses of Cowdung.
Bangladesh J. Agril. Res. 36(1): 151-163.

SINGH HP, SINGH TN. 2004. Effect of sources and levels of Zn on growth yield and mineral
composition of rice in Alkali soil. Indian J. Plant Physiol. 4: 378-382.

SINGH HM, TIWARI JK. 2013. Impact of micronutrient spray on growth, yield and quality of
tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill). Hort Flora Research Spectrum, 2(1), 87-89.

SKOOG F. 1940, Relationships between zinc and auxin in the growth of higher plants.
American Journal of Botany. 27: 939-951.

SPIEGEL-ROY P, GOLDSCHMIDT E. 2008, Biology of Citrus. Cambridge University Press.
140-184.

STANLEY DW, BOURNE MC, STONE AP AND WISMER WV. 1995. Low temperature
blanching effects of chemistry, firmness and structure of canned green beans and carrots.
Food Sci. (60): 327-333.

STEIN AJ, MEENAKSHI JV, QAIM M, NESTEL P, SACHDEV HPS. 2008. Potential impacts
of iron biofortification in India. Soc. Sci. Med. 66: 1797-1808.

SUPPAN S. 2013. Nanomaterials In Soil, Our Future Food Chain? Institute of Agriculture and
trade policy.

SULTANA S, NASER HM, AKHTER S, BEGUM RA. 2016. Effectiveness of Soil and Foliar
Applications of Zinc and Boron on the Yield of Tomato. Bangladesh J. Agril. Res. 41(3):
411-418

87

SWIETLIK D. 2002. Zinc nutrition of fruit crops. HortTechnology 12: 45-50.
TISDALE SL, NELSON WL, BEATON JD. 1985. Soil fertility and fertilizers. pp: 754.

TOOR RK, SAVAGE GP, HEEB A. 2006. Influence of different types of fertilisers on the
major antioxidant components of tomatoes. Journal of Food Composition and Analysis,
19: 20-27

UL HAQ AN, NADHMAN A, ULLAH I, MUSTAFA G, YASINZAI M, KHAN I. 2017.
Synthesis Approaches of Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles: The Dilemma of Ecotoxicity.
Hindawi Journal of Nanomaterials. Vol 2017: 1-4.

UMER S, BANSAL SK, IMAS P, MAGEN H. 1999. Effect of foliar fertilization of potas-sium
on yield, quality and nutrient uptake of groundnut. J. Plant. Nutr. 22:1785—1795.

VAEZI M R, SADRNEZHAAD SK. 2007. Nanopowder synthesis of zinc oxide via
solochemical processing. Materials & Design.; 28: 515-519.

WANITCHANG J, TERDWONGWORAKUL A, WANITCHANG P, NOYPITAK S. 2010.
Maturity sorting index of dragon fruit: Hylocereus polyrhizus. Journal of Food
Engineering, 100: 409-416.

WENG L, TEMMINGHOFF EJM, LOFTS S, TIPPING E, VAN RIEMSDIJK WH. 2002.
Complexation with dissolved organic matter and solubility control of heavy metals in a
sandy soil. Environ. Sci. Technol. 36: 4804-4810.

YADAV PVS, TIKKOO A, SHARMA NK, TIKKOO, A. 2001. Effect of Zn and B on growth,
flowering and fruiting of tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.) Haryana J. Hort. Sci.,
30(1-2), 105-107.

YOSHIDA S, AHN JS, & DA FORNO. 1973. Occurrence, diagnosis, and correction of zinc
deficiency of lowland rice, Soil Science and Plant Nutrition, 19:2, 83-93

YU Q, OSBORNE L, RENGEL Z. 1998. Micronutrient Deficiency Changes Activities of
Superoxide Dismutase and Ascorbate Peroxidase in Tobacco Plants. J Plant Nutr., 21:
1427-1437.

ZAMBAUX M, BONNEAUX F, GREF R, MAINCENT P, DELLACHERIE E, ALONSO M,
LABRUDE P, VIGNERON C. 1998. Influence of experimental parameters on the
characteristics of poly(lactic acid) nanoparticles prepared by double emulsion method. J.
Control. Release, 50: 31-40.

Online Reference:

FOOD AND FERTILIZER TECHNOLOGY CENTER. 2001. Retrieved on 12 July 2017
from: http://www. fftc.agnet.org/library.php?func=view&id=20110804140457&

type_id=2

88

APPENDIX A

SUMMARY OF DATA TABLES

APPENDIX A

SUMMARY OF DATA TABLES

Table 28. Plant height of tomato as influenced by varying foliar treatments.

PLANT HEIGHT, cm
TREATMENTS VEGETATIVE FLOWERING FRUITING MATURITY
(46 DAP) (53 DAP) (64DAP) _(74 DAP)
Control 45.528 60.60 63.39° 64.22»
SNZ 52.96% 66.08 71.03% 74.05%
CNZ 51.92% 65.50 67.00% 69.06”
BZ 48.55% 61.33 68.47% 69.25%
ZS 51.88” 64.58 66.39% 67.44%
SNZ+B 56.74° 67.75 TIAT 80.722
CNZ+B 52.71% 64.58 70.33” 71.00”
BZ+B 50.96% 65.58 67.89% 68.00%
ZS+B 51.58” 61.00 68.67" 69.78%
CV, % 6.16 5.86 5.91 6.89
Mean 51.42 64.11 68.93 70.39
Significance i ns ‘ a

Means within the same column followed by different letters are significantly different (P<0.05, HSD).
ns = not significant; * significant at P<0.05; ** significant at P<0.01.

90

Table 29. Number of clusters per tomato plant as influenced by varying foliar treatments.

NO. OF CLUSTERS PER PLANT
TREATMENTS VEGETATIVE FLOWERING FRUITING MATURITY

(46 DAP) (56 DAP) (64DAP) _(74 DAP)
Control 2.08 3.42 3.33% 3.33%
SNZ 2.25 3.67 4.832 5.00%
CNZ 2.58 3.67 3.898 3.28%
BZ 2.08 3.22 4.25%° 4.67"
Zs 1.92 2.75 3.11° 3.83%
SNZ+B 2.25 4.50 5.238 5.434
CNZ+B 1.92 3.33 4.05%° 4.67"
BZ+B 2.25 3.17 3.44e¢ 3.50%
ZS+B 1,75 3.75 4.2280 2.58°
CV, % 14.48 15.55 14.11 21.14
Mean 2.12 3.50 4.04 4.03
Significance ns ns 7 *

Means within the same column followed by different letters are significantly different (P<0.05, HSD).

ns = not significant; * significant at P<0.05; ** significant at P<0.01.

Table 30. Number of leaves per tomato plant as influenced by varying foliar treatments.
NO. OF LEAVES PER PLANT

TREATMENTS VEGETATIVE FLOWERING FRUITING MATURITY

(46 DAP) (53 DAP) (64 DAP) (74 DAP)
Control 9.50 9.80° 11.00° 11.58°
SNZ 9.92 11.08” 13.78% 15.17%
CNZ 9.83 10.33% 12.67% 13.34%
BZ 9.83 10.33” 11.33° 12.89
ZS 9.67 10.08 10.67° 12.22°
SNZ+B 9.92 12.02? 14.14? 15.908
CNZ+B 10.17 10.75% 12.00% 14.17%
BZ+B 9.92 10.33% 11.00° 12.56”
ZS+B 10.08 10.75" 11.78% 13.26%
CV, % 6.96 5.5 6.47 10.53
Mean 9.87 10.61 12.04 13.45

Significance ns * *e *

Means within the same column followed by different letters are significantly different (P<0.05, HSD).

ns = not significant; * significant at P<0.05; ** significant at P<0.01.

91

Table 31. Number of flowers per tomato plant as influenced by varying foliar treatments.

NO. OF FLOWERS PER PLANT
TREATMENTS VEGETATIVE FLOWERING FRUITING MATURITY

(46 DAP) (56 DAP) (G4DAP) (74 DAP)
Control 3.83 11.78 14.78 12.78
SNZ 4.63 13.92 18.11 18.89
CNZ 3.75 12.58 16.00 15.67
BZ 4.38 10.67 15.00 17.33
Zs 4.17 11.17 12.06 13.78
SNZ+B 3.08 10.50 16.56 19.14
CNZ+B 3.83 12.67 14.78 17.67
BZ+B 3.08 11.86 13.50 13.33
ZS+B 3.83 11.67 10.89 9.67
CV, % 35.18 28.86 26.12 29.44
Mean 3.84 11.87 15.19 15.36

Significance ns ns ns ns

Means within the same column followed by different letters are significantly different (P<0.05, HSD).
ns = not significant; * significant at P<0.05; ** significant at P<0.01.

Table 32. Number of fruits per tomato plant as influenced by varying foliar treatments.
NO. OF FRUITS PER PLANT
TREATMENTS VEGETATIVE FLOWERING FRUITING MATURITY
(46 DAP) (56 DAP) (64DAP) _(74 DAP)

Control 1.25 3.78 4.72 8.11>
SNZ 2.33 4.89 6.89 13.11”
CNZ 1.36 4.44 5.78° 12.89%

BZ 1.67 4.44 6.33° 9.67°

Zs 2.50 5.06 5.89° 9.33
SNZ+B 2.83 5.67 11.54? 16.75#
CNZ+B 2.58 4.45 5.67° 11.33%

BZ+B 1.50 3.56 5.67° 11.33%

ZS+B 2.08 2.11 3.61° 7.22»

CV, % 54.70 39.06 25.73 20.83
Mean 2.01 4.27 6.23 11.08

Significance ns ns ++ bid

Means within the same column followed by different letters are significantly different (P<0.05, HSD).

ns = not significant; * significant at P<0.05; ** significant at P<0.01.

92

Table 33. Percent fruit set per tomato plant as influenced by varying foliar treatments.
PERCENT FRUIT SET PER PLANT

TREATMENTS VEGETATIVE FLOWERING FRUITING MATURITY

(46 DAP) (56 DAP) (64DAP) _(74DAP) __
Control 32.61 32.08 31.95 63.47
SNZ 50.43 35.13 38.02 69.41
CNZ 36.30 35.32 36.11 82.27
BZ 38.02 41.67 42.22 55.77
zs 60.00 45.27 48.86 67.74
SNZ+B 91.89 53.97 69.72 87.53
CNZ +B 67.39 35.10 38.35 64.14
BZ+B 48.65 29.98 41.98 85.00
ZS +B 54.35 18.10 33.16 74.71

Table 34. SPAD units per tomato plant as influenced by varying foliar treatments.

SPAD UNITS,
TREATMENTS VEGETATIVE FLOWERING FRUITING MATURITY
(46 DAP) (56 DAP) (64DAP) _(74 DAP)
Control 45.73° 41.06 41.53 42.82"
SNZ 51.48? 42.88 40.32 41.948
CNZ 49,7820 40.53 36.92 39.27%
BZ 51.94% 42.84 43.34 47.798
ZS 51.519 44,38 46.02 48.248
SNZ+B 53.238 47.58 47.32 52.228
CNZ+B 46.57% 44.18 40.29 45.37%
BZ+B 51.54% 43.18 36.84 42.28%
ZS+B 50.2480 39.28 40.09 38.76
CV, % 4.04 10.19 13.85 11.26
Mean 50.34 42.40 41.08 43.63
Significance a ns ns +e

Means within the same column followed by different letters are significantly different (P<0.05, HSD).
ns = not significant; * significant at P<0.05; ** significant at P<0.01.

94

Table 35. Soil pH as influenced by varying foliar treatments.

SOIL pH
TREATMENTS
58 DAP 74 DAP
CTRL 5.2 5.2
SNZ 5.2 5.1
CNZ 5.4 5.2
BZ 5.3 4.8
ZS 5.3 5.3
SNZ+B 5.3 5.1
CNZ+B 5.3 5.1
BZ+B 5.1 5.0
ZS+B 5.2 5.3
%CV 2.28 3.21

Means within the same column followed by different letters are significantly different (P<0.05, HSD).
ns = not significant; * significant at P<0.05; ** significant at P<0.01.

Table 36. Soil Zn concentration as influenced by varying foliar treatments.

TREATMENTS ta
58 DAP 74 DAP
CTRL 0.84 1.794
SNZ 1.32 2.92
CNZ 1.65 2.49%
BZ 1.21 2.1¢4
Zs 1.61 1.804
SNZ+B 1.63 2.35%
CNZ+B 1.52 1,99be4
BZ+B 1.47 1.84°4
ZS+B 1.49 2.30%
%CV 25.42 8.21
Mean 1.41 2.18
Significance ns **

Means within the same column followed by different letters are significantly different (P<0.05, HSD).
ns = not significant; * significant at P<0.05; ** significant at P<0.01.

95

Table 37. Soil Fe, Cu and Mn concentration as influenced by varying foliar treatments.

TREATMENTS [Fe], ppm [Cu], ppm [Mn], ppm

58 DAP 74 DAP 58 DAP 74 DAP 58 DAP 74 DAP
CTRL 59.21 65.08? 2.14 2.644 10.37° 1.70?
SNZ 61.33 68.29* 2.57? 2.93? 17.80? 2.44?
CNZ 57.70 51.64° 2.37? 2.78? 14,23 2.06?
BZ 60.73 65.454 2.424 2.89 12.16% 1.97%
ZS 58.21 60.18 2.38? 2.57 14.46% 1.86
SNZ+B 56.47 62.82? 2.55% 2.69 13.70% 1.954
CNZ+B 61.78 66.15? 2.48 3.06? 14.53% 2.042
BZ+B 57.14 64.978 1.86? 2.54 11.57% 1.86?
ZS+B 59.36 57.62% 2.27? 2.664 15.32% 1.71?
%CV 9.43 6.09 13.56 16.40 16.71 15.77
Mean 59.10 62.47 2.34 2.75 13.79 1.96

Significance ns ae ns ns ae ns

Means within the same column followed by different letters are significantly different (P<0.05, HSD).
ns = not significant; * significant at P<0.05; ** significant at P<0.01.

Table 38. Tomato Stem Mg and Ca concentration as influenced by v:

ing foliar treatments.

[Mg], ppm [Ca], ppm

TREATMENTS |-eSDAP 74DAP 58DAP 7T4DAP
CTRL 261.754 205.524 864.362 700.24#
SNZ 267.212 202.714 886.022 757.68°
CNZ 236.542 206.60? 860.17 689.192
BZ 257.06 183.814 1,050.202 498.062
zs 236.59? 185.40? 926.25% 513.11?
SNZ+B 287.702 137.61? 874.502 566.352
CNZ+B 225.198 165.578 812.68? 570.394
BZ+B 243.662 163.05? 940.884 401.80?
ZS+B 227.522 155.594 772.384 338.03?

%CV 10.14 24.25 19.55 42.91

Means within the same column followed by different letters are significantly different (P<0.05, HSD).
ns = not significant; * significant at P<0.05; ** significant at P<0.01.

96

Table 39. Tomato Stem Mn and Fe concentration as influenced by varying foliar treatments.

[Mn], ppm [Fe],ppm

TREATMENTS 58DAP 74DAP 58DAP 74DAP
CTRL 8.88 9.48 16.41? 24.49?
SNZ 14.67 15.262 14.25 38.842
CNZ 8.63 11.67 21.42% 25.442
BZ 11.55 4.76% 31.16% 11.23"
ZS 13.41 6.754 24.98% 17.134
SNZ+B 15.48 5.898 27.53° 14.208
CNZ+B 9.58 8.912 32.69% 24.568
BZ+B 10.66 6.462 48.792 11.148
ZS+B 9.83 5.422 14.13° 10.85?

%CV 27.35 63.20 46.22 52.65

Means within the same column followed by different letters are significantly different (P<0.05, HSD).
ns = not significant; * significant at P<0.05; ** significant at P<0.01.

Table 40. Tomato Leaf Fe, Cu and Mn concentration as influenced by v:

ing foliar treatments.

TREATMENTS [Fe], ppm [Ca], ppm [Mn], ppm

S8DAP 74DAP | S58DAP _74DAP | S58DAP —_74DAP

CTRL 51.98% 57.904 643.78" 1,199.29 | 14.362 16.444
SNZ 307.58" —44,55° 557.20" ‘1,335.20 | 15.69% 47.76
CNZ 32.712 38.6764 | 641.099 §=——871.728 10.777 45.2004
BZ 90.78" 35.00 | 588.59" 1,396.52" | 13.078 17.85%
Zs 31.217 36.46" | 608.38" 1,075.82 | 10.98 —45.48°°
SNZ+B 31.68" 82.74" | 604.47* = 1,258.878 | 16.37" 79.128
CNZ+B 72.11" 61.57" | 1185.69" 1,200.89" | 24.98" 65.468”
BZ+B 44.14 63.32> 609.09 1,139.67" | 12.05" 49.63?
ZS+B 66.777 _ 64.61 | 502.627 _1,179.812 | _ 12.997 _ 61.48%

Means within the same column followed by different letters are significantly different (P<0.05, HSD).
ns = not significant; * significant at P<0.05; ** significant at P<0.01.

Table 41. Total N in tomato leaf and stem as influenced by varying foliar treatments.
LEAF TOTALN, % STEM TOTAL N, %

Means within the same column followed by different letters are significantly different (P<0.05, HSD).

TREATMENTS 58 DAP 74 DAP 58 DAP 74 DAP
CTRL 0.1759° 5.9008 3.3151% 3.1438° |
SNZ 0.2815” 7.3950? 4.5594? 4.2494"
CNZ 0.52897 6.9469 4.0855 3.4914°
BZ 0.4099 5.6481° 3.44992 3.5723°
ZS 0.3863 6.7026 3.2769° 5.2938
SNZ+B 0.5401? 7.2119 4.0383° 6.3899?
CNZ+B 0.3953” 7.0362” 3.2073° 3.7980°
BZ+B 0.3863" 7.42867 3.5442 5.3163”
ZS+B 0.3414 6.7268” 3.0905° 4.2438
%CV 23.35 14,31 11.39 8.64

ns = not significant; * significant at P<0.05; ** significant at P<0.01.

Table 42. Total P in tomato leaf and stem as influenced by varying foliar treatments.

nN)
Means within the same column followed by different letters are significantly different (P<0.05, HSD).

LEAF TOTAL P, % STEM TOTAL P, %
TREATMENTS
58 DAP 74 DAP 58 DAP 74 DAP
CTRL 0.3658 1.4618 0.3241 0.9536
SNZ 0.3929 0.9064 0.3374 1.0415
CNZ 0.4032 0.9855 0.3793 1.1466
BZ 0.3937 0.4922 0.3431 1.0866
ZS 0.4145 1.1387 0.3782 1.2141
SNZ+B 0.4098 1.5518 0.3438 1.2807
CNZ+B 0.4197 1.2271 0.3413 1.1819
BZ+B 0.4377 1.1329 0.3563 1.0782
ZS+B 0.3704 1.0383 0.3948 0.7939
%CV

ns = not significant; * significant at P<0.05; ** significant at P<0.01.

97

98

Table 43. Total K in tomato leaf and stem as influenced by varying foliar treatments.

LEAF TOTAL K, ppm STEM TOTAL K, ppm
TREATMENTS

58 DAP 74 DAP 58 DAP 74 DAP

CTRL 0.1545 0.1449 0.3963 0.3202
SNZ 0.2385 0.1495 0.4761 0.4232
CNZ 0.2099 0.1679 0.4030 0.3375
BZ 0.1343 0.1814 0.4820 0.2788
ZS 0.2301 0.1864 0.3560 0.2821
SNZ+B 0.1646 0.1763 0.4987 0.3233
CNZ+B 0.2603 0.1646 0.2737 0.2670
BZ+B 0.1495 0.1763 0.4903 0.2569
ZS+B 0.1914 0.2066 0.2603 0.3006

%CV

ee Se
Means within the same column followed by different letters are significantly different (P<0.05, HSD).
ns = not significant; * significant at P<0.05; ** significant at P<0.01.

Table 44. Yield data of tomato as influence by varying foliar treatments.

NON- NON-
TREATMENTS MARKETABLE MARKETABLE
YIELD, kg/plant YIELD, tons/ha

MARKETABLE MARKETABLE
YIELD, kg/plant YIELD, tons/ha

CTRL 0.11 3.06 0.24 b 4.99 b
SNZ 0.06 1.57 0.61 a 12.99 a
CNZ 0.07 1.94 0.54 ab 11.49 ab
BZ 0.08 2.11 0.39 ab 8.39 ab
ZS 0.06 1.67 0.55 ab 11.73 ab
SNZ+B 0.05 1.27 0.67 a 14.28 a
CNZ+B 0.06 1.51 0.45 ab 9.69 ab
BZ+B 0.02 0.42 0.41 ab 8.70 ab
ZS 0.06 1.64 0.28 b 6.04 b
%CV 55.81 55.78 24.01 24.01
Mean 0.06 1.69 0.46 12.27
Significance ns ns ** ras

Means within the same column followed by different letters are significantly different (P<0.05, HSD).
ns = not significant; * significant at P<0.05; ** significant at P<0.01.

Soil pH, N, P and K

Table 45. Soil total N as influenced by varying foliar treatments.

TREATMENTS SOIL TOTAL N, %

58 DAP 74 DAP

CTRL 0.0910 0.1162
SNZ 0.0648 0.1064
CNZ 0.1193 0.1062
BZ 0.0858 0.0820
Zs 0.1200 0.0820
SNZ+B 0.1022 0.1302
CNZ+B 0.1009 0.1376
BZ+B 0.1100 0.1121
ZS+B 0.1011 0.0995

%CV

Means within the same column followed by different letters are significantly different (P<0.05, HSD).
ns = not significant; * significant at P<0.05; ** significant at P<0.01.

APPENDIX B

PROCEDURES IN SOIL AND
PLANT TISSUE ANALYSES

100

101

Sample Preparation

o Assoonas possible after sampling, spread the soil sample on a clean sheet of
paper and allow it to dry thoroughly.

o Do not place the samples in direct contact with the sun to avoid volatilization
of nutrients while drying.

o When the aggregates are air-dried, crush the sample with a mallet or with a
rubber-tipped pestle in a mortar.

o Remove weathered rock fragments, gravel, concretions, and roots from the soil
while pounding.

o Sift the sample through a sieve with holes 2-mm in diameter.

o Return the coarse materials retained on the sieve for further crushing. Repeat
the process of crushing and sieving until only the primary particles remain or
until the desired amount of sieved soil sample is attained.

o For soil analyses requiring finer soil particle size, such as Nitrogen and
Organic matter, sift the soil again through a 0.5-mm sieve until about a handful
of the sieved soil is attained.

o Store in a sealed container to avoid contamination from dust and other soil
samples.

Soil Moisture (Gravimetric Method)
Procedure:

1. Transfer about 10g of air-dried soil to tared moisture can.
2. Dry for 24 hours at 105°C.
3. Remove tin can from oven, cool in a desiccator and weigh to constant weight.

Calculation:

Fresh weight - oven dried weight

% Moisture content = - -
oven dried weight

100 + % moisture

Moisture Correction Factor (mcf) = i00


102

Bulk Density (Core Method)

Procedure:

1.
2.

Determine the weight of the core sampler.
Measure the height and the inner diameter of the core sampler and calculate its
volume.

. Prepare a smooth vertical or horizontal soil surface at the depths to be sampled.
. Firmly press the core sampler into the soil far enough to fill the inner cylinder of

the sampler.

. Excavate around the outer ring of the sampler without disturbing the soil it

contains. Carefully remove the sampler and remove protruding soil from the
side.

. Dry the core in an oven at approximately 110°C for about 48 hours.

7. Remove the sampler from the oven and allow to cool in a desiccator before
weighing.
Calculation:
. ODW — SW
Bulk density = Volume of sampler
d?
Volume of sampler = 3.14 x va xh
Where, ODW - oven-dried weight

SW — core sampler weight
d-—core sampler inner diameter

h—core sampler height

103

Soil Texture (Hydrometer Method)

Reagents:

ic

Calgon. Dissolve 40.9 g of sodium hexametaphosphate and 9.1 g of sodium
carbonate into distilled water. Dilute to 1 L volume.

Procedure:

DOs See

Weigh about 100 g of air dry soil in a dispersion cup.

Add 100 ml of distilled water.

Add 20 ml of calgon (sodium hexametaphosphate) solution.

Add enough distilled water to the mark about one inch from the lip of the dispersion.
Stir in the Bouyocous dispersion apparatus for 15 minutes.

Transfer content of the cup to a Bouyocous sedimentation cylinder. Ensure complete
transfer of soil particles from the cup with the use of a squirt bottle.

7. Place the hydrometer in the soil suspension in the Bouyocous hydrometer jar.

8. Add water up to the hydrometer jar mark.

9. Remove the hydrometer and mix the suspension well using the plunger.

10. After mixing, put the cylinder on a firm base and put the thermometer and the
hydrometer slowly so as not to disturb soil suspension. Avoid jarring the cylinder.

11. Get the thermometer and hydrometer readings 40-second after mixing the
suspension. Read again after eight hours.

12. Remove the hydrometer slowly after each reading as soil particles tend to settle on
the shoulder of the hydrometer.

Calculations:

1. Compute for the Correction Factor (CF). If the temperature of the soil suspension is
the same as the temperature of the blank, the CF of the soil suspension is equal to
the hydrometer reading of the blank at the same reading time. If the soil suspension
has different temperature as the blank, CF is computed as,

correction formula = OHRg + 0.36 (Ts — Tg)
Where, OHRs = Original hydrometer reading of blank
Ts = Temperature reading of soil suspension
Ts = Temperature reading of blank
2. Compute for the corrected hydrometer reading (CHR) for the soil suspension from

the observed OHR of blank using the formula,

104

CHR = OHR, — CF

3. Compute for the percentage composition of each soil particle using the formula
below.
CHR after 8 hrs

———————_ x 100
weight of sample

% clay =

. CHR after 8 hrs — CHR after 40s
% silt = ————__—_—_——__—_———— x 100
weight of sample

% sand = 100 — (% silt + % clay)

4. Use textural triangle to determine the texture of the soil sample analysed.

105

Soil pH (Soil-water suspension using electrode pH meter)
Procedure:

1. Weigh 20 g soil into a 50ml beaker.

2. Add 20 ml distilled water (1:1). Stir the suspension several times during the next 30
minutes and then set aside for 30 minutes to permit most of the clay to settle out of
the suspension.

3. Calibrate the pH meter using the standard buffer solutions of pH 4.0 and 7.0.

Stir the sample suspension at regular intervals for about an hour and immediately
determine the pH to the nearest 0.1 pH unit.

5. Rinse electrodes with distilled water and wipe with tissue paper every sample
change.

Soil pH (Soil-CaCh suspension using electrode pH meter)
Reagents:

1. 0.01M Calcium chloride (CaCl2). Dissolve 1.469 g of CaClz into distilled water.
Dilute to 1 L volume.

Procedure:

1. Weigh 10 g soil into a SOml beaker.
Add 20 ml of 0.01M CaCl solution (1:2). Stir the suspension several times during the
next 30 minutes and then set aside for 30 minutes to permit most of the clay to
settle out of the suspension.

3. Calibrate the pH meter using the standard buffer solutions of pH 4.0 and 7.0.
Stir the sample suspension at regular intervals for 30 minutes and immediately
determine the pH to the nearest 0.1 pH unit.

5. Rinse electrodes with distilled water and wipe with tissue paper every sample
change.

106

Organic Matter (Walkley and Black Method)
Reagents:

1. 1N Potassium dichromate (K2Cr207). Dry 1N K2Cr20; at 105°C for 1 hour. Dissolve
49.039 g using analytical balance of reagent grade K2Cr20; in distilled water and
dilute to 1L.

Concentrated Sulfuric acid (H2SO4) — 98% (36.77N)

0.5N Ferrous sulphate (FeSO.). Dissolve 140 g of reagent grade FeSO4°7H20 in 800 ml
of distilled water. Add 40 ml of concentrated H2SO, and dilute to 1L. Standardize this
each time before use by titrating against 10 ml standard 1N K2Cr207.

Concentrated Phosphoric acid (H3PO,).

5. Barium diphenylamine sulfonate indicator. Dissolve 0.16 g of barium diphenylamine
sulfonate in 100 mi distilled water. Store at cool temperature.

Procedure:

1. Measure 1.0 of air-dry soil sample (ground to pass a 0.5mm or 35-mesh sieve) into
a 500ml flask.
Add exactly 10 ml of 1.00 N potassium dichromate (K2Cr207) solution.

3. Add 20 ml of concentrated sulfuric acid reagent as rapidly as possible.
Mix thoroughly and allow the reaction to complete for 30 minutes under the fume
hood.

5. Dilute the reaction mixture with 200 ml water and 10 ml phosphoric acid (H3POs).
Add 1 ml of barium diphenylamine sulfonate indicator.

7. Titrate the solution with standard iron sulphate (FeSO,) solution to a brilliant green
color end-point.

8. Runa blank (without soil) simultaneously.

Calculations:
1. The exact normality of FeSO, is computed as,

Fy _ __Nx,cr,07 * Vizcr.07
FeSO, —
Veeso, used to titrate blank

2. Calculate for organic matter by using the equation below, with Vresos as the volume
of FeSO, used to titrate soil samples.

(Nx,cr,0, X Vizcr207) — (Nreso, X Veeso,) x 0.67 x mcf

9 i =
% Organic Carbon weight of soil (g)

Where, mcf = moisture correction factor

The factor 0.0069 is derived as follows:

1.0N x 2 100 = 0.3896
4,000 * 0.77."
Where, 12/4,000 = me of carbon

100/77 = 77% recovery factor

107

108

Total Nitrogen (Kjeldahl Method)

Reagents:

4% Boric acid (H3BOs) indicator. Place 40 g of pure boric acid (H3BOs) in a 1 L beaker.
Add 800 ml distilled water and warm while stirring using a hot plate with magnetic
stirrer until H3BO3is dissolved. Cool and add 40 ml mixed indicator solution, which
can be prepared by dissolving 0.099 g of bromcresol green and 0.066 g of methyl red
in 100 ml of absolute alcohol. Adjust pH of prepared boric acid solution by adding SN
NaOH continuously until the solution assumes a reddish purple tint (pH 5.0) and
volume solution to 1 L by addition of distilled water.

2. Salt mixture (catalyst). Mix thoroughly 100 g potassium sulphate to 10 g copper
sulphate and 1g selenium. Grind the mixture using mortar and pestle.

3. 10N (40%) Sodium hydroxide (NaOH). Place 400 g of NaOH in a 1 L plastic beaker.
Add 1 L of distilled water and stir until the alkali is dissolved. Cool the solution in a
plastic reagent bottle.

4. Concentrated Sulfuric acid (H2SO) — 98% (36.77N)

5. 0.05 N Sulfuric acid. Dilute 1.3598 ml of concentrated sulfuric acid. Standardize
before use.

Procedure:

1. Weigh one gram of soil (ground to pass a 0.5mm or 35-mesh sieve) to a small
Kjeldahl flask.

2. Add one gram of salt mixture and 10ml of concentrated sulphuric acid.

3. Digest the sample and allow to cool.

4. Transfer the contents into a macro Kjeldahl flask.

5. Add about 150ml distilled water.

6. Slowly add 45ml of 10N sodium hydroxide (NaOH) down the neck of the flask before
distillation.

7. Distil to a 125ml Erlenmeyer flask receiver containing 20 ml of 4% boric acid (H3BO3)
indicator solution.

8. Titrate the distillate with standard 0.05N H2SO, to purple color end-point.

9. Run blank simultaneously.

Computation:

%N = (T-B)xNx 0.014 x
"oven dry weight of sample mef

Where, T = volume of standard H2SOq used in sample

109

B = volume of standard H2SOx used in blank
N = normality of H2SO4

mcf = moisture correction factor

Standardization of 0.05 N H2SO:

is

Prepare standard Potassium hydrogen phthalate (KHP) by mixing 0.3 g of
dried KHP to distilled water. Dissolve to 50 ml volume using a volumetric
flask.

Prepare 0.05 N NaOH by dissolving 1 g of NaOH into 500 ml of distilled
water. Stir continuously until NaOH is completely dissolved. Cool and store in
a tightly sealed plastic bottle. Standardize before use to check normality due to
its rapid reaction with atmospheric carbon.

Transfer the 50 ml KHP to 125 ml Erlenmeyer flask. Add 5-6 drops of
phenolphthalein and titrate with 0.05 N NaOH as the titrant until the faint pink
endpoint.

Calculate the normality of NaOH by the formula below.

0.39
Nyaon = 394.23 * Vaon

1000 ml
Determine the exact normality of H2SOs acid by titrating about 5 ml of the acid
against the standardized NaOH titrant. Add 3 drops of phenolphthalein to the
acid before titration. Titrate until the faint pink to white endpoint.
Calculate the normality of the acid by the formula below.
— Nwaon X Vwaon used

Nu,s04 ~ Vy a
2904

110

Available Phosphorus for Acidic Soils (Bray no. 2 Method)

Reagents:

1.

10 N Hydrochloric acid (HCI). Slowly add 414.0478 ml of concentrated HCI to
about 80 ml of distilled water while stirring. Dilute to 500 ml volume. This will
be used in the preparation of the Chloromolybdic acid reagent below.

Note: Add the acid to the water. Do not add water to acid, as this may cause
violent boiling and may splatter the acid out of the container.

1.5% Chloromolybdic acid reagent. Dissolve exactly 15 g of C.P. ammonium
molybdate [(HN4)6Mo702°4H20] in about 300 ml of distilled water. Warm
while stirring using hot plate with magnetic stirrer. Filter the solution to
remove sediments of necessary. Cool then add with 350 ml of 10N HCI slowly
with rapid stirring. Cool again to room temperature then dilute to 1 L. Replace
every 2 months.

. Stannous chloride (SnCl2°H20) stock solution. Dissolve 10 g of reagent grade

SnCleH20O in 25 ml concentrated HCI. Keep in a dark tightly stoppered bottle.
This solution has to be replaced at 2 months interval. For each four hour
interval, fresh stannous chloride should be prepared by diluting 1 ml of stock
solution to 330 ml with freshly boiled, cooled distilled water.

. Extraction solution: 0.1 N Hydrochloric acid (HCI) and 0.03 N Ammonium

fluoride (NH4F). Dissolve 1.11 g of solid NH4F in 1 L of 0.1 N HCl, which can
be prepared by diluting 8.2810 ml of HCI to distilled water, then volume to 1
L

. Primary phosphate standard, 50 ppm P. Dry potassium dihydrogen phosphate

(KH2POs) in the oven for about an hour and dissolve 0.2195 g in about 400 ml
of distilled water then dilute to 1 L volume. This gives 50 ppm P stock
solution. Preserve and store in a weathered soft glass bottle (rather than Pyrex
bottles) to minimize contamination with arsenic.

. Secondary phosphate standard, 5 ppm P. Get 50 ml of the 50 ppm P stock

solution and dilute to 500 ml to produce 5 ppm P standard. Add 7.5 ml of
concentrated HCI (12 N) before dilution to diminish microbial activity.

. 0.08 M Boric acid (H3BO3). Dissolve 50 g of H3BOs3 in about 700 ml of

distilled water. Warm and stir using a hot plate with magnetic stirrer to
completely dissolve H3BO; in water. Cool then dilute to 1 L volume.

Procedure:

1.

Weight 2.85 g of soil sample (crushed to pass 2-mm sieve) into 125 ml
Erlenmeyer flask. Add carbon black if the organic matter content is too high. It
acts as decolorizer to remove yellow color from the extract.

111

2. Add 20 ml of extraction solution from a pipette. Put a stopper and manually
shake (hand shaking) the flask for 1 minute.

3. Filter the suspension immediately using Whatman No. | filter paper held in a

filter tube. The Filtrate should be clear. If not, the solution should be quickly

poured back through the same filter.

Transfer a 5 ml aliquot of the clear filtrate to a 25 ml volumetric flask.

Add 7.5 ml of H3BO3.

Add 5 ml of Chloromolybdic acid reagent and then mix the solution.

Finally, add 2.5 ml of freshly diluted SnCl2°H20. Put a stopper or use Parafilm

to cover the flask then immediately mix the solution. Dilute to 25 ml volume

with distilled water.

8. Let the color develop for 5 to 6 minutes. Read before the 15 to 20 minute mark,
as the color will begin to diminish after this time. Read the color ina
spectrophotometer or colorimeter using a red filter (650 nm) employed for the
100% transmittance setting.

9. The P standards are made up of 0 ppm, 0.2 ppm, 0.4 ppm, 0.6 ppm, 0.8 ppm,
and 1 ppm P. This is made by pipetting 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 ml of 5 ppm P
secondary phosphate standard to 25 ml volumetric flasks, respectively. Follow
the same procedures from steps 5 to 8.

NAW SS

Calculations:

1. Using the readings from the P standards, create a concentration curve with its
concentration (ppm P) in the x-axis and transmittance in the y-axis. Find the
slope (m) and the y-intercept (b) in the linear equation y = mx + b using the
equation below.

_ nlx UKLyi
~ nds? = x?
_ Lyi — MYX;
~ n

b

2. Translate the transmittance values obtained in the samples to P concentration in
the solution by interpolation. Use calculated m and b values from the standard
and substitute soil sample transmittance values to y.

ystb

“im

3. Calculate for the ppm P in the soil using the formula below.

ppm P insoil = ppmP insolution x 35.05 x mcf

x=

112

Available Phosphorus for Basic Soils (Olsen Method)

Reagents:

1.

Extracting solution: 0.5 N Sodium bicarbonate (NaHCOs), pH 8.5. Dissolve 42
g of NaHCO; to about 800 ml distilled water. Warm while continuously
stirring using a hot plate with a magnetic stirrer. Adjust pH to 8.5 with 5 N
NaOH. Dilute to 1 L volume with distilled water.

Reagent A: Acid molybdate stock solution. Dissolve 6 g of Ammonium
molybdate [(HN4)sMo702°4H20] in 125 ml distilled water. At the same time,
separately dissolve 0.1455 g of Antimony potassium tartrate in 50 ml distilled
water. Add both of these solutions to 500 ml of 5 N H2SOa, which is prepared
by mixing 67.99 ml of concentrated H2SOs to distilled water diluted to 500 ml
volume. Mix the resulting solution and dilute to 1 L volume with distilled
water.

Reagent B: Ascorbic acid. Dissolve 0.5278 g of Ascorbic acid to 100 ml of
Reagent A. This reagent must be prepared each day as needed, since it will not
keep for more than 24 hours.

Phosphorus stock solution, 50 ppm P. Dissolve 0.2197 g of dried Potassium
dihydrogen phosphate (KH2POx,) in 25 ml of distilled water. Dilute to 1 L
volume with extracting solution.

. Working standards. Pipette approximate amounts of 50 ppm P stock solution

into respective volumetric flasks. Bring to volume by adding extracting
solution.

Final volume Concentration of Equivalent
Volume of ppm . : . a,
P standard (ml) with extracting working standard concentration in
solution (ml) (ppm P) soil (ppm P)
1 250 0.2 4
1 100 0.5 10
2 100 1.0 20
4 100 2.0 40
6 100 3.0 60
8 100 4.0 80
10 100 5.0 100
Procedure:

1.

Weigh 1 g of soil into 125 Erlenmeyer flask.

2. Add 20 ml extracting solution and shake at 200 or more rpm for 30 minutes.
3.
4. Transfer 5 mi aliquot of the filtrate into 50 ml Erlenmeyer flask.

Filter with Whatman No. 2 filter paper to plastic reagent bottles.

113

Add 15 ml distilled water.

Add 5 ml of Reagent B and agitate flask so that thorough mixing occurs.
Allow 10 minutes for color development.

Read transmittance or optical density on a colorimeter set at 882 nm filter.
Read before the 2 hours mark, as the color will begin to diminish after this
time.

9. Prepare a standard curve by pipetting 5 ml aliquot of each of the working
standards to 50 ml Erlenmeyer flask. Repeat steps 5 to 8 for the standards.
Allow the color to develop and read in the same manner as with the soil
extracts.

COSA G4

Calculation:

1. Convert P standard readings and the soil sample readings from transmittance to

absorbance using the formula below.
absorbance = 2log(transmittance)

2. Using the readings from the P standards, create a concentration curve with its
concentration (ppm P) in the x-axis and absorbance in the y-axis. Find the
slope (m) and the y-intercept (b) in the linear equation y = mx + b using the
equation below.

_ neni - UML
nYx? — (Lx)?
_ Lv- Myx
~ n

b

3. Translate the absorbance values obtained in the samples to P concentration in
the solution by interpolation. Use calculated m and b values from the standard
and substitute soil sample absorbance values to y.

yb

m
4. Calculate for the ppm P in the soil using the formula below.
ppm P in solution x 20

weight of soil

x=

ppm P in soil =

114

Cation Exchange Capacity (Ammonium Acetate Method)

Reagents:

1.

1 N Ammonium acetate solution (HN4OAc), pH 7.0. Dissolve 77.08 g of
ammonium acetate crystal in 400 ml of distilled water. Adjust pH to 7.0 using
5 N NaOH or HCL. Dilute the solution to 1 L volume using distilled water.
95% Ethyl alcohol.

10% Acidified sodium chloride (NaCl). Dissolve 100 g of NaCl in 900 ml of
distilled water and add 0.42 ml of concentrated HCI. Dilute to 1 L volume with
distilled water. This solution is 0.005 N ion concentration with respect to
acidity.

1 N Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) solution. Dissolve 40 g of NaOH in 1 L of
distilled water. Store in a tightly sealed plastic container.

. 0.2 .N standard Sulfuric acid (H2SOs). Mix 5.4392 ml of concentrated H2SOsg in

distilled water. Dilute to 1 L volume with distilled water. Standardize with
standard NaOH before use.

Mixed indicator. Dissolve 0.099 g of bromcresol green and 0.066 g of methyl]
red in 100 ml of absolute alcohol.

4% Boric acid (H3BOs) solution. Dissolve 40 g of boric acid in 800 ml of distilled
water. Warm while stirring using a hot plate with magnetic stirrer until H3BOs is
dissolved. Cool and add 40 ml mixed indicator solution. Adjust pH of prepared boric
acid solution by adding SN NaOH cautiously until the solution assumes a reddish
purple tint (pH 5.0) and volume solution to 1 L by addition of distilled water.

Procedure:

PwnN>

Weigh 10 g of air-dried soil into a 125 ml beaker.

Add 20 ml of 1 N NHsOAc.

Stir for few minutes and allow to stand overnight.

Transfer the contents quantitatively on a Whatman No.42 filter paper or equivalent in
55mm Buchner funnel fitted on a 250ml suction flask.

Apply gentle suction with a vacuum pump. After the supernatant liquid is drained, add
10 ml of NHsAOc at a time on the surface of the soil for 8 times amounting to a total
of 80 ml volume. Disconnect the suction flask and allow to drain thoroughly. Do not
allow the soil to become dry and cracked.

Transfer all the leachate to a 250 ml beaker and evaporate to dryness on a hot plate.
This will be used in the preparation of solution A for exchangeable cation (Ca, Mg, K)
determination.

Add 10 ml of alcohol in the soil and apply suction.

Repeat step 7 five times. Discard washings.

Replace the adsorbed ammonium ions (NH4+) with sodium ions (Na+) by adding 10
ml of 10% NaCl solution to the soil for ten times to approximate 100 ml of leachate.

115

10. Transfer all the leachate into Kjeldahl flask and wash with water. Add 20 ml of
4% NaOH.

11. Distill 75 ml into a 125ml Erlenmeyer flask containing 20 ml of 4% H2BO3
solution.

12. Titrate the distillate with standard 0.2N H2SOs. The color change is from green
to purple end-point.

13. Run blanks on the reagent.

Calculations:

APE (S-—B) x N x 100
~ oven dry weight of sample

x mcf
Where, S = volume of H2S04 used in sample

B = volume of H2S04 used in blank

N = normality of H2SO4

mef = moisture correction factor

116

Exchangeable Cations (Ammonium Acetate Method)

Reagents:

15
2.
3.

Fuming Nitric acid (HNO3) — 69-71% (16 N)

Concentrated Hydrochloric acid (HCI) — 37% (12 N).

6 N Standard Hydrochloric acid (HCI). Slowly add 496.84 ml of concentrated
sulfuric acid (37%) to distilled water while stirring. Cool then dilute to 1 L
volume with distilled water.

0.1 N Nitric acid (HNO3). Slowly add 6.45 ml of nitric acid to distilled water
while continuously stirring. Dilute with distilled water to 1 L volume.

Procedures:

1,

Evaporate the ammonium acetate extract (from the determination of cation
exchange capacity) in a 250ml beaker to completer dryness on a hotplate, cool,
and cover the beaker with a watch glass.

Add slowly through the lip of the beaker 2.5 ml of fuming HNOs and 1 ml of
concentrated HCl.

Warm on a hot plate until the reaction has subsided and the brown fumes are
no longer given off.

Rinse the watch glass into the beaker, transfer the solution to a 50 ml beaker,
and evaporate the solution to dryness at low heat to prevent spattering.
Continue to heat for about 10 minutes to dehydrate the salts, then place the
beaker in an electric muffle furnace at about 150-200°C. Heat to 390°C +
10°C, and hold at this temperature for 20 minutes.

Remove the beaker from the muffle furnace and cool.

Treat the residue with 1.5 ml of 6N HCI to dissolve the oxides of manganese,
iron, and aluminum.

Evaporate to dryness on a hot plate and continue heating for about 30 minutes
longer to dehydrate silica.

Cool and dissolve the residue in 0.1N HNO acid.

. Stir with rubber policeman to loosen and dissolve the residue of salts.
11.

Filter the solution and dilute the filtrate to 50ml volumetric flask with 0.1N
HNOs. Make to volume, label, and designate as solution A (to be used in the
determination of exchangeable Ca, Mg, and K).

Exchangeable Calcium (EDTA Titration Method)

Reagents:

1.

10% Potassium hydroxide (KOH) solution. Dissolve 100 g of KOH in distilled
water. Dilute to 1 L volume with distilled water.

Standard Calcium solution. Dissolve 1.2486 g of pure CaCOs in a beaker with
1:1 HCI (H2O:HCI) or 6 N HCI using as little as possible (just to dissolve the
CaCO; until clear) and make up to 500 ml with H20. This makes up 1,000 ppm
Ca.

Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) di-sodium salt solution. Dissolve 4 g
of EDTA (di-sodium) in distilled water. Dilute to 1 L volume with distilled
water. This will makes up 0.025 N EDTA salt solution. This should be
standardized against a standard Calcium solution.

. Calcium indicator powder. Mix thoroughly the following reagent grade

chemicals: 40 g Potassium sulfate (K2SO«) powder and 0.2 g Murexide.

Procedure:

1.
. Add 45 ml distilled water.

. Add 5 ml of 10% KOH solution.

. Add about 0.3 g of the Calcium indicator powder and stir.

. Titrate with the EDTA (di-sodium) salt solution. The end point is from pink or

AP WN

Measure 5 ml aliquot of Solution A into 125 ml Erlenmeyer flask.

orange red to violet or violet red. The color at the endpoint should be compared
with a blank.

Note: if the solution is over titrated with EDTA (di-sodium salt) it may be back
titrated with dilute Calcium solution.

. The blank is prepared by measuring 5 ml aliquot of standard Calcium solution

into 125 ml Erlenmeyer flask and repeating steps 2 to 5.

Calculations:
V, 100
Vs x (A) x =
cmol (+) _ Vp 20
Exchangeable Ca ( leg soil) = —Ttysol mcf
Where, Vs = Volume of EDTA used for titrating soil sample

Va = Volume of standard Calcium solution used (5ml)
Ve = Volume of EDTA used for titrating blank (Ca solution)

mcf = Moisture Correction Factor

118

Exchangeable Magnesium (EDTA Titration Method)

Reagents:

1.

Buffer solution. Dissolve 67.5 g of Ammonium chloride (NH«C]) in about 200
ml water mixed with 750 ml of concentrated Ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH)
and dilute to 1 L volume with distilled water.

. F-241 indicator. Dissolve 0.2 g of Eriochrome Black T in 50 ml of Methyl

alcohol containing 2 g of Hydroxylamine hydrochloride. The indicator is fairly
stable, but the freshly prepared material gives a sharper end point.

. Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) di-sodium salt solution. Dissolve 4 g

of EDTA (di-sodium) in distilled water. Dilute to 1 L volume with distilled
water. This will makes up 0.025 N EDTA salt solution. This should be
standardized against a standard Magnesium solution.

. Standard Magnesium solution. Dissolve 10.14 g of dried Magnesium sulfate

(MgS0O4°7H20) in distilled water and make up to 1 L volume. This solution
contains 1 mg of Mg per milliliter.

2% Potassium Cyanide (KCN) solution. Dissolve 20 g of KCN to distilled
water. Dilute to 1 L volume with distilled water. This will make up 2% KCN
aqueous solution.

Procedure:

1.
. Add 45 ml distilled water.

. Add 5 ml of the buffer solution.
. Add 1 ml of 2% KCN solution.
. Add 6 drops of F-241 indicator.

nk WN

Measure 5 ml aliquot of Solution A into 125 ml Erlenmeyer flask.

Stir and titrate with the EDTA solution up to the end point. The endpoint is
from red wine to blue.

Note: the presence of large amount of phosphate slows down the development
of the red point because MgNHaPOs is nearly insoluble. In such case add
excess EDTA solution and titrate back with dilute magnesium solution.

The blank is prepared by measuring 5 ml aliquot of standard Magnesium
solution into 125 ml Erlenmeyer flask and repeating steps 2 to 5.

119

Calculations:
1. Note the volume of EDTA used from titrating soil samples for Calcium as this
will be used in the computation of exchangeable Magnesium.

V, 100
(Vs — Vea) X 74 X Ta76
cmol (+) _ Vg “12.16
Exchangeable Mg ( lheg soil) =——Tysoil mef
Where, Vs = Volume of EDTA used for titrating soil sample for Mg

Vca = Volume of EDTA used for titrating soil sample for Ca
Va = Volume of standard Magnesium solution used (5ml)
Ve = Volume of EDTA used for titrating blank (Mg solution)
mcf = Moisture Correction Factor

EDTA or generally known as “versenate” forms complexes with many bivalent
cations, such as Ca’* and Mg?*, during the titration process. However, Ca ions are first titrated
before any Mg ions, thereby turning the solution with Calcium indicator powder from pink to
violet. Using Eriochrome Black T as an indicator, the solution remains red while Ca ions are
being titrated and as long as Mg ions remain untitrated by the versenate. After the versenate
has completely titrated Ca* then Mg", the indicator dye changes the solution from red to
blue.

120

Exchangeable Potassium (Flame Photometer Method using Solution A)

Reagents:

1. Standard Potassium solution. Dissolve 1.9067 g of pure KCI reagent grade in
distilled water and dilute to 1 L.

Procedure:

1. Pipette approximate amounts of standard Potassium solution into 100 ml
volumetric flask. Dilute to volume with distilled water.

Concentration of standard K Volume of 1,000 ppm K Final Volume with distilled |
(ppm K) stock solution water.
0 0 100
5 0.5 100
10 1 100
20 2 100
30 3 100
40 4 100
50 iz 5 100

2. Read the K standards and the Solution A directly in a flame photometer.

w

. Compare with the readings of Solution A to that of the standards.

4. Ifthe amount of potassium is high, take a suitable aliquot and place in a 25 ml
volumetric flask. Dilute to volume with distilled water and read in the flame

photometer.

Calculations:

1. Compute for the slope (m) of the standard readings using concentration (ppm
K) as the independent variable (x-axis) and the flame photometer reading

(“eabsorbance) as the dependent variable (y-axis).
— REx UAL
nYx? — (Lx)?

121

2. Compute for the exchangeable Potassium in the soil using the formula below.

HA 50
— X mann X 100
cmol (+) _m 1,000
Exchangeable K ( leg sol) = Tce mcf
If only 5 ml of the solution was used. Use the formula below.
%A 25 50
— X mam X = X 100
cmol (+) _m 1,000 5
Exchangeable K ( lheg sol) = wag CX me
Where, %A = Flame photometer reading (Absorbance)

m = slope (from standard readings)
50 = total volume of Solution A
100 = 100 g of soil

10 = weight of sample used

39 = atomic weight of K

122

Exchangeable Potassium (Quick Method — Ammonium Acetate Extraction)
Reagents:

1. 1N Ammonium acetate (NH4OAc) extracting solution, pH 7.0. Dissolve
77.08g of NH4OAc in 1 L distilled water. Adjust to pH 7.0 with Acetic acid or
Ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH).

2. Standard Potassium solution, 1,000 ppm K. Dissolve 1.9076 g of pure KCI
reagent grade in distilled water and dilute to 1 L volume. Add a few granules
of Mercuric chloride to inhibit microbial growth.

Procedures:
1. Pipette approximate amounts of standard Potassium solution into 100 ml
volumetric flask. Dilute to volume with distilled water.

Concentration of standard K Volume of 1,000 ppm K Final Volume with distilled
(ppm K) stock solution water.
0 0 100
5 0.5 100
10 1 100
20 2 100
30 3 100
40 4 100
50 5 100

2. Read the series of standard with the highest standard to correspond 100 percent
transmittance (use 768 nm setting).

. Weigh 2.5 g of soil into a 125 Erlenmeyer flask.

. Add 25 ml of 1 N NH4OAc.

Shake for 30 minutes and filter using Whatman No. 42 filter paper.

. Filtrate can be read directly on a flame photometer.

. Compare the emission with that from the series of standard made in NH4OAc.

. If amount of Potassium is high, take 5 ml aliquot and place in a 25 ml
volumetric flask. Dilute to volume with distilled water and read in a flame
photometer.

CINADMKMHEDW

Calculations:
1. Construct the standard curve by plotting percent transmittance (y-axis) against
the concentration (x-axis) of the respective standards. Calculate for slope (m).
_ nyxyi- UML:
~ nDx ?- x)?

123

2. Compute for the exchangeable Potassium in the soil using the formula below.
Exchangeable K (cme se) sol)

_ %A x 25 x 100 x
~ m ~ 2.5 ~ 106 ~ 0.039

If only 5 ml of the solution was used. Use the formula below.

cmol (+) _%A 25 _ 100 1 25
Exchangeable K (' /ieg sol) = ma BE ™* 108 * 0039 * =

x mcf

x mcf

Where, %A = Flame photometer reading (YoAbsorbance)
m = slope (from standard readings)
2.5 = weight of soil used (g)
0.039 = weight (g) of K per milliequivalent

5 = aliquot of extract used

