Academic Editor: César Leal-Costa
Received: 24 July 2025
Revised: 12 September 2025
Accepted: 15 September 2025
Published: 17 September 2025
Citation: Tsapnidou, E.; Moudatsou,
M.; Katharakis, G.; Koukouli, S.;
Rovithis, M.; Kelesi, M.; Stavropoulou,
A. The Impact of Toxic Leadership on
Nurse Retention: A Scoping Review.
Healthcare 2025 ,13, 2341. https://
doi.org/10.3390/healthcare13182341
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Review
The Impact of Toxic Leadership on Nurse Retention:
A Scoping Review
Eleni Tsapnidou1,*
, Maria Moudatsou2, George Katharakis1
, Sofia Koukouli2
, Michael Rovithis3
,
Martha Kelesi1
and Areti Stavropoulou1
1Department of Nursing, School of Health, Faculty of Health and Care Sciences, University of West Attica,
12243 Egaleo, Greece; gkatharakis@uniwa.gr (G.K.); mkel@uniwa.gr (M.K.); astavropoulou@uniwa.gr (A.S.)
2Department of Social Work, Faculty of Health Sciences, Hellenic Mediterranean University,
71410 Heraklion, Greece; moudatsoum@hmu.gr (M.M.); koukouli@hmu.gr (S.K.)
3Department of Business Administration and Tourism, School of Management and Economics Sciences,
Hellenic Mediterranean University, 71410 Heraklion, Greece; rovithis@hmu.gr
*Correspondence: etsapnidou@uniwa.gr
Abstract
Background/Objectives : Toxic leadership has arisen as a matter of serious concern within
the nursing profession, with growing evidence linking it to diminished job satisfaction,
ineffective conflict management, and weakened organizational commitment. These effects
not only compromise nurse retention but also threaten the quality of patient care and overall
healthcare outcomes. This scoping review aimed to examine the impact of toxic nursing
leadership on staff retention by synthesizing evidence from existing literature and a broad
range of published studies. Methods : A comprehensive literature search was conducted
across multiple databases, including PubMed/MEDLINE, Scopus, CINAHL and Science
Direct databases yielding 1356 articles. Of these, 18 met the predefined inclusion criteria.
The scoping review followed the six-stage methodological framework proposed by Arksey
and O’Malley. Thematic analysis identified two core categories: (a) key dimensions shaping
perceptions of toxic leadership and (b) the impact of toxic leadership on nursing staff
retention. Results : The findings reveal that toxic leadership contributes to organizational
silence, emotional exhaustion, diminished psychological safety, and low professional
commitment. Such behaviors not only jeopardize nurse engagement and productivity
but also negatively affect patient safety and care quality. In contrast, leadership styles such
as transformational and transactional leadership are associated with higher job satisfaction,
reduced burnout, and improved retention outcomes. Conclusions : This review underscores
the need for healthcare organizations to identify and address toxic leadership behaviors
promptly. By promoting supportive and ethical leadership styles, institutions can foster
a healthier workplace, improve nurse retention, and ultimately enhance the quality of
care. The study offers practical implications for healthcare administrators, emphasizing
leadership development.
Keywords: toxic leadership; nursing staff; staff retention; job satisfaction
1. Introduction
Leadership is a complex and evolving concept with various definitions. It is often
defined as an influencing process aimed at achieving goals, where leaders mobilize others to
strive for shared aspirations [ 1]. It is also described as the ability to establish and accomplish
objectives, react effectively to challenges and empower others within an organization [ 2].
Healthcare 2025 ,13, 2341 https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare13182341
Healthcare 2025 ,13, 2341 2 of 23
The ambiguity and multiplicity of leadership pose significant challenges. The concept is
often conflated with management, although some argue that leadership and management
are distinct, yet complementary roles [1].
Nursing leadership is often described as the process of influencing and guiding nurses
to attain joint outcomes, with a focus on improving patient outcomes and enhancing
the work environment [ 3,4]. Key attributes of nursing leadership include the ability to
motivate, support and develop team members, as well as to foster decision-making [ 5].
Effective nursing leadership is linked to better patient outcomes, reduced medical errors and
enhanced patient safety. It encourages evidence-based practices, increases staff engagement,
and promotes collaboration with other healthcare professionals [ 6–8]. Positive leadership
styles such as relational leadership promote the nurses’ well-being and productivity, while
addressing challenges and empowering nurses to strive for excellence and quality care [ 6,9].
On the other hand, negative leadership behaviors, such as toxic leadership, are linked
to decreased job satisfaction due to the stress caused by exploitative managerial actions.
These may lead to higher turnover rates and financial losses for the healthcare organiza-
tions [ 10,11]. Toxic leadership affects team dynamics, leading to poor conflict management
and reduced organizational commitment [ 12]. It may also result in a negative working
environment, poor quality of care and increased frequencies of adverse clinical events.
Understanding abusive leadership helps in developing strategies to mitigate its effects,
as this leadership style may undermine workforce stability, productivity, staff resilience,
and patient safety [ 13]. This scoping review synthesizes evidence from multiple countries,
addressing a critical gap by offering a broader perspective on toxic leadership in healthcare,
rather than limiting the analysis to a single organization or setting. Periodically consol-
idating this literature is essential, as the global nursing shortage increasingly threatens
quality of care, patient safety, and staff well-being. This study focuses on how healthcare
professionals identify key dimensions and behaviors of toxic leadership and how toxic
leadership influences nurse retention in healthcare organizations.
1.1. Toxic Leadership and the Toxic Leader
Toxic leadership is a detrimental style of leadership characterized by harmful be-
haviors and attitudes that negatively impact organizations and individuals. Smidt [ 14]
suggested that toxic leadership encompasses five core elements: abusive supervision,
authoritarianism, narcissism, self-promotion, and behavioral inconsistency.
The concept of toxic leadership was introduced in 1996, initially explored within
corporate and military settings. It was not until 2007 that empirical research began to
connect abusive leadership with higher education systems, highlighting its influence on
leadership culture in these environments [ 15,16]. Over the years, the research has expanded
to include various organizational contexts, including education and manufacturing [17].
Dysfunctional leadership is marked by behaviors such as abuse, bullying, and de-
structive actions that create a harmful work environment. These leaders often aim to
conceal their incompetence and maintain control, leading to increased ambiguity and
confusion within the organization [ 18,19]. They often exhibit behaviors of being autocratic,
manipulative, controlling, deceitful, and callous. These demeanors distinguish them from
merely difficult leaders and contribute to a toxic work environment [ 18,20]. The personality
traits associated with toxic leaders include Machiavellianism, narcissism, and psychopathy,
which contribute to organizational failures [ 21]. These dispositions often lead to unethical
decision-making and a focus on personal gain over organizational well-being [21,22].
Destructive leadership negatively affects job satisfaction, commitment, and turnover
intention, with organizational culture playing a mediating role in these outcomes [ 17]. It
undermines employee well-being, health, morale, and productivity, ultimately impacting
Healthcare 2025 ,13, 2341 3 of 23
organizational effectiveness [ 23]. Oppressive leadership in higher education exerts harmful
effects on faculty, staff, and students. Such practices lead to emotional strain, lower
job satisfaction, and widespread organizational dysfunction. [ 22]. Toxic leadership, as a
destructive model, is characterized by behaviors—including manipulation, pressure, and
recognized humiliation—that decompose organizational culture, undermine employee
morale, and compromise institutional efficacy.
1.2. Nursing Staff Retention
The shortage of nurses is a critical issue affecting healthcare systems globally. This
scarcity has been persistent and is exacerbated by various factors. The aging of nursing staff
leads to a gap in the workforce as there are not enough new entrants to fill these positions.
Declining enrolment in nursing programs further exacerbates this issue [ 24]. The strain
of continuous high stress working conditions leads to professional burnout, ultimately
increasing nurse turnover and diminishing workforce sustainability [ 25,26]. Economic
challenges and other social factors, such as the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, have
intensified the shortage by increasing job vacancies and affecting the well-being of the
existing nurses [27,28].
Nursing staff are integral to maintaining a safe hospital environment and ensuring
high-quality patient care. Their engagement in hospital safety strategies is crucial for
achieving optimal patient safety outcomes [ 29]. Adequate nursing staff levels are associated
with better patient safety outcomes, such as reduced fall rates and hospital-acquired
pressure ulcers. Retaining experienced nurses also plays a significant role in patient
safety [ 30]. Instead, low nurse staffing levels are consistently associated with adverse
patient outcomes. These include higher rates of in-hospital mortality, hospital-acquired
infections, medication errors, and patient falls [ 31–34]. Studies have shown that inadequate
staffing leads to increased missed care, which directly impacts the quality of care and
patient safety [ 35–37]. Additionally, personnel shortages in emergency departments have
been linked to longer door-to-discharge times and an increased number of patients leaving
without being seen [38].
Nursing staff retention is a critical issue in healthcare, influenced by a variety of factors.
A positive work environment and high job satisfaction are crucial for retaining nursing
staff. Factors such as supportive management and leadership, group cohesion, and reduced
job stress contribute significantly to retention [ 39–42]. Factors such as staffing levels, career
advancement opportunities, and financial remuneration contribute significantly to the
decrease in the turnover levels [ 43,44]. Nurses who feel appreciated and supported by their
managers and peers are more likely to stay. Recognition of their work and contributions is
vital for retention [39,44].
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Aim of the Study
The aim of this scoping review was to examine the impact of toxic leadership on nurses’
retention. This research specifically aims to respond to the following research questions
that were developed following the PIO (Population, Intervention, Outcome) framework
where Population is the Nurses, Intervention is the toxic leadership and Outcome is the
nursing staff retention:
Q1: What are the key dimensions and behaviors associated with toxic leadership in
nursing as identified by the healthcare professionals?
Q2: How does toxic leadership influence nursing staff on their career decisions and
retention in healthcare organizations?
Healthcare 2025 ,13, 2341 4 of 23
2.2. Design
A scoping review is a rigorous exploratory methodology designed to systematically
map the range of existing literature on a defined research topic. Unlike traditional sys-
tematic reviews, which focus on answering highly specific questions, scoping reviews
employ a structured yet flexible approach to identify key concepts, evidence gaps, and
emerging trends within a field. By applying predefined criteria, this methodology facili-
tates a comprehensive analysis and synthesis of existing literature, enabling researchers to
address their study’s broader research questions [ 45]. In alignment with well-known best
practices, this study adopts the systematic six-stage framework originally developed by
Arksey and O’Malley [ 45], ensuring methodological transparency and accuracy throughout
the review process.
2.3. Identifying Relevant Studies
Eligibility criteria. This analysis incorporated peer-reviewed studies examining toxic
leadership in healthcare organizations, including quantitative (cross-sectional, longitudi-
nal), qualitative, and mixed-methods research designs. The inclusion criteria required that
studies (a) specifically analyze toxic leadership behaviors and their organizational impacts,
(b) be published in English between 2019 and 2025 to ensure contemporary relevance,
and (c) provide empirical evidence from healthcare contexts. Studies that (a) addressed
leadership generically without focusing on toxic behaviors, (b) were published prior to
2019, except those that were cited in the conceptual framework, (b) lacked peer-review
validation, or (c) were unavailable as full-text articles, were excluded. Specific consideration
was given to excluding studies that conflated toxic leadership with other negative leader-
ship styles (e.g., laissez-faire or incompetent leadership) to maintain conceptual clarity. A
thorough selection process ensured inclusion of the most relevant and methodologically
robust research on the harmful impacts of toxic leadership in healthcare organizations.
Information sources and search strategy . A comprehensive, multi-database search strat-
egy was executed across PubMed/MEDLINE, Scopus, CINAHL, and Science Direct to
capture the full spectrum of research on toxic leadership in healthcare backgrounds. The
search incorporated an in-depth set of leadership-related terms including “toxic leader-
ship”, “abusive leadership”, “negative leadership”, “oppressive leadership”, and “de-
structive leadership,” combined with healthcare-specific terms through Boolean operators
(AND/OR/NOT) to ensure methodological consistency. The search strategy specifically
targeted studies examining these leadership styles’ impacts on nursing staff and healthcare
organizations, with all search parameters and term combinations systematically docu-
mented in Table 1 to ensure transparency and reproducibility.
Table 1. Search Strategy: Key Terms and Boolean Operators.
Term Boolean Operator Term Boolean Operator Term
Toxic1Leadership AND Healthcare Organizations
Toxic Leadership AND Nursing Staff
Toxic Leadership AND Healthcare Organizations AND Nursing Staff
Toxic Leadership OR Nursing Staff AND Healthcare Organizations
Healthcare Organizations OR Nursing Staff AND Toxic Leadership
1The primary search term ‘toxic leadership’ was systematically expanded to include conceptually related terms
such as ‘abusive leadership,’ ‘destructive leadership,’ and ‘oppressive leadership’ to ensure comprehensive
coverage of the literature.
2.4. Study Selection
The study selection process followed a thorough, systematic approach, as detailed in
the PRISMA flowchart (Figure 1) [ 4]. Initial database searches across PubMed/MEDLINE,
Scopus, CINAHL, and Science Direct yielded 1356 records. After removing duplicates
Healthcare 2025 ,13, 2341 5 of 23
(n= 556) and records deemed ineligible through automated tools and manual screening
(n= 441), 359 studies underwent full-text assessment. Of these studies, 231 were sought
for retrieval, with 160 unavailable, leaving 71 studies for eligibility evaluation. Following
a stringent review, 53 studies were excluded—32 for irrelevance to Research Question 1
(RQ1) and 21 to Research Question 2 (RQ2)—resulting in 18 studies that met all inclusion
criteria. These studies were selected for their explicit focus on toxic leadership and its
detrimental impacts within healthcare backgrounds. This deliberate selection ensures the
review captures the most relevant evidence on toxic leadership’s consequences, providing
a necessary contrast to dominant narratives of positive leadership.
 
Figure 1. PRISMA Flow Diagram of Study Selection.
2.5. Charting the Data
In accordance with Arksey and O’Malley’s established framework [ 45], a carefully
designed data extraction and synthesis process was implemented to systematically examine
toxic leadership in healthcare contexts. The methodology began with the development of
a structured data extraction table designed to capture critical elements from each study,
including specific toxic leadership behaviors, their healthcare-specific consequences, and
key methodological characteristics. To ensure reliability, a pilot test on a subset of four
Healthcare 2025 ,13, 2341 6 of 23
studies (approximately 22% of the total studies) was conducted. During this pilot, two
researchers independently extracted data using the preliminary table. The process revealed
minor ambiguities in how certain toxic leadership behaviors and outcomes were classified.
Based on these findings, the extraction criteria were refined. Inter-rater reliability (IRR)
was then calculated by comparing the two researchers independent coding decisions
across all extraction fields. Cohen’s kappa coefficient was used, which adjusts for chance
agreement, and the resulting score exceeded 0.85, indicating strong agreement. Following
this refinement, the finalized extraction framework was applied consistently across all
18 studies. Three researchers with expertise in organizational behavior and healthcare
leadership independently extracted data from the allocated studies. Due to a high initial
inter-researcher agreement, few significant discrepancies arose. The limited discrepancies
that did occur were resolved through systematic consensus discussions, and all decisions
were documented to maintain transparency throughout the analysis process. The final
synthesized data, presented in Appendix A, provides a comprehensive overview of the
included studies. This includes detailed information on authorship, publication dates,
geographic focus, research objectives, methodological approaches, and key findings related
to toxic leadership’s impact on healthcare environments (see Table A1). This methodical
approach aligns with best practices in scoping reviews and the consensus-based validation
process ensures the findings are both reproducible and accurate.
2.6. Data Analysis
The extracted data were systematically analyzed within two conceptual categories:
(a) the key dimensions shaping perceptions of toxic leadership in healthcare environments,
and (b) its measurable impact on nursing staff retention. These thematic dimensions were
chosen, in order to reveal critical patterns across the literature, with the first thematic
category exposing how nurses identify and experience toxic leadership through specific
behavioral manifestations (e.g., psychological manipulation, bullying, and inconsistent
decision-making), while the second category documented its devastating consequences on
workforce stability (including increased turnover intentions, emotional exhaustion, and
premature career abandonment). Three lead researchers conducted the primary analysis
coding and categorizing findings, followed by iterative consensus-building sessions with
the entire research team to verify emerging themes. This collaborative methodology
supported robust interpretation of the findings while preserving the contextual integrity
of the original studies. The final synthesis was structured according to PRISMA-ScR
guidelines [ 46]. This scoping review was registered on the Open Science Framework
platform on 25 July 2025 (Registration DOI https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/UWY4G).
2.7. Consultation
Preliminary findings were presented to critical evaluation through discussions with
the research team to ensure interpretive validity. Following this, a structured validation
process with four external stakeholders from the healthcare sector was conducted. These
individuals were selected based on their extensive leadership experience and expertise in
organizational management within healthcare environments. They were then invited to
critically assess the clarity, accuracy, and significance of these findings, offering feedback
on whether the results resonated with their professional experiences. Additionally, they
highlighted practical considerations for addressing toxic leadership in institutional settings,
such as policy adjustments, leadership training programs, and support mechanisms for
affected staff. Their insights provided valuable external perspectives on both the inter-
pretation of the results including the identified dimensions of toxic leadership and its
documented effects on nursing staff retention.
Healthcare 2025 ,13, 2341 7 of 23
3. Results
3.1. Characteristics of the Included Studies
As presented in Table 2, the included studies varied by region, publication period,
methodological approach, and thematic emphasis on toxic leadership dimensions or nurse
retention outcomes.
Table 2. Summary of Included Studies’ Characteristics.
Characteristics Studies n(%)
Area of Studies
Europe 2 (11.1)
Asia 8 (44.4)
USA 1 (5.6)
Africa 7 (38.9)
Year of publication
2019 3 (16.7)
2020 2 (11.1)
2021 2 (11.1)
2022 5 (27.8)
2023 3 (16.7)
2024 2 (11.1)
2025 1 (5.6)
Type of studies
quantitative study 10 (55.6)
qualitative study 2 (11.1)
mixed methods 6 (33.3)
Categorization of studies
key dimensions shaping perceptions of toxic leadership 5 (27.8)
impact of toxic leadership on nursing staff retention 13 (72.2)
The scoping review incorporated 18 studies examining toxic leadership in healthcare,
with distinct geographical and methodological patterns. Geographically, nearly half origi-
nated from Asia (44.4%, n= 8), followed closely by Africa (38.9%, n= 7), while European
and North American studies were underrepresented (11.1% and 5.6%, respectively). Tem-
porally, most publications emerged in the latter half of the review period (61.1%, n= 11;
2022–2025), suggesting growing research interest. Methodologically, cross-sectional designs
dominated (55.6%, n= 10), with mixed methods approaches representing a third of studies
(33.3%, n= 6). Thematic analysis revealed a strong emphasis on toxic leadership’s impact
on nurse retention (72.2%, n= 13), outweighing investigations of its subjective experiences
(27.8%, n= 5). This distribution highlights a critical research gap in understanding how
toxic leadership is identified versus its measurable workforce consequences.
3.2. Perceptions of Toxic Leadership Key Dimensions
Concerning the views of Chinese nurses on the nature, features, and response mech-
anisms related to toxic managerial behaviors in nursing leadership roles, Guo et al. [ 47]
carried out a qualitative study conducting semi-structured in-depth interviews with
12 registered nurses in China. This study pointed out that the toxic leader depicts self-
Healthcare 2025 ,13, 2341 8 of 23
centeredness, low emotional intelligence, narrow-mindedness and competitiveness. Al-
though the nurses notice their managers’ abusive leadership traits, they choose either to
tolerate it or to ignore it, as they regard it as common or inevitable. They tendentially make
positive evaluations about their oppressive managers for fear of receiving punishment or
vindictive behaviors, purposeful unfairness, excessive pressure and workloads. The nurses
develop silence as coping mechanism, they may choose the night shift to avoid interaction
with their leader, and they even self-reflect when they receive negative behaviors.
Staff withdrawal owing to corrosive leadership behaviors was also studied by Dur-
rah et al. [ 48], obtaining information from 413 healthcare workers in France. This study
examined the two dimensions of staff turnover, the psychological and the physical, indi-
vidually and revealed that various negative leadership behaviors trigger different work-
force reactions. More specifically this study concluded that authoritarian leadership is
linked to physical resignation, whereas self-promotion is more influential on psychological
withdrawal behaviors. Other destructive leadership characteristics were the unpredictabil-
ity and uncertainty of the supervisor, which led to lower workforce engagement and
eventually turnover.
Bakkal et al. [ 49] investigated the impact of harmful leadership on nurses’ and hos-
pital employees’ job satisfaction and turnover intention and the mediating effect of their
perceptions of dysfunctional leadership behaviors. The study was conducted in Turkey
and included a sample of 658 participants. The findings of this study indicate an inverse
relationship between job satisfaction and the components of toxic leadership, specifically
unappreciativeness, selfishness, and self-serving behavior. The study suggests that when
employees’ perception of self-respect is attacked, their self-confidence and individual per-
formance deteriorate. Consequently, as job satisfaction declines, turnover intention tends
to increase.
Ofei et al. [ 50] sought to evaluate the characteristics and the relationship between
toxic leadership traits in nurse management and nurses’ perceived job fulfillment and
productivity in the healthcare sector. Utilizing a sample of 943 nurses from various hospitals
in Ghana, this study underlined intemperance, humiliation, narcissism, and self-promotion
as the most common attributes of despotic leadership. The outcomes of this study also
displayed a significant positive correlation between autocratic leadership behaviors and
turnover intentions. Moreover, job satisfaction appears to act as a mediating factor in this
relationship, suggesting that the detrimental effects of toxic leadership on retention are, in
part, driven by its impact on nurses’ satisfaction at work.
In another study in Egypt [ 51], in which 250 nurses took part, two hospitals, a univer-
sity hospital and a health insurance hospital, were compared. In this study each hospital
was studied in terms of how nurses responded to adverse leadership behaviors. Results
highlighted that nurses’ intent to stay was negatively affected by authoritarian and un-
predictable leadership in the university hospital and by self-promoting leadership in the
health insurance hospital.
3.3. Toxic Leadership and Its Impact on Staff Retention
Labrague L. et al. [ 52] in their study in 2020 in Philippines with 770 participants
compared the impact of the toxic and transformational leadership on the nurses’ work
attitudes. According to their findings, toxic leadership results in diminished job satisfaction,
elevated stress levels, increased rates of absenteeism, and a heightened intent to leave the
profession. On the other hand, transformational leadership -where managers inspire and
empower their staff- leads to higher job satisfaction and lower turnover intentions.
Ofei et al. [ 53] in Ghana performed an investigation about the nature and effect of
destructive nurse leadership conduct for nursing staff’s perceptions of job satisfaction and
Healthcare 2025 ,13, 2341 9 of 23
productivity. In this descriptive study 943 nurses took part and revealed that emotionally
damaging leadership behaviors of nurse managers related to decreased psychological em-
powerment, job dissatisfaction, poor work performance and greater likelihood of departure
from the nursing profession and the affiliated institution.
Ramdan and Eid [ 54] in their research in Egypt, with a sample size of 544 participants,
compared the effects of the oppressive leadership styles of nurse managers on nursing
staff in two ICUs. They assessed their nurse manager’s harmful leadership related to their
selected conflict management methods and organizational commitment levels. The study
demonstrated a positive relationship between toxic leadership and confrontational conflict
management styles and a negative correlation with the collaborative dispute resolution
methods. The results also indicated a negative correlation between malicious leadership
and the nurses’ organizational commitment in both hospitals highlighting the significance
of the leader’s behavior regarding staff retainment and sustainability.
In China, Siyal et al. [ 55] conducted research with 430 healthcare professionals ex-
amining the impact of abusive supervision on the employees’ performance. The results
of this study underscore that destructive leadership has a negative impact on employee
performance, with job satisfaction and extrinsic motivation mediating this relationship.
Consequently the healthcare organization’s image was also affected by the reduction in
the quality of its services, due to the lack of interest of the employees receiving negative
behaviors. On the other hand, employees who were motivated and satisfied with their
leadership, depicted higher quality performance.
Regarding the impact of destructive leadership on the employee health, Trépanier
et al. [ 56] undertook research among 399 Canadian nurses. This study analyzed the mental
and motivational processes involved in how tyrannical and laissez-faire leadership styles
influence employee burnout, affective commitment, and job performance. According to the
outcomes of this study, tyrannical leadership style is related to emotional dysregulation,
low affective commitment and poor performance, which jeopardize both patient safety
and organizational success. Also, laissez-faire leadership style is highly associated with
autonomy frustration, burnout and low work engagement. Both negative managerial styles
were found to erode motivation, self-determination, feelings of competence, self-worth and
appreciation, leading ultimately to resignation figuratively or literally.
The impact of different leadership styles on healthcare personnel’s well-being was
investigated by Erschens et al. [ 57] in Germany, using a sample of 1137 participants from
all three occupational groups (physicians, nursing staff and administrative employees).
The findings of this study underlined the positive effects of effective leadership as well as
the negative repercussions of dysfunctional leadership. As far as the group of nurses is
concerned, those who experienced transformational and transactional leadership styles,
exhibited higher well-being scores than the ones who incurred destructive and laissez-
faire leadership.
Low et al. [ 58] led a research initiative in Malaysia, in which 377 nurses took part,
and pointed out the effects of abusive supervision on the nurses’ negative and absurd
behaviors. More specifically this study showed that nurses who perceived injustice or
discrimination had low power distance orientation and external locus of control, and
were more likely to acquire counterproductive behaviors. This tendency arises from their
difficulty in accepting inequalities and their attempt to restore a sense of justice. The
outcomes of this study advocate, that applying unethical nursing leadership results in
antisocial behaviors, reduces compliance with the rules and the nurses’ interest about
organizational goals, increases organization-oriented aggression and bullying incidents.
Shipl et al. [ 59] studied the effect of manipulative leadership on the nurses’ follow-
ership effectiveness. In their study in Egypt participated 343 nurses and revealed, that
Healthcare 2025 ,13, 2341 10 of 23
workforce responsiveness negatively correlated with leadership practices that undermine
team cohesion, due to the instability, stress, rigidly, discriminations and perceived threats.
Furthermore, a weak but statistically significant negative correlation was observed between
harmful leadership and nurses’ overall effectiveness. This finding indicates that nurses,
by employing professionalism and critical thinking, were able to buffer the adverse effects
of toxic leadership on their performance. The study also identified a significant negative
effect of abusive supervision on the nurses’ active engagement. This association may be at-
tributed to characteristic behaviors of oppressive supervisors, including public belittlement
of staff and persistent reminders of past errors and failures. Such actions serve as workplace
stressors, eroding employees’ psychological resources and well-being. Consequently, staff
exposed to corrosive supervision is more inclined to disengage and exhibit silence in the
workplace, thereby reducing their levels of professional and organizational commitment.
Organizational silence among nurses and its repercussions, is a major problem ad-
dressed by Berma et al. [ 60] in their research, which took place in Egypt and had a total of
235 participants. This study underscored that workplace toxicity may originate from either
managerial figures or colleagues, highlighting multiple potential sources of a detrimen-
tal work environment. One quarter of the nurses exhibited high levels of organizational
silence as a coping mechanism. Organizational silence—a phenomenon characterised by
the reluctance of the employees to share their thoughts and ideas about organizational
issues- may stem from various concerns, including fear of losing professional respect,
harming relationships with senior management, an inability to openly discuss work-related
issues, the presence of a bureaucratic and non-transparent hospital system, fear of puni-
tive responses, self-neglect, inadequate organizational support, and former experiences
of abusive supervision. Additionally, although the majority of the nurses were highly
committed and passionate to thrive, workplace toxicity fosters increased organizational
silence, hindering professional growth and productivity, and ultimately contributing to
higher turnover intentions.
Budak & Erdal [ 61] examined the role of burnout syndrome as a mediator in the link
between malevolent leadership and job satisfaction in healthcare environments. Utilizing
a sample of 412 participants employed in public hospitals in Turkey, the results revealed
that ego-driven and self-serving leadership appears to exert a significantly negative impact
on job satisfaction related to managerial roles. Furthermore, it was found to be associ-
ated with aspects of burnout encompassing exhaustion, depersonalization, and decreased
sense of personal achievement. Burnout resulting from problem-solving demands and
efforts to contribute meaningfully also appeared to be influenced by counterproductive
leadership practices.
Mrayyan [ 62] posited in her research in Jordan, the evident ramifications of destruc-
tive nursing leadership in workforce preservation. Involving 384 respondents, this study
investigated the presence of toxic leadership among nursing leaders in Jordan and its
relationship with nurses’ workplace satisfaction, job engagement, and turnover intention.
Destructive leadership was identified as a critical determinant of reduced workplace satis-
faction and diminished job engagement among nurses, primarily through the cultivation of
a dysfunctional and unbalanced work environment. Such conditions contribute to both
emotional disconnection and physical disengagement, driven by the sustained intensity
and demands of the nursing role. Despite these adverse effects, many nurses demonstrated
reluctance to leave their positions. This behavior may be attributed to a cost–benefit anal-
ysis shaped by financial constraints and familial obligations, which make employment
mobility impractical. While a subset of nurses continued to exhibit professional pride
and emotional investment in their work, overall job engagement appeared to be neither
spontaneous nor sustainable under persistent tyrannical leadership. The findings of this
Healthcare 2025 ,13, 2341 11 of 23
study concluded that this dynamic poses significant managerial concerns, as prolonged
dissatisfaction may ultimately lead to increased turnover intentions and potential attrition
from the nursing profession.
Labrague [ 63] carried out a research study in Philippines, utilizing a sample of
283 nurses. The study aimed to emphasize the direct and mediated influences of harmful
leadership styles on occupational satisfaction and psychological discomfort, with work–
family conflict serving as a mediating variable. The findings of the study demonstrated that
authoritarian and oppressive leadership behaviors exhibited by nurse managers, exert a
substantial detrimental effect on employee contentment and its influence on psychological
well-being among nurses in emergency settings A critical insight from the analysis was that
work–family conflict has partial mediating effects in the dynamic between malicious leader-
ship and these adverse outcomes. This indicates that toxic leadership not only has a direct
detrimental effect on nurses’ well-being, but also indirectly exacerbates dissatisfaction and
psychological strain by intensifying conflicts between professional and personal roles.
Farghaly Abdelaliem & Abou Zeid [ 64] in their study in Egypt evaluated the rela-
tionship between corrosive leadership and organizational functionality among nursing
professionals in a university-affiliated hospital, while also examining how organizational
silence mediates this relationship. The study identified a significant inverse relationship be-
tween dictatorial leadership and organizational performance. Furthermore, a pronounced
negative correlation was observed between unethical leadership and nurses’ organizational
silence, indicating that these leadership styles detrimentally affect both individual job
satisfaction and the propensity of nurses to withhold their opinions. Organizational silence
was found to act as a mediating factor in the relationship between arbitrary leadership and
nurses’ organizational performance. Furthermore, a negative correlation was identified
between dictatorial leadership and organizational performance.
4. Discussion
The findings from this study indicated that toxic leadership behaviors like self-
centeredness, low emotional intelligence, rigidity, and excessive competitiveness play
a major role in creating and maintaining a culture of silence within healthcare organizations.
Furthermore, leadership practices that instill fear are associated with organizational silence,
which, in turn, adversely impacts individual development and overall productivity. These
dynamics collectively foster increased turnover intentions among nurses [ 47,49,60,64].
These findings are consistent with the study by Lukacik and Bourdage [ 65], which simi-
larly identified a correlation between abusive supervision and heightened levels of self-
promotion and intimidation. A growing body of literature across various disciplines
further supports the assertion that destructive leadership is significantly linked to reduced
employee voice. Under such leadership, employees are more inclined to withhold their
opinions or merely reiterate the perspectives favored by their superiors, thereby impeding
organizational learning and growth [ 66–68]. Kazmi et al. [ 69] in their research also found
that despotic leadership fosters increased employee withdrawal and silent acquiescence,
mediated through leader-member exchange and work–life quality.
Furthermore, the study showed that authoritarian and laissez-faire leadership styles
act as toxic traits that contribute to autonomy frustration, burnout, lower work engagement,
higher turnover intentions, reduced job satisfaction, and greater work-related stress among
nurses [ 48,51,56,63]. These findings align with the research of Schaubroeck et al. [ 70],
who demonstrated that authoritarian leadership exerts a detrimental impact on employee
performance, organizational commitment, and intention to remain with the organization.
However, the results partially diverge from those of Chen et al. [ 71], who found that
while authoritarian leadership may impede work performance through the activation of
Healthcare 2025 ,13, 2341 12 of 23
hindrance stressors, it may simultaneously enhance performance by eliciting challenge
stressors, contingent upon the leader’s power distance orientation. Additionally, the laissez-
faire leadership style has been consistently associated, across multiple studies, with adverse
outcomes such as heightened job stress and workload, diminished job satisfaction and
engagement, and ultimately, reduced staff retention rates [72–75].
Concerning the impact of toxic leadership on staff retention, research evidence indi-
cates that nursing personnel exposed to such behaviors demonstrate higher absenteeism,
elevated stress levels, and stronger intentions to leave the organization.
In contrast, transformational and transactional leadership were associated with higher
job satisfaction and lower staff turnover [ 52,57]. A substantial body of research supports
these findings, highlighting that both transformational and transactional leadership styles
have been frequently associated with higher job satisfaction and lower rates of employee
turnover among nursing professionals [76–81].
Moreover, toxic leadership behaviors are markedly associated with lower organi-
zational and professional commitment. This relationship is manifested through poor
employee performance, reduced psychological empowerment, and heightened job dis-
satisfaction, which collectively contribute to both organizational and professional with-
drawal [ 50,54,59]. These findings are consistent with the study by Alsadaan et al. [ 12],
which identified a link between toxic leadership and reduced organizational commitment
among nurses. Similarly, Mahgob et al. [ 82] demonstrated that toxic leadership adversely
affects staff nurses’ commitment to their professional roles.
Relevant research indicated a strong relationship between toxic leadership and burnout
syndrome—comprising its fundamental elements of psychological fatigue, detachment, and
reduced feelings of personal efficacy—and highlighted its detrimental effect on nursing staff
retention. These effects ultimately contribute to employee withdrawal, primarily driven
by diminished job satisfaction, even though some may be more resilient due to emotional
investment and professionalism [ 61,62]. These results are additionally corroborated by
Palvimo et al. [ 83], who reported a positive association concerning destructive leadership,
workplace demands, and burnout in nursing personnel. Similarly, Nunes and Palma-
Moreira [ 84] found that toxic leadership contributes to increased burnout syndrome and
turnover intentions. Their study also revealed that disengagement partially mediates
this relationship.
Another key finding of the present study is that toxic leadership has adverse effects
not only on nurses but also on healthcare organizations, particularly with regard to staff
retention. Specifically, it contributes to diminished employee performance, reduced job
satisfaction, and weakened extrinsic motivation, all of which adversely impact the quality
of organizational services and, ultimately, the institution’s public image [55]. This finding
is further supported by the work of Solehudin and Syabanasyah [ 85], who demonstrated
that toxic leadership exerts a negative influence on nurses’ motivation, occupational con-
tentment, output, and staff turnover intentions, ultimately contributing to higher rates of
employee attrition. Similarly, Labrague [ 11] found that toxic nursing leadership is associ-
ated with heightened occurrences of adverse events and a decrease in care effectiveness
within medical units. Collectively, these studies corroborate the initial conclusion of our
study, regarding the detrimental impact of toxic leadership in healthcare organizations.
The study also revealed that counterproductive work behaviors among nurses may
serve as a response mechanism to toxic leadership traits, perceived injustice, and experi-
ences of discrimination within the workplace [ 58]. This finding is further substantiated by
multiple studies which have shown that behaviors such as abusive supervision, perceived
unfair treatment, and negative management styles directly contribute to an increase in coun-
terproductive work behaviors among nurses. These behaviors are often associated with
Healthcare 2025 ,13, 2341 13 of 23
a rise in adverse events, including patient complaints, medication errors, and healthcare-
associated infections. Additionally, affected nurses tend to develop organizational cynicism
and harbor negative attitudes towards their work environment [11,86–89].
Theoretical and practical implications
On the theoretical side, the findings of this study provide further confirmation of
the Destructive Leadership Model, particularly regarding its defining characteristics and
outcomes for both nursing staff and healthcare organizations [ 90]. Consistent with the
model’s description of destructive leadership as systematic and repeated behavior that
undermines organizational goals and staff well-being, our review identified multiple exam-
ples of toxic leadership in nursing [ 48–51,58,59]. For instance, the model emphasizes abuse
of power, bullying, intimidation, and humiliation; our findings reveal that nurses experienc-
ing these behaviors report decreased psychological safety, fear of reprisal, and reluctance to
voice concerns [ 47,48,50,53,56–60,63]. Similarly, belittling, humiliation, intimidation and
favoritism, also highlighted in the model, were found in our review to erode trust, damage
team cohesion, and foster perceptions of inequity and discrimination that drive turnover,
lower job satisfaction and commitment [ 47,49,50,52,54,55,57–64]. In line with the model’s
claim that destructive leaders sabotage organizational goals for personal gain and misuse
resources, evidence from our review shows that toxic nursing leaders prioritize personal
authority and control over patient care quality, thereby compromising organizational ef-
fectiveness [ 48–51,58,59]. Finally, our findings mirror the model’s predicted outcomes:
toxic leadership in nursing was consistently associated with reduced job satisfaction and
commitment, heightened stress and burnout, poorer health outcomes among staff and
lower productivity [ 48–50,52–57,59–64]. Collectively, these parallels confirm and extend the
Destructive Leadership Model by demonstrating its applicability to the healthcare sector
and highlighting the particularly detrimental impact of toxic leadership on nurse retention.
These findings also align with and extend the Job Demands–Resources (JD–R) model,
which emphasizes the balance between workplace demands and resources as a key pre-
dictor of employee well-being and performance [ 91]. Toxic leaders intensify psychoso-
cial job demands, including emotional strain, fear, and role conflict, while simultane-
ously undermining critical job resources such as empowerment, recognition, and sup-
port [ 47,49,50,54,58–60]. Within the JD–R framework, this imbalance accelerates burnout
and disengagement—outcomes that our review identifies as major contributors to nurse
turnover [ 48–52,56,59,61]. In combination, the Destructive Leadership Model and the JD–R
model offer complementary perspectives: the former delineates destructive leadership be-
haviors and their toxic consequences, while the latter elucidates the mechanisms by which
elevated demands and depleted resources translate into burnout and attrition in nursing.
The practical implications of these findings underscore the need for proactive, multi-
level interventions to mitigate destructive leadership in healthcare. Mandatory ethical and
transformational leadership development programs for middle managers and executives
can cultivate constructive behaviors and reinforce a positive organizational culture. Stan-
dardized protocols for the early detection of toxic behaviors—incorporating workplace
climate indicators, 360◦evaluations, and exit interviews—can facilitate timely intervention.
Confidential reporting systems are essential to allow staff to disclose abusive behaviors
safely, while comprehensive support mechanisms—including psychological counseling,
mediation, and, when necessary, temporary reassignment—can protect and assist affected
personnel. Finally, integrating leadership metrics into internal quality audits would ensure
that leadership practices and personnel management are assessed with the same rigor as
clinical outcomes, promoting accountability and sustainable organizational improvement.
Healthcare 2025 ,13, 2341 14 of 23
5. Limitations and Strengths
This scoping review offers additional evidence regarding the relationship between
toxic leadership and nursing staff retention, with a key strength being its synthesis of
findings from multiple countries, providing a comprehensive and globally informed per-
spective. Nonetheless, despite the rigorous search and selection strategy employed, some
relevant studies may have been excluded, particularly those published in languages other
than English, introducing potential publication and language biases. A significant limita-
tion is the regional focus of the studies analyzed, which were predominantly drawn from
Asia and Africa, with limited representation from the United States and Europe. Addition-
ally, cultural factors influencing leadership dynamics may shape differing responses to
toxic leadership behaviors, potentially affecting the generalizability of the findings. Other
limitations include the possible underrepresentation of qualitative studies, which may
restrict insight into nurses’ lived experiences, and methodological heterogeneity across the
included studies, such as differences in design, measurement tools, and sample character-
istics, which may influence the interpretation of results. These limitations highlight the
need for future research that incorporates more diverse geographic and cultural contexts,
qualitative approaches, and standardized methodologies to strengthen the evidence base
and enhance understanding of toxic leadership in healthcare. Longitudinal studies are also
suggested to evaluate the impact of interventions designed to mitigate toxic leadership and
their effects on nurses’ job satisfaction, retention, and overall well-being over time. Addi-
tionally, multicenter comparative studies involving hospitals with diverse organizational
cultures would provide insights into how contextual factors influence the prevalence and
consequences of toxic leadership
6. Conclusions
Exploring toxic leadership in nursing is critical to enhancing nurse job satisfaction,
reducing the incidence of adverse patient outcomes, and improving the overall quality of
healthcare delivery. By identifying and addressing toxic behaviors, healthcare organizations
can create a more supportive and effective work environment for nurses, increase staff
retainment and decrease their intention to leave the profession, ultimately benefiting patient
care. By identifying specific negative leadership patterns and their consequences on nursing
staff retention, this paper provides evidence recommendations for healthcare administrators
aiming to foster healthier, more resilient and sustainable workplace environments.
Author Contributions: E.T., A.S. and G.K.; conceptualization, methodology, software, data curation:
validation, and writing—original draft preparation. A.S., S.K. and M.M.; writing—reviewing and
editing and project administration. E.T., G.K., M.R. and M.K.; writing—reviewing and editing and
supervision. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created or analyzed in this study. Data sharing is
not applicable to this article.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Healthcare 2025 ,13, 2341 15 of 23
Appendix A
Table A1. Research studies by Author(s), Country, Aim, Data Sample, Study Design, Data Collection and Data Analysis Method and Finding(s).
A/A Author(s), Year Country Aim Data Sample Study Design Data Collection MethodData Analysis
MethodFinding(s)
1.Labrague et al.,
2020 [52]PhilippinesThis study examined the
influence of toxic and
transformational leadership
practices on nurses’ job
satisfaction, psychological
distress, absenteeism, and intent
to leave the organization or the
nursing profession.770Cross-sectional
studyToxic Leadership Behaviors of
Nurse Managers Scale, Global
Transformational Leadership, Job
Satisfaction Index, Perceived
Stress Scale, Two single-item
measures developed by O’Driscoll
and Beehr, Absenteeism was
assessed using a
researcher-designed single item
questionSPSS Version
22.0Toxic leadership
increased distress
and absenteeism;
transformational
leadership improved
job satisfaction.
2.Hossny et al.,
2023 [51]EgyptThis study was designed to
assess nurses’ perception of the
effects of organizational climate
and toxic leadership behaviors on
their intention to stay and the
differences in these domains
between the two hospitals
studied250descriptive
comparative
studythe organizational climate
questionnaire (42 items categorized
into nine domains), the toxic
leadership scale (30 items
categorized into five domains), and
the
Chinese version of the
intent-to-stay scale.IBM SPSS
Statistics Version
22.0,
Microsoft Excel,
GraphPad Prism
5Positive
organizational
climate and
supportive systems
increased nurses’
intention to stay.
3. Ofei, 2022 [53] GhanaThis study aimed at assessing the
nature and effect of toxic
leadership of nurse managers on
the perceived job satisfaction and
productivity of the nursing
workforce.943Cross-sectional
descriptive
studyToxic Leadership Behaviors of
Nurse Managers’
Scale, Perceived Productivity
Questionnaire, and the Minnesota
Satisfaction Questionnaire
(MSQ-short version)SPSS software
version 26Toxic leadership
reduced nurses’ job
satisfaction and
productivity.
4.Ramdan and Eid.,
2020 [54]EgyptThis study envisioned to
compare toxic leadership among
intensive care nursing staff at
Tanta University Hospital and El
Menshawy hospital and assess its
relation to their conflict
management style used and
organizational commitment at
the two hospitals.544Descriptive,
comparative,
cross-sectional
studyToxic Leadership Assessment Scale,
Conflict Management Styles,
Assessment
Scale, Organizational Commitment
Assessment
ScaleIBM
SPSS software
package version
20.0.Toxic leadership
reduced
organizational
commitment and
influenced conflict
management styles.
Healthcare 2025 ,13, 2341 16 of 23
Table A1. Cont.
A/A Author(s), Year Country Aim Data Sample Study Design Data Collection MethodData Analysis
MethodFinding(s)
5.Xueqin Guo et al.,
2022 [47]ChinaThe aim of this study is to
explore the perceptions of
Chinese registered nurses on
toxic leadership behaviors of
nurse managers and to determine
its type, cause and response
measures12Phenomenological
qualitative studysemi-structured in-depth
interviewsColaizzi
seven-step
analysis methodNurses working with
a transformational
leader report higher
job contentment and
lower intent to leave
the nursing
profession. Nurses
who work for a
manager with toxic
leadership behaviors
demonstrated lower
job contentment,
higher stress levels,
frequent absenteeism
and higher intent to
leave the nursing
profession.
6.Siyal et al.,
2021 [55]ChinaThe aim of this study is to
develop and empirically test a
mediation model to examine the
indirect impact of abusive
supervision on employee
performance.430Empirical,
experimental
studyThe 10-item scale version of the
15-item scale by Aryee et al., [92]
developed by Tepper [93], 4-item
scale validated by
Amabile et al. [94], general
satisfaction 5-item measure by
Hackman and Oldham [95], the
4-item scale to measure employee
performance developed by
Liden et al. [96].Model
development
and empirical
testingAbusive supervision
reduced employee
performance.
7.Durrah et al.,
2024 [48]FranceThe current study aims to
examine how toxic management
styles can lead to both
psychological and physical
withdrawal of employees in the
healthcare sector413Quantitative
studySelf-developed questionnaireSmartPLS 3.3.9Toxic leadership
increased both
psychological and
physical withdrawal
behaviors
Healthcare 2025 ,13, 2341 17 of 23
Table A1. Cont.
A/A Author(s), Year Country Aim Data Sample Study Design Data Collection MethodData Analysis
MethodFinding(s)
8.Trépanier et al.,
2019 [56]CanadaThe aim of this paper is to
investigate the psychological and
motivational processes involved
in the relationship between two
forms of destructive leadership
(tyrannical and laissez-faire) and
employee health (burnout,
affective commitment and job
performance)399Cross-sectional
studyThe Destructive Leadership Scale,
The French version
of the Psychological Need
Thwarting Scale,
The Multidimensional Work
Motivation Scale,
The Maslach Burnout Inventory
General Survey, The occupational
commitment questionnaire
A self-reported scale consisting of
4 items adapted from the in-role
performance subscale of the
organizational citizenship behavior
scaleStructural
equation
modeling
analysis.Tyrannical
leadership frustrates
autonomy,
competence, and
relatedness, leading
to burnout and
lower performance.
9.Erschens et al.,
2022 [57]GermanyThe aim of this study is to
investigate the association of
general well-being and different
leadership styles among
employees in a German tertiary
hospital.1137Cross-sectional
studyModule A and D of the
standardized Questionnaire on
Integrative Leadership,
the five-item World Health
Organization well-being indexIBM SPSS
version 25Transformational
and transactional
leadership styles are
associated with
higher well-being
scores among
hospital employees,
while laissez-faire
and destructive
leadership styles are
associated with
lower scores across
all professional
groups.
10.Low et al.,
2019 [58]MalaysiaThe aims of this research are to
address the two fundamental
research questions: (1) What are
the antecedents that lead to
counterproductive work behavior
(CWB) of nurses in public
hospitals?
(2) How effective are the
moderating roles of power
distance orientation (a cultural
factor) and locus
of control (an individual factor)
in impacting CWB?337Quantitative
studyTepper’s [93] 15-item abusive
supervision Measure,
Colquitt’s [ 97] 20-item scale 24-item
measure adapted from Mitchell and
Ambrose [98] and Bennett and
Robinson‘s [99],
six-item scale developed by
Dorfman and Howell, [100] and
Farh, Hackett and Liang’s [101]
16-item Work Locus of
Control Scalestructural
equation
modelingAbusive supervision
leads to
counterproductive
work behavior in
nurses
Healthcare 2025 ,13, 2341 18 of 23
Table A1. Cont.
A/A Author(s), Year Country Aim Data Sample Study Design Data Collection MethodData Analysis
MethodFinding(s)
11.Shipl et al.,
2022 [59]EgyptThis study aimed to investigate
the relationship between toxic
leadership and nurse
followership effectiveness343Cross-sectional
studyThe Toxic Leadership Scale and
the Followership Styles
QuestionnaireIBM SPSS,
version 25Toxic leadership
negatively correlated
with nurse
followership
effectiveness
12.Berma et al.,
2021 [60]EgyptThis study aimed to investigate
the relationship between
workplace toxicity, organizational
silence and thriving among
nurses.235descriptive
correlational
researchToxic Workplace Environment
Questionnaire, Organizational
Silence Scale, Thriving at Work
ScaleSPSS version
22.0Workplace toxicity
leads to increased
organizational
silence, reducing
thriving among
nurses and
potentially leading
to staff resignation
13.Bakkal et al.,
2019 [49]TurkeyThe aim of this study is to
investigate the effects
of the toxic leadership of
healthcare employees on the
turnover intention and the
mediating effects of job
satisfaction658cross-sectional
descriptive
studyThe Toxic Leadership
Scale,
the Minnesota Job Satisfaction
Questionnaire, a turnover intention
scale by Rosin
& Korabik [102]Confirmatory
Factor Analysis,
Structural
Equation Model
SPSS 24.0 and
AMOS 24.0Toxic leadership
negatively impacts
job satisfaction,
which in turn
increases turnover
intention among
healthcare personnel
14.Budak & Erdal,
2022 [61]TurkeyThe aim of this study is to
investigate the mediating effect
of burnout
syndrome on toxic leadership
and job satisfaction412cross-sectional
studyToxic Leadership Scale,
Burnout Scale, Job Satisfaction ScaleStructural Model
AnalysisToxic leadership
negatively affects job
satisfaction and
increases burnout
syndrome
15. Mrayyan, 2025 [ 62] JordanThe aim of this research is to
investigate nursing leaders’ toxic
leadership, nurses’ workplace
satisfaction,
job engagement, and turnover
intention in Jordan and whether
toxic leadership and sample
characteristics predict nurses’
work-
place satisfaction, job
engagement, and turnover
intention.384cross-sectional
studyToxic Leadership Scale, Nursing
Workplace Satisfaction Scale, Job
Engagement Scale, Turnover
Intention ScaleOnline survey,
SPSS program
version 25Toxic leadership
results in low job
satisfaction, stress
and emotional
exhaustion, and, in
turn, decreased
quality of nursing
care
Healthcare 2025 ,13, 2341 19 of 23
Table A1. Cont.
A/A Author(s), Year Country Aim Data Sample Study Design Data Collection MethodData Analysis
MethodFinding(s)
16.Labrague,
2024 [63]PhilippinesThe aim of this study is to
examine the mediating
effects of work-family conflict on
the relationship between toxic
leadership behaviors of nurse
managers and psychological
distress and work satisfaction
among emergency nurses.283cross-sectional
studyToxic Leadership Behaviors of
Nurse
Managers Scale, Work-Family
Conflict
Scale, Job Stress Scale and the Job
Satisfaction
IndexMediation
analyses were
conducted using
the PROCESS
Macro with
Model 4.Toxic leadership
reduced work
satisfaction and
increased
psychological
distress
17.Farghaly
Abdelaliem &
Abou Zeid,
2023 [64]EgyptThe aim of this study is to assess
toxic leadership and
organizational performance
among nurses of a University
Hospital, and explore
the mediating effect of nurses
‘silence750cross-sectional
studyThe toxic leadership scale,
the organizational performance
questionnairestructured
equation
modelingToxic leadership
had a significant
negative relationship
with organizational
performance and
the nurses’ silence
18.Ofei et al.,
2023 [50]GhanaThe aim of this study is to
investigate the mediating role of
job satisfaction on toxic
leadership and turnover
intentions of nurses943cross-sectional
studyThe Turnover Intention, Minnesota
Satisfaction
Scale and the Toxic Leadership
Behaviors of
Nurse Managers’ ScaleSPSS software
version 26,
descriptive and
differential
statisticsJob satisfaction acts
as a mediating factor
for toxic leadership
behaviour and
nurses’ turnover
intentions
Healthcare 2025 ,13, 2341 20 of 23
References
1. Benmira, S.; Agboola, M. Evolution of leadership theory. BMJ Lead. 2021 ,5, 3–5. [CrossRef]
2. Rajoria, P .; Sharma, A.; Sharma, M.; Sumaiya, B. Leadership Style and Organisational Success. World J. Engl. Lang. 2022 ,12, 71.
[CrossRef]
3. Aydogdu, A.L.F. Exploring Different Aspects of Nursing Leadership: An Integrative Review of Qualitative Studies. Mod. Care J.
2023 ,20, e130402. [CrossRef]
4. Scully, N.J. Leadership in nursing: The importance of recognising inherent values and attributes to secure a positive future for the
profession. Collegian 2015 ,22, 439–444. [CrossRef]
5. ´Cerani´ c, J.; Peliˇ ci´ c, D.; Savelji´ c, M. Building leadership in nursing practice. Sanamed 2024 ,19, 93–99. [CrossRef]
6. Hashlan, M.A.; Alqhtani, N.A.; Alshaiban, A.M.; Alqahtani, M.M.S.; Alqahtani, M.S.M.; Alward, H.N.M.; Al Qahtani, M.M.A.;
Alqahtani, M.S.M.; Hadi, R.L.B.L.; Assiri, A.H.M. Nursing Leadership and Its Impact on Healthcare Quality: A Systematic Review.
J. Ecohumanism 2024 ,3, 2224. [CrossRef]
7. Frazer, C.; Sullivan, D. The nuts & bolts of being a nursing leader. Part 1: Leadership in nursing series. Teach. Learn. Nurs. 2025 ,
20, 46–48. [CrossRef]
8. Al-Naemi, I.A. Nursing Leadership Role in Healthcare Transformation—A Critical Overview. Saudi J. Nurs. Health Care 2023 ,6,
310–312. [CrossRef]
9. De Rezende, H. How relational leadership can enhance nurses’ well-being and productivity. Nurs. Stand. 2024 ,39, 77–81.
[CrossRef]
10. Atalla, A.D.G.; Mostafa, W.H. Relationship between Toxic Leadership and Work Outcomes: A Cross-sectional Study. Egypt. J.
Health Care 2023 ,14, 199–211. [CrossRef]
11. Labrague, L.J. Influence of nurse managers’ toxic leadership behaviours on nurse-reported adverse events and quality of care. J.
Nurs. Manag. 2021 ,29, 855–863. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Alsadaan, N.; Alqahtani, M. Toxic Leadership in Emergency Nurses: Assessing Abusive Supervision and Its Team-Level Impacts
on Conflict Management and Organizational Commitment. J. Nurs. Manag. 2024 ,2024 , 4271602. [CrossRef]
13. Labrague, L.J. Toxic leadership and its relationship with outcomes on the nursing workforce and patient safety: A systematic
review. Leadersh. Health Serv. 2024 ,37, 192–214. [CrossRef]
14. Schmidt, A.A.; Hanges, P .J. Development and Validation of the Toxic Leadership Scale. Master’s Thesis, University of Maryland,
College Park, MD, USA, 2008.
15. Bas, B. Toxic Leadership in Education. Int. J. Educ. Adm. Manag. Leadersh. 2020 ,1, 97–104. [CrossRef]
16. Smith, N.; Fredricks-Lowman, I. Conflict in the workplace: A 10-year review of toxic leadership in higher education. Int. J.
Leadersh. Educ. 2020 ,23, 538–551. [CrossRef]
17. Paltu, A.; Brouwers, M. Toxic leadership: Effects on job satisfaction, commitment, turnover intention and organisational culture
within the South African manufacturing industry. SA J. Hum. Resour. Manag. 2020 ,18, a1338. [CrossRef]
18. Pelletier, K.L. Leader toxicity: An empirical investigation of toxic behavior and rhetoric. Leadership 2010 ,6, 373–389. [CrossRef]
19. Milosevic, I.; Maric, S.; Lonˇ car, D. Defeating the Toxic Boss: The Nature of Toxic Leadership and the Role of Followers. J. Leadersh.
Organ. Stud. 2020 ,27, 117–137. [CrossRef]
20. Satiani, B.; Satiani, A. Recognizing and Managing a Toxic Leader: A Case Study. Physician Leadersh. J. 2022 ,9, 23–27. [CrossRef]
21. Arbogast, G.; Jadav, A. Investigating business toxic leadership. J. Manag. Eng. Integr. 2024 ,17, 107–116. [CrossRef]
22. Bosetti, L.; Heffernan, T. The emotional and personal toll of higher education leadership. J. Educ. Adm. Hist. 2021 ,53, 103–105.
[CrossRef]
23. Gupta, A.; Chawla, S. Toxic Leadership in Workplaces: Insights from Bibliometric, Thematic Analysis, and TCM Framework. Int.
J. Organ. Leadersh. 2024 ,13, 179–200. [CrossRef]
24. Goodin, H.J. The nursing shortage in the United States of America: An integrative review of the literature. J. Adv. Nurs. 2003 ,43,
335–343. [CrossRef]
25. Xie, A.; Duff, J.; Munday, J. Perioperative Nursing Shortages: An Integrative Review of Their Impact, Causal Factors, and
Mitigation Strategies. J. Nurs. Manag. 2024 ,2024 , 2983251. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Peters, M. Time to solve persistent, pernicious and widespread nursing workforce shortages. Int. Nurs. Rev. 2023 ,70, 247–253.
[CrossRef]
27. van Wyk, S.N.; Naicker, V . A review of the effect of nurse shortages on existing nurse workforces in South Africa and Ukraine.
Technol. Audit. Prod. Reserves 2023 ,4, 28–32. [CrossRef]
28. Kovner, C. COVID-19 and the supply and demand for Registered Nurses. Int. Nurs. Rev. 2022 ,69, 118–120. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. Gaboyan, Y.S.; Pivkina, A.I. Nursing staff as a provider of safe and high-quality medical care. Public Health 2022 ,2, 35–41.
[CrossRef]
30. Wang, L.; Lu, H.; Dong, X.; Huang, X.; Li, B.; Wan, Q.; Shang, S. The effect of nurse staffing on patient-safety outcomes: A
cross-sectional survey. J. Nurs. Manag. 2020 ,28, 1758–1766. [CrossRef]
Healthcare 2025 ,13, 2341 21 of 23
31. Griffiths, P .; Ball, J.; Drennan, J.; Dall’Ora, C.; Jones, J.; Maruotti, A.; Pope, C.; Saucedo, A.R.; Simon, M. Nurse staffing and patient
outcomes: Strengths and limitations of the evidence to inform policy and practice. A review and discussion paper based on
evidence reviewed for the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence Safe Staffing guideline development. Int. J. Nurs.
Stud. 2016 ,63, 213–225. [CrossRef]
32. Dall’Ora, C.; Saville, C.; Rubbo, B.; Turner, L.Y.; Jones, J.; Griffiths, P . Nurse staffing levels and patient outcomes: A systematic
review of longitudinal studies. Int. J. Nurs. Stud. 2022 ,134, 104311. [CrossRef]
33. Needleman, J.; Liu, J.; Shang, J.; Larson, E.L.; Stone, P .W. Association of registered nurse and nursing support staffing with
inpatient hospital mortality. BMJ Qual. Saf. 2020 ,29, 10–18. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Assaye, A.M.; Wiechula, R.; Schultz, T.J.; Feo, R. Impact of nurse staffing on patient and nurse workforce outcomes in acute care
settings in low- and middle-income countries: A systematic review. JBI Evid. Synth. 2021 ,19, 751–793. [CrossRef]
35. Ball, J.E.; Murrells, T.; Rafferty, A.M.; Morrow, E.; Griffiths, P . ‘Care left undone’ during nursing shifts: Associations with workload
and perceived quality of care. BMJ Qual. Saf. 2014 ,23, 116–125. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36. Griffiths, P .; Recio-Saucedo, A.; Dall, C.; Briggs, J.; Maruotti, A.; Meredith, P .; Smith, G.B.; Ball, J.; On behalf of the Missed Care
Study Group. The association between nurse staffing and omissions in nursing care: A systematic review. J. Adv. Nurs. 2018 ,74,
1474–1487. [CrossRef]
37. Cho, S.; Lee, J.; You, S.J.; Song, K.J.; Hong, K.J. Nurse staffing, nurses prioritization, missed care, quality of nursing care, and
nurse outcomes. Int. J. Nurs. Pract. 2020 ,26, e12803. [CrossRef]
38. Ramsey, Z.; Palter, J.; Hardwick, J.; Moskoff, J.; Christian, E.; Bailitz, J. Decreased Nursing Staffing Adversely Affects Emergency
Department Throughput Metrics. West. J. Emerg. Med. 2018 ,19, 496–500. [CrossRef]
39. Marufu, T.C.; Collins, A.; Vargas, L.; Gillespie, L.; Almghairbi, D. Factors influencing retention among hospital nurses: Systematic
review. Br. J. Nurs. 2021 ,30, 302–308. [CrossRef]
40. Leveck, M.L.; Jones, C.B. The nursing practice environment, staff retention, and quality of care. Res. Nurs. Health 1996 ,19, 331–343.
[CrossRef]
41. Mara, S.O. 121 The factors influencing nursing staff retention in the ICU setting: A scoping review. Ann. Work. Expo. Health 2024 ,
68, 1. [CrossRef]
42. Conroy, N.; Patton, D.; Moore, Z.; O’Connor, T.; Nugent, L.; Derwin, R. The Relationship between Transformational Leadership
and Staff Nurse Retention in Hospital Settings: A Systematic Review. J. Nurs. Manag. 2023 ,2023 , 9577200. [CrossRef]
43. Labrague, L.J.; De los Santos, J.A.A.; Falguera, C.C.; Nwafor, C.E.; Galabay, J.R.; Rosales, R.A.; Firmo, C.N. Predictors of nurses’
turnover intention at one and five years’ time. Int. Nurs. Rev. 2020 ,67, 191–198. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44. Chamanga, E.; Dyson, J.; Loke, J.; McKeown, E. Factors influencing the recruitment and retention of registered nurses in adult
community nursing services: An integrative literature review. Prim. Health Care Res. Dev. 2020 ,21, e31. [CrossRef]
45. Arksey, H.; O’Malley, L. Scoping studies: Towards a methodological framework. Int. J. Soc. Res. Methodol. 2005 ,8, 19–32.
[CrossRef]
46. Tricco, A.C.; Lillie, E.; Zarin, W.; O’Brien, K.K.; Colquhoun, H.; Levac, D.; Moher, D.; Peters, M.D.J.; Horsley, T.; Weeks, L.;
et al. PRISMA Extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR): Checklist and Explanation. Ann. Intern. Med. 2018 ,169, 467–473.
[CrossRef]
47. Guo, X.; Xiong, L.; Wang, Y.; Li, X.; Wang, Y.; Xiao, F.; He, J.; Xiang, Y.; Xu, C. Chinese nurses’ perceptions on toxic leadership
behaviours of nurse managers: A qualitative study. J. Nurs. Manag. 2022 ,30, 3256–3263. [CrossRef]
48. Durrah, O.; Alkhalaf, T.; Sharbatji, O. Toxic leadership as a predictor of physical and psychological withdrawal behaviours in the
healthcare sector. J. Soc. Psychol. 2024 ,164, 1159–1177. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49. Bakkal, E.; Serener, B.; Myrvang, N.A. Toxic Leadership and Turnover Intention: Mediating Role of Job Satisfaction. Rev. De
Cercet. Si Interv. Soc. 2019 ,66, 88–102. [CrossRef]
50. Ofei, A.M.A.; Poku, C.A.; Paarima, Y.; Barnes, T.; Kwashie, A.A. Toxic leadership behaviour of nurse managers and turnover
intentions: The mediating role of job satisfaction. BMC Nurs. 2023 ,22, 374. [CrossRef]
51. Hossny, E.K.; Alotaibi, H.S.; Mahmoud, A.M.; Elcokany, N.M.; Seweid, M.M.; Aldhafeeri, N.A.; Abdelkader, A.M.; Elhamed,
S.M.A. Influence of nurses’ perception of organizational climate and toxic leadership behaviors on intent to stay: A descriptive
comparative study. Int. J. Nurs. Stud. Adv. 2023 ,5, 100147. [CrossRef]
52. Labrague, L.J.; Nwafor, C.E.; Tsaras, K. Influence of toxic and transformational leadership practices on nurses’ job satisfaction, job
stress, absenteeism and turnover intention: A cross-sectional study. J. Nurs. Manag. 2020 ,28, 1104–1113. [CrossRef]
53. Ofei, A.M.A.; Paarima, Y.; Barnes, T.; Poku, C.A. Toxic leadership behaviour of nurse managers on perceived job satisfaction
and productivity of nursing workforce in sub-Saharan Ghana: A multi-centre cross-sectional study. J. Nurs. Manag. 2022 ,30,
2733–2742. [CrossRef]
54. Ramdan, A.H.A.; Eid, W.M. Toxic Leadership: Conflict Management Style and Organizational Commitment among Intensive
Care Nursing Staff. Evid.-Based Nurs. Res. 2020 ,2, 12. [CrossRef]
Healthcare 2025 ,13, 2341 22 of 23
55. Siyal, S.; Saeed, M.; Pahi, M.H.; Solangi, R.; Xin, C. They can’t treat you well under abusive supervision: Investigating the impact
of job satisfaction and extrinsic motivation on healthcare employees. Ration. Soc. 2021 ,33, 401–423. [CrossRef]
56. Trépanier, S.-G.; Boudrias, V .; Peterson, C. Linking destructive forms of leadership to employee health. Leadersh. Organ. Dev. J.
2019 ,40, 803–814. [CrossRef]
57. Erschens, R.; Seifried-Dübon, T.; Stuber, F.; Rieger, M.A.; Zipfel, S.; Nikendei, C.; Genrich, M.; Angerer, P .; Maatouk, I.; Gündel, H.;
et al. The association of perceived leadership style and subjective well-being of employees in a tertiary hospital in Germany. PLoS
ONE 2022 ,17, e0278597. [CrossRef]
58. Low, Y.M.; Sambasivan, M.; Ho, J.A. Impact of abusive supervision on counterproductive work behaviors of nurses. Asia Pac. J.
Hum. Resour. 2021 ,59, 250–278. [CrossRef]
59. El Fatah Shipl, A.M.A.; Nabawy, Z.M.; Al anwer Ashour, H.M. The relationship between toxic leadership and nurses’ followership
effectiveness. Cent. Eur. J. Nurs. Midwifery 2022 ,13, 730–740. [CrossRef]
60. Berma, A.; Mohamed, H.; Nosier, H. Organizational Silence as a Mediator Factor between Workplace Toxicity and Thriving
among Nurses. Assiut Sci. Nurs. J. 2021 ,9, 10–20. [CrossRef]
61. Budak, O.; Erdal, N. The Mediating Role of Burnout Syndrome in Toxic Leadership and Job Satisfaction in Organizations. South
East Eur. J. Econ. Bus. 2022 ,17, 1–17. [CrossRef]
62. Mrayyan, M.T. Effects of Nursing Leaders’ Toxic Leadership on Nurses’ Workplace Satisfaction, Job Engagement, and Turnover
Intention: An Online Cross-Sectional Study. J. Adv. Nurs. 2025 ,0, 1–18. [CrossRef]
63. Labrague, L.J. Linking Toxic Leadership With Work Satisfaction and Psychological Distress in Emergency Nurses: The Mediating
Role of Work-Family Conflict. J. Emerg. Nurs. 2024 ,50, 670–678. [CrossRef]
64. Abdelaliem, S.M.F.; Zeid, M.A.G.A. The relationship between toxic leadership and organizational performance: The mediating
effect of nurses’ silence. BMC Nurs. 2023 ,22, 4. [CrossRef]
65. Lukacik, E.-R.; Bourdage, J.S. Exploring the Influence of Abusive and Ethical Leadership on Supervisor and Coworker-Targeted
Impression Management. J. Bus. Psychol. 2019 ,34, 771–789. [CrossRef]
66. Pandey, A.; Nambudiri, R.; Selvaraj, P .; Sadh, A. A temporal study on subordinate’s response to destructive leadership: Voice
withdrawal as a conflict coping mechanism. Int. J. Confl. Manag. 2021 ,32, 886–911. [CrossRef]
67. Li, H.; Zhu, J. Destructive Leadership, Employees’ Voice, and Organization. In Diversity of Managerial Perspectives from Inside
China. Managing the Asian Century ; Foo, C., Ed.; Springer: Singapore, 2016; pp. 205–221. [CrossRef]
68. Joseph, S.; Shetty, N. An empirical study on the impact of employee voice and silence on destructive leadership and organizational
culture. Asian J. Bus. Ethics 2022 ,11, 85–109. [CrossRef]
69. Kazmi, S.A.; USMANI, S.; Raza, S. Effect of Despotic Leadership on the Employee Work Withdrawal Behavior and Acquiescent
Silence. Rev. Manag. Sci. 2022 ,4, 31–49. [CrossRef]
70. Schaubroeck, J.M.; Shen, Y.; Chong, S. A dual-stage moderated mediation model linking authoritarian leadership to follower
outcomes. J. Appl. Psychol. 2017 ,102, 203–214. [CrossRef]
71. Chen, L.; Huang, X.; Sun, J.; Zheng, Y.; Graham, L.; Jiang, J. The virtue of a controlling leadership style: Authoritarian leadership,
work stressors, and leader power distance orientation. Asia Pac. J. Manag. 2024 ,41, 507–547. [CrossRef]
72. Mousa, W.; EldinFekry, N.; Elewa, A. Relationship between nurse manager leadership style and staff nurses’ work engagement.
Egypt. Nurs. J. 2019 ,16, 206. [CrossRef]
73. Berger, R.; Glazer, S.; Leiva, D. Leaders Condition the Work Experience: A Test of a Job Resources-Demands Model Invariance in
Two Countries. J. Nurs. Manag. 2023 ,2023 , 1353289. [CrossRef]
74. Asiri, A.M.; Mahran, S.M.; Elseesy, N.A. A study of staff nurses’ perceptions of nursing leadership styles and work engagement
levels in Saudi general hospitals. Int. J. Adv. Appl. Sci. 2023 ,10, 55–61. [CrossRef]
75. Pishgooie, A.H.; Atashzadeh-Shoorideh, F.; Falcó-Pegueroles, A.; Lotfi, Z. Correlation between nursing managers’ leadership
styles and nurses’ job stress and anticipated turnover. J. Nurs. Manag. 2019 ,27, 527–534. [CrossRef]
76. Specchia, M.L.; Cozzolino, M.R.; Carini, E.; Di Pilla, A.; Galletti, C.; Ricciardi, W.; Damiani, G. Leadership Styles and Nurses’ Job
Satisfaction. Results of a Systematic Review. Int. J. Env. Res. Public Health 2021 ,18, 1552. [CrossRef]
77. Bellali, T.; Theodorou, P .; Psomiadi, M.; Konstantakopoulou, O.; Platis, C.; Mpouzika, M.; Manomenidis, G. Assessing the Effect
of Transactional Leadership and Empowerment on Nursing Staff’s Satisfaction: A Cross-Sectional Study. Florence Nightingale J.
Nurs. 2024 ,32, 277–283. [CrossRef]
78. Suliman, M.; Almansi, S.; Mrayyan, M.; ALBashtawy, M.; Aljezawi, M. Effect of nurse managers’ leadership styles on predicted
nurse turnover. Nurs. Manag. 2020 ,32, 20–25. [CrossRef]
79. Xie, Y.; Gu, D.; Liang, C.; Zhao, S.; Ma, Y. How transformational leadership and clan culture influence nursing staff’s willingness
to stay. J. Nurs. Manag. 2020 ,28, 1515–1524. [CrossRef]
80. Gashaye, M.; Tilahun, D.; Belay, A.; Bereka, B. Perceived Utilization of Leadership Styles Among Nurses. Risk Manag. Heal. Policy
2023 ,16, 215–224. [CrossRef]
Healthcare 2025 ,13, 2341 23 of 23
81. Malak, H.M.; Lorman, W.; Rundio, A.; Simion, D.; Simion, M.G. Predominantly practiced leadership styles of Chief Nursing
Officers in healthcare organizations. J. Interprofessional Educ. Pract. 2022 ,28, 100517. [CrossRef]
82. Mahgob, G.A.-N.H.; Mohammed Abdallah Adam, S.; Mohamed El-sayed, S. Staff Nurses ’Perception Regarding Toxic Leadership
Behavior of Head Nurses and it’s Relation to their Work Engagement. Egypt. J. Health Care 2024 ,15, 511–524. [CrossRef]
83. Palvimo, T.; Vauhkonen, A.; Hult, M. The Associations among Destructive Leadership, Job Demands and Resources, and Burnout
among Nurses: A Cross-Sectional Survey Study. J. Nurs. Manag. 2023 ,2023 , 4289450. [CrossRef]
84. Nunes, A.; Palma-Moreira, A. Toxic Leadership and Turnover Intentions: The Role of Burnout Syndrome. Adm. Sci. 2024 ,14, 340.
[CrossRef]
85. Solehudin, S.; Syabanasyah, I. Impact of toxic leadership on nurses’ motivation, job satisfaction, productivity, and turnover
intentions. J. Health Sci. Med. Ther. 2024 ,2, 228–239. [CrossRef]
86. Zaghini, F.; Fiorini, J.; Piredda, M.; Fida, R.; Sili, A. The relationship between nurse managers’ leadership style and patients’
perception of the quality of the care provided by nurses: Cross sectional survey. Int. J. Nurs. Stud. 2020 ,101, 103446. [CrossRef]
87. Ahmed, M.A.O.; Zhang, J.; Fouad, A.S.; Mousa, K.; Nour, H.M. The Dark Side of Leadership: How Toxic Leadership Fuels
Counterproductive Work Behaviors Through Organizational Cynicism and Injustice. Sustainability 2024 ,17, 105. [CrossRef]
88. Lapalme, M.; Guerrero, S. How do I stand compared to agency workers? Justice perceptions and employees’ counterproductive
work behaviours. J. Nurs. Manag. 2019 ,27, 1471–1478. [CrossRef]
89. Kayani, M.B.; Alasan, I.I. Impact of Toxic Leadership on Counterproductive Work Behavior with the Mediating role of Psycholog-
ical Contract Breach and Moderating role of Proactive Personality. Stud. Appl. Econ. 2021 ,39. [CrossRef]
90. Einarsen, S.; Aasland, M.S.; Skogstad, A. Destructive leadership behaviour: A definition and conceptual model. Leadersh. Q. 2007 ,
18, 207–216. [CrossRef]
91. Tummers, L.G.; Bakker, A.B. Leadership and Job Demands-Resources Theory: A Systematic Review. Front. Psychol. 2021 ,12,
722080. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
92. Aryee, S.; Chen, Z.X.; Sun, L.-Y.; Debrah, Y.A. Antecedents and outcomes of abusive supervision: Test of a trickle-down model. J.
Appl. Psychol. 2007 ,92, 191–201. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
93. Tepper, B.J. Consequences of Abusive Supervision. Acad. Manag. J. 2000 ,43, 178–190. [CrossRef]
94. Amabile, T.M.; Hill, K.G.; Hennessey, B.A.; Tighe, E.M. The Work Preference Inventory: Assessing intrinsic and extrinsic
motivational orientations. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 1994 ,66, 950–967. [CrossRef]
95. Hackman, J.R.; Oldham, G.R. The Job Diagnostic Survey: An Instrument for the Diagnosis of Jobs and the Evaluation of Job
Redesign. 1974, 1–87. Available online: https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED099580.pdf (accessed on 25 July 2025).
96. Liden, R.C.; Wayne, S.J.; Stilwell, D. A Longitudinal Study on the Early Development of Leader-Member Exchanges. J. Appl.
Psychol. 1993 ,78, 662. [CrossRef]
97. Colquitt, J.A. On the dimensionality of organizational justice: A construct validation of a measure. J. Appl. Psychol. 2001 ,86, 386.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
98. Mitchell, M.S.; Ambrose, M.L. Abusive supervision and workplace deviance and the moderating effects of negative reciprocity
beliefs. J. Appl. Psychol. 2007 ,92, 1159–1168. [CrossRef]
99. Bennett, R.J.; Robinson, S.L. Development of a measure of workplace deviance. J. Appl. Psychol. 2000 ,85, 349–360. [CrossRef]
100. Dorfman, P .W.; Howell, J.P . Dimensions of National Culture and Effective Leadership Patterns: Hofstede Revisited ; JAI Press: Stamford,
CT, USA, 1988; pp. 129–150.
101. Farh, J.L.; Hackett, R.D.; Liang, J. Individual-level cultural values as moderators of perceived organizational support–employee
outcome relationships in China: Comparing the effects of power distance and traditionality. Acad. Manag. J. 2007 ,50, 715–729.
[CrossRef]
102. Rosin, H.; Korabik, K. Organizational Experiences and Propensity to Leave: A Multivariate Investigation of Men and Women
Managers. J. Vocat. Behav. 1995 ,46, 1–16. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.