SETTING LOCALIZED CONSERVATION PRIORITIES OF THE USEFUL PLANT SPECIES OF THE ALANGAN MANGYAN OF MT. ILONG, HALCON RANGE, MINDORO ISLAND, PHILIPPINES

ELAINE LOREEN CASAPAO VILLANUEVA

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Environmental Science

JUNE 2018

ABSTRACT

This study aimed to set priorities for conservation among useful plants of the
Alangan Mangyan of Mt. Ilong, Halcon Range, Mindoro Island, Philippines. Information
on plant ecology of Mt. Ilong and traditional knowledge of the Alangan people were
utilized for local conservation priority setting of species. The useful plants of the Alangan people were documented from interviews among
60 key informants and verified by the elderly key informants. This study recorded 199 local
names of plants (wild and cultivated types) with varying uses. Patterns on plant use indicate
that there were more cultivated than wild plant species for food, fodder, medicine, and
firewood use categories, while more wild than cultivated species were recorded for
construction and lumber use categories. The plants were verified in the field during a study of the vegetation structure and
dynamics of tree species in Mt. Ilong, Halcon Range. Hierarchical cluster analysis in
unweighted pair group arithmetic mean (UPGMA) algorithm (using Bray-Curtis similarity
index) was performed to identify major plant communities in Mt. Ilong, namely; Zone I
(agroforest), Lansium - Artocarpus - Swietenia - Ficus - Nephelium - Mangifera zone; Zone
II (forest zone), Cyathea - Astronia - Syzygium - Garcinia - Ficus - Psydrax - Diplodiscus
zone; and Zone III (forest zone), Agathis - Suli - Alitugba - Ardisia zone. Furthermore,
ordination using canonical correspondence analysis (CCA) was performed to analyze the
relationship between the tree species and selected environmental variables. Temperature
and elevation were the greatest influencing environmental factors that affected the species
distribution in Mt. Ilong. An evaluation index for species level was devised to set priorities for conservation.
The conservation priority index is a point-scoring procedure, composed of seven criteria
encompassing ecological, socio-cultural significance, and present threat assessment which
are important considerations when setting conservation priorities for conservation.
Seventy-two wild plant species identified from field survey and vegetation analysis were
evaluated using the devised index. From this evaluation, 17 species were identified as
species of medium priority for conservation. Furthermore, a nonlinear principal component analysis was also done to identify which among the criteria have influenced in conservation
priority setting. The results of this study can be useful in conservation management in the local
level, as the index promotes the involvement of the local people in conservation. Moreover,
the methodology used in setting conservation priorities of plants species can be simulated
to other localities in the Philippines.

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

Rationale

The Philippines is home to a lot of threatened plant species (Myers et al., 2000).
Six hundred ninety-four taxa of vascular plants and mosses are considered threatened in
the country (Fernando et al., 2008) needing immediate conservation.

Some of these are in Mindoro Island (Villanueva and Buot, 2015), a distinct
biogeographical region hosting some unique flora and fauna. The island has a generally
rugged terrain with mountain ranges at the center. Halcon Range is one of the mountain
ranges in Mindoro Island, with its highest peak (Mt. Halcon) having an elevation of 2592
meters above sea level. Mt. Halcon has a high plant diversity and covered mostly with
forest composed of unique plants (Mindoro Biodiversity Conservation Foundation, Inc.,
2012). Several of these plant species were found only in this mountain (Gonzales et al.,
2000; Mandia, 1998). Mt. Halcon is also one of the Key Biodiversity Areas in the
Philippines (Conservation International Philippines, DENR-Protected Areas and Wildlife
Bureau, and Haribon Foundation, 2006).

The native inhabitants of Halcon Range are the Alangan, one of the eight ethnic

groups of Mangyan in Mindoro. These people live along the foothold of the mountain range

for several centuries. They are known to have a harmonious plant-human relationship as
they are dependent to the environment to live. These people consider their forest as their
world (Schult, 2001). Moreover, local flora of Halcon Range is known to be useful in their
everyday lives (Mandia, 2004). Unfortunately, their rich culture is fast changing due to the
pressure of increasing population and the influence of the outside social environment
(Quiaoit, 1997). The threats to the plant diversity of the mountain can also threaten the
cultural survival of these people.

Given its biological and cultural significance, the Halcon Range can be declared as
a protected area under the National Integrated Protected Areas System Act (Republic Act
No. 7586). The DENR proposed to declare it as a protected area, however, the proposal
failed to push through because of the intense opposition of the Mangyans living in the area.
The only legislation protecting the mountain is the Indigenous Peoples’ Rights Act of 1997
(R.A. No. 8371) since the mountain is covered by ancestral domain claims (MBCFI, 2012).

Although there has been a lot of information regarding how the indigenous people
(IP) have used the plant biodiversity, little has been known about its distribution, density,
and response to harvesting. Using a point-scoring system that utilizes plant ecological
information and the traditional knowledge, this study attempted set conservation priorities

of the plant species used by the Alangan Mangyans.

Research Objectives

This study mainly aimed to set priorities for conservation of the useful plant species
of the Alangan Mangyans. The specific objectives of the study were as follows:
1. To determine the useful plants of the Alangan Mangyan community in Paitan,
Naujan, Oriental Mindoro
2. To analyze the structure and dynamics of the tree species distribution in Mt. Ilong,
Halcon Range
3. To evaluate which plants are of local priority for conservation considering its

biological and socio-cultural values

Significance of the Study

Knowing that the indigenous people are mostly dependent on the forest resources,
the reduction of such is a threat to their survival (Pei, 2013). Documenting and updating
the local practices related to use of these plants in the forest is important in prioritizing
conservation. By considering the biological and socio-cultural values of plant biodiversity,
a more unbiased approach of setting priorities for conservation will be used in this study.

A list of conservation priorities provides knowledge on taxa that needs to be
targeted for regulation and wise utilization. Setting conservation priorities is a crucial step

in creating conservation strategies for the species and ecosystems, given the limited

financial resources allocated in any conservation efforts. It can give the planners, resource
managers and local people essential information on local biological diversity of cultural

and economic importance (Brehm et al., 2010).

Scope and Limitations

This study was conducted in Brgy. Paitan, Naujan, Oriental Mindoro, situated at
the foothill of Mt. Ilong. The collection of data (field survey and vegetation sampling) was
conducted from April-May 2016.

The interview about the useful plants listed all the wild and cultivated plants. The
information gathered included all uses pertaining to provisioning ecosystem services
provided by plants, as well as their cultural uses. The vegetation analysis included sampling
plots laid out along the altitudinal gradient of Mt. Ilong, Halcon Range. The plants included
in the quadrat sampling included vascular plants only.

In the conservation priority setting of plants, only the wild plants were included in
the assessment. Aside from the primary data collected from social and vegetation surveys,
secondary sources of information were also gathered for the assessment of some criteria in

the conservation priority index.

Definition of Terms

Alangan — the indigenous people residing in the northern part of Mindoro, specifically

along the slopes and foothill of Halcon Range (Mandia, 2004).

Halcon Range — pertains to the mountain range in the central northern part of Mindoro
Island, Philippines. The highest point in Mindoro Island (Mt. Halcon: 2,582 masl)

can be found along this range, along with Mt. Ilong (see Mt. Ilong).

Mangyan — a collective term for the indigenous groups in Mindoro Island, Philippines,
namely: Iraya, Alangan, Tadyawan, Buhid, Tau-Buid, Bangon, Hanunoo, and

Ratagnon. This study focused on the Alangan people of Mindoro.

Mt. Ilong — one of the prominent peaks in Halcon Range. The study area of this study is
situated along the slopes of Mt. Ilong. This is also known as Ilong Peak in some

literature (Dutson et al., 1992).

Useful Plants — refers to plants with recorded uses (food, medicine, construction, timber,
firewood, cultural). Since most ethnobotanical studies have focused on medicinal
plants, the term “useful plants” was widely used in this study to encompass a
broader knowledge of uses by the local people. The uses included in the analysis in
this study were limited to provisioning and cultural ecosystem services

(Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2005).

Zonation — separation of distinct plant community types across an elevational gradient in
mountain ecosystems. Multivariate techniques such as classification and ordination

analyses allow identification of these zones.

Literature Cited

BREHM, J.M., MAXTED N., MARTINS-LOUGAO, M.A., AND FORD-LLOYD, B.V.
2010. New approaches for establishing conservation priorities for socio-
economically important plant species. Biodiversity Conservation, 19, 2715-2740.

CONSERVATION INTERNATIONAL PHILIPPINES, DEPARTMENT OF
ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES-PROTECTED AREAS AND
WILDLIFE BUREAU, AND HARIBON FOUNDATION FOR THE
CONSERVATION OF NATURE. 2006. Priority Sites for Conservation in the
Philippines: Key Biodiversity Areas. Quezon City, Philippines: Conservation
International Philippines. Retrieved 20 May 2015
from _http://www.conservation.org/global/philippines/publications/Pages/Priority-
Sites-for-Conservation-Key-Biodiversity-Areas.aspx

DUTSON, G.C.L., EVANS, T.D., BROOKS, T.M., ASANE, D.C., TIMMINS, R.J. AND
TOLEDO, A. 1992. Conservation status of birds on Mindoro, Philippines. Bird
Conservation International, 2, 303-325.

FERNANDO, E:S., CO, L.L., LAGUNZAD, D.A., GRUEZO, W.S.M., BARCELONA,
J.F.. MADULID, D.A., LAPIS, A.B., TEXON, G.I, MANILA, A.C., AND
ZAMORA, P.M. 2008. Threatened plants of the Philippines: a preliminary
assessment. Asia Life Sciences Supplement, 3,1-52

GONZALES, J.C.T., DANS, A.T.L., AFUANG, L.E. with contributions from
PORTILLO, B.S., PEDREGOSA, M., LEDESMA, M.M., HERNAEZ, B.,
BULALACAO, W.B., YNGENTE, V.B., DANS, F.G. AND ALVIOLA, P.A.
2000. Mindoro: Island-wide survey of fauna and flora and field inventory of
selected sites for priority conservation. Muntinlupa City: Mindoro Biodiversity
Conservation Foundation, Inc.

MANDIA, E.H. 1998. The vegetation on the Northeastern summit of Mt. Halcon, Mindoro
Island, Philippines. PhD dissertation. University of the Philippines Los Bajios.

MANDIA, E.H. 2004. The Alangan Mangyan of Mt. Halcon, Oriental Mindoro: Their
Ethnobotany. Philippine Quarterly of Culture and Society, 32, 96-117.

MILLENNIUM ECOSYSTEM ASSESSMENT. 2005. Ecosystems and Human Well-
being: Synthesis. Island Press, Washington, DC.

MINDORO BIODIVERSITY CONSERVATION FOUNDATION, INC. 2012. Mount
Halcon Conservation and Management Plan. Retrieved 26 November 2016 from
http://mbcfi.org.ph/media/Technical_Reports/1_%20Mt_Halcon_Conservation_M
anagement_Plan.pdf

MYERS, N., MITTERMEIER, R.A., MITTERMEIER, C.G., FONESCA, G.A.B. AND
KENT, J. 2000. Biodiversity hotspots for conservation priorities. Nature, 403(24)
853-858.

PEI, S. 2013. Ethnobotany and the sustainable use of biodiversity. Plant Diversity and
Resources, 35(4), 401-406.

QUIAOIT, J.S. 1997. The changing patterns in the man-land relationship of the Alangan
Mangyan of Oriental Mindoro. Master’s Thesis. Xavier University, Cagayan de
Oro.

REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7586. 1992. Retrieved 13 July 2015 from
http://www.officialgazette. gov.ph/1992/06/01/republic-act-no-7586/

REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8371. 1997. Retrieved 13 July 2015 from
http://www.officialgazette. gov.ph/1997/10/29/republic-act-no-8371/

SCHULT, V. 2001. Deforestation and Mangyan in Mindoro. Philippine Studies: Historical
and Ethnographic Viewpoints, 49(2), 151-175.

VILLANUEVA, E.L.C. AND BUOT, I.E.Jr. 2015. Threatened plant species of Mindoro,
Philippines. IAMURE Journal of Ecology and Conservation, 14, 168-190.

CHAPTER II

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

Introduction

Setting conservation priority has been known to be an essential tool in safeguarding
biodiversity. In species level, it specifically targets which species need attention for
conservation (Brehm et al., 2010).

Meanwhile, the growing recognition on the interconnection of cultural and natural
systems have provided a broader perspective on the diversity of life (Pretty et al., 2009).
The decisions in conservation priority setting of plants, therefore, must be created in an
interdisciplinary and inclusive manner that is not only limited to ecological considerations;
the socio-cultural importance of biodiversity to the people also needs to be addressed. The
framework for a localized conservation priority setting needs to be based on the synergy of
nature and culture and on the perspectives of different stakeholders of biodiversity.

This literature review is composed of three subsections, corresponding to each of
the specific objectives of the study. The first subsection of this chapter briefly looks on
studies on quantitative ethnobotany, one of the disciplines dealing with human-nature
interaction. It mainly provides a review on how studies of plant use by the local people

have evolved and became useful in conservation of biodiversity, with emphasis on the

context of the Alangan people of Mindoro. The second subsection discusses the studies on
vegetation structure and distribution of tropical mountains, highlighting the Philippine
mountains and Mindoro flora, and its application in identifying land use types in tropical
mountains. The third part of the literature review talks about the localized conservation
priority setting, which is an integration of both information on ecological and socio-cultural
information on plants. Towards the end of this review, a conceptual framework is provided,

highlighting the crucial need to do this study.

Methodology

This chapter reviewed and synthesized several literature sources. It primarily
highlights the importance of plant use by the local people, as well as the studies on plant
biodiversity of mountain ecosystem, in a localized conservation priority setting. From this

in-depth analysis, a framework was constructed serving as the guide of this thesis.

Discussion

Use of Plant Resources by the Indigenous People

Studies of plant use in the past had mostly become descriptive in nature,

documenting plants and how they are used by the indigenous people. Early ethnobotanical

10

studies, which utilized mainly anthropological methods, paved way to the discovery of
information on the plant-human relationship of the indigenous people. Studies about the
Philippine ethnobotany were widely conducted in the Philippine indigenous groups from
the north to the south of the archipelago, some of which include Ifugao (Conklin, 1967),
Bontoc (Bodner and Gereau, 1988), Ayta (Fox, 1952), Hanunoo (Conklin, 1955), and
Tasaday people (Yen and Gutierrez, 1974). These studies, being qualitative in nature,
provided well-detailed accounts on the ethnobotanical uses of plants. Moreover, studies
focusing mainly on ethnomedicinal accounts were also conducted in the country
(Balangcod and Balangcod, 2011; Raterta et al., 2014; Olowa and Demayo, 2015; Fajardo
et al., 2017). Information on plant uses have been very valuable in the contributing
knowledge on medicine and conservation (Pei, 2013).

There had been some studies that documented the traditional knowledge on the
plant use of the Alangan Mangyans. These studies were also qualitative in nature. In an
ethnobotanical study about the Alangan by Mandia (2004), it was described that the
Alangans are horticulturalists and have a special relationship with the plants in their local
environment. Despite the acculturation happening in some of their communities, the plants
remained useful and apparent in the everyday living of the Alangan Mangyans. The plants
in their forests are used in subsistence, clothing, dwelling, household articles, cordage
materials and fire-making. Aside from their uses, the plants are also integrated in their
beliefs, practices and songs.

Furthermore, a study of Caringal and Guarde (2015) described how the Alangan

people have learned to glean rice (himalay-ani) from the leftovers from the harvesting of

11

rice of the lowlanders. This practice has been done by the Alangan in the downstream as a
strategy to secure food alongside with their horticultural practices in the upstream.

In the late 90’s, there has been a shift on the approach on the study of plant use
worldwide, from qualitative to quantitative. This allowed ethnobotanical data to be used in
analyzing patterns of how the plants are used by the people. The shift to quantitative
approaches in the study of plant use have been appropriately essential in conservation and
pharmacological research (Phillips, 1996). Quantitative approaches, however, cannot
replace the need for describing indigenous knowledge qualitatively.

Quantified knowledge on plant use by the local people have been considered in
local conservation priority setting. For instance, the conservation priority index (IPC), an
index adapted and modified from Dzerefos and Witkowski (2001), has been applied to the
study of conservation of medicinal plants (Albuquerque et al., 2011; Oliveira et al., 2007)
and useful plants (Lucena et al., 2013) of Brazil. Other versions of indices for conservation
priority for the local level were also applied to studies in medicinal plants of India (Dhar
et al., 2002; Dixit and Silori, 2010; Kala et al., 2004), Argentina (Martinez et al., 2006),
and wild edible plants of Southern Bénin (N’Danikou et al., 2011).

In the Philippines, a few studies used quantitative ethnobotanical approaches, like
in Ivatan people of Batan Island (Abe and Ohtani, 2013) and Ati people of Guimaras Island
(Ong and Kim, 2014). These studies mainly focused on plants with pharmacological
potential.

Existing studies on the plant use of the Alangan people are mostly qualitative in

approach. Though quantitative studies on plant use of the Philippine indigenous people

12

have been slowly emerging, these have not been fully utilized in the context of conservation
of the Philippine flora. The focus of these studies is mostly on medicinal plants. Moreover,
as of now, there is no quantitative study on the plant use of the Alangan people, who are
the primary users of the biodiversity in Halcon Range.

Quantitative ethnobotany is in a critical platform to understand the knowledge and
practices of the indigenous people which are indeed relevant to sustainable use and
conservation of forest ecosystems. Their traditional knowledge, when integrated with the
Western scientific knowledge, can possibly provide ways of managing forest resources and
maintaining biodiversity (Pei, 2013), especially in the local level.

To gather information on the socio-cultural importance of plant biodiversity in
Halcon Range, a quantitative inventory of plant use was done in an Alangan community in
Brgy. Paitan, Naujan, Oriental Mindoro. As primary users of the forest resources in Halcon
Range, their knowledge is essential in providing preliminary information on the plants that

can be found in Halcon Range, which was later verified in the vegetation surveys.

Vegetation Studies on Tropical Mountains

Studies on tropical mountain ecosystem has been of interest to many scientists
because of its high plant diversity and importance to society (Richter, 2008). In the
Philippines, there were some existing studies that focused on the vegetation structure and
distribution of the Philippine tropical mountains. Tree forms were the most popular

identifiers of plant community types in the Philippines, such as in Mt. Pulag (Buot and

13

Okitsu, 1998), Mt. Pangasugan (Belonias and Aguilar, 2004), Mt. Akiki (Buot, 2007), Mt.
Mayon (Buot, 2008), Mt. Makiling (Buot and Osumi, 2011), Mt. Tabunan (Cadiz and Buot,
2011), and Aborlan Guba System (Sopsop and Buot, 2013). Pteridophytes were also used
as zonation markers to provide description on the vegetation distribution along an
altitudinal gradient (Banaticla and Buot, 2005; Delos Angeles and Buot, 2015). These
studies in general put more emphasis on the floristic characteristics in the tropical
mountains in the country, which are similar with the floristics of tropical mountains in the
Malesian region (van Steenis, 1964; Kitayama, 1992; Aiba and Kitayama, 1999).
Meanwhile in the case of the mountains in northern Philippines (i.e. Mt. Pulag and Mt.
Akiki), the floristic elements are relatively similar to mainland Asia.

Species distribution in tropical mountains can be highly influenced by
environmental and anthropogenic factors. Altitude plays a very prominent role in the
vegetation structure (Hemp, 2006). The influence of altitude in the mountain flora has also
been observed in some of the mountains in Southeast Asia (Kitayama, 1992; Van and
Cochard, 2017; Nguyen et al., 2015) and the Philippines (Buot and Okitsu, 1998; Buot,
2007; 2008). Moreover, along with the elevation comes another environmental gradient
called temperature (Sarmiento, 1986), causing niche separation among species (Culmsee
and Leuschner, 2013). Soil properties are also known to affect the vegetation structure in
the tropical forests, as what was observed in some studies. Nutrients in the soil were known
to decrease as the altitude increases (Aiba and Kitayama, 1999; Kitayama, 1992). In the
Philippines, soil nutrients (Sopsop and Buot, 2013) and water holding capacity (Cadiz and

Buot, 2011) were known to affect the vegetation structure.

14

Furthermore, human activities have shaped the mountain landscape of the
Philippines. Human disturbances have played an impact in modifying the vegetation in
Aborlan Guba System, Palawan (Sopsop and Buot, 2013). Furthermore, a study by Buot
and Osumi (2011) applied the information in vegetation structure and distribution in
identifying land use types in a human disturbed landscape in Mt. Makiling.

In Mindoro, the earliest comprehensive records in the flora happened in early
1900’s, focused in Mt. Halcon (Ames, 1907; Brotherus, 1907; Copeland, 1907; Merrill,
1907a;b). The exploration study in the mountain provided a picture of its rich plant
diversity. The most recent study on vegetation in Halcon Range was conducted at the
northeastern summit zone of Mt. Halcon (Mandia, 1998). The floristic composition in the
summit zone was found to be similar with Mt. Kinabalu, mostly composed of Malesian
floristic elements. However, to date, there is no study on the altitudinal distribution along
the slope of Halcon Range. Updated information on its flora including below the summit
zone will provide a comprehensive information and current state of the vegetation, which
can be useful in biodiversity conservation.

Aside from identifying the state of the forests in the tropical mountains, studying
the vegetation structure and distribution can also be helpful in observing land use patterns
in Mt. Ilong, Halcon Range. These studies utilize multivariate approaches in ecology which
include classification and ordination analyses. These analyses, when brought together,
provides a clearer description of plant communities as well as these interactions between

these plants and its physical environment.

Setting Localized Priorities for Conservation
of Plant Species

Setting conservation priorities can be taken at different levels. It can be done at the
ecosystem level, or in this case, at the species level. There is a need to protect all threatened
species, but since this is impossible, species are ranked for prioritization. By setting
conservation priorities, it is assumed that some species are more important than others
(Given and Norton, 1993).

There is no perfect methodology for setting priorities for conservation of species.
The criteria are based on the availability of the information and the aim of conservation
strategy (Brehm et al., 2010). The methodologies do not only consider the ecological
aspects, but these may also include cultural and economic considerations (Given and
Norton, 1993). The method used in the IUCN Red List is a popular way of ranking species.
Using a rule-based system, it has a set of rules in which a certain species must comply to
be categorized as threatened (Brehm et al, 2010). Threatened species are either categorized
as Critically Endangered (CR), Endangered (EN), and Vulnerable (VU). IUCN has been
widely recognized authority in species conservation. In the same way, the Philippines has
its own list of threatened species under the Department of Environment and Natural
Resources (DENR) Department Administrative Order 2017-11. DENR adapts the
methodology of IUCN for national assessment on threatened species (Fernando et al.,
2008).

Meanwhile, studies about localized conservation priority setting used rating system

or scoring schemes (Dzerefos and Witkowskwi, 2001; Kala et al., 2004; Brehm et al., 2010;

16

Albuquerque et al., 2011; Martinez et al., 2006). In a localized conservation priority setting,
the knowledge of the people on the use of plants has been considered alongside with
biological information on plants.

Another methodology in conservation priority setting in plants utilizes multivariate
approaches: such as hierarchical cluster analysis and detrended correspondence analysis
(Given and Norton, 1993), principal components analysis (Partel et al., 2005), and non-
parametric principal components analysis (Lozano et al., 2003). These studies were taken
at a larger scale (i.e. national level). Multivariate methods have been used in conservation
priority setting, as this take conservation planning in a multidimensional setting. It can
provide information as to what specific conservation strategy can be applied on plants,
since it can target which factors influence threat.

A localized conservation priority index is an integration of ecological and socio-
cultural information on plants. What makes this strategy unique is that it takes the
perspective of the local people as well. In a culturally and biologically diverse country like
the Philippines, a conservation priority setting in a local level can be useful for conservation
planning. Moreover, multivariate methods can be helpful tools in knowing specifically
which caused the threat to a plant, and probably provide an idea on applicable strategy that
can be applied for plants.

Based on the information on the knowledge on plant use and the state of forest
vegetation, an evaluation index for conservation priority setting was constructed in the
context of an Alangan community. The index is valuable as it integrates both the

perspectives of the users and the experts on their views on biodiversity and its importance.

17

Conceptual Framework

It was previously considered that the culture and environment are separate systems.
Lately, people began to have an understanding that the cultural and biological diversity are
interconnected. This has led to the establishment of sub-disciplines that deals with the
intersection of nature and culture (Pretty et al., 2009).

The indigenous people understand the complex ecological systems in the context
of their own locality. The worldview embraced by traditional knowledge emphasizes that
the humans are part of nature. The owners of traditional knowledge view people, plants,
animals and other elements of the universe as interconnected by a network of social
relations and obligations (Berkes et al., 1995; Maffi, 2007). Their close relationship with
one another is critical in such a way that a shift in one system can cause a change in another
(Pretty et al., 2009). This is reflected by studies indicating that the most biologically diverse
areas have a high linguistic diversity (Gorenflo et al., 2012; Stepp et al., 2004). Moreover,
most of the indigenous communities are situated in places with the most plant genetic
resources (Gerique, 2006). The loss of genetic diversity in plants will be followed by the
loss of the indigenous knowledge (Martinez et al., 2006; Benz et al., 2000).

By considering these two aspects, a more unbiased and holistic approach of setting
conservation priorities is possible. The devised conservation priority index is a point
scoring procedure makes use of valuable information essential for conservation, such as
ecological information, sociocultural significance, as well as the current threat assessment

per plant species being assessed (Figure 2.1) While there is an urgent need to conserve the

18

biodiversity, there is also a need to consider the traditions of the indigenous people. As the

direct users of these resources, the indigenous people have a critical role in conservation

management (Engels et al, 2011). The details about this index will be further discussed in

Chapter VI.

Species Distribution

Cultural Diversity

Figure 2.1.

CULTURE
(Traditional Ecological
Knowledge)

Harvesting Risk
Economic Use
Cultural Use

NATURAL ENVIRONMENT

SPECIES ENVIRONMENTAL
VARIABLES

Relative Density YN
Relative

Temperature
Elevation

Frequency ‘
Relative Dominance Soil (pH.N. PK)

Ayssanig jeoibojolg

Threat Assessment (Global and National)

PT 4

Conceptual framework of the study.

Conclusion

In studying conservation and sustainable use of plant resources, biodiversity needs

to be seen not only in terms of biological point of view, but also in a cultural lens. Thus,

19

the knowledge on plant uses by the local people plays an important role in conservation
planning. Moreover, from this information, the state of land use types can be validated on
site using vegetation studies. Conservation priority setting of plant species, especially in a

local level, needs to be seen in the context of the intertwining of nature and culture.

Literature Cited

ABE, R. AND OHTANI, K. 2013. An ethnobotanical study of medicinal plants and
traditional therapies of Batan Island, Philippines. Journal of Ethnopharmacology,
145, 554-565.

AIBA, S. AND KITAYAMA, K. 1999. Structure, composition and species diversity in an
altitude-substrate matrix of rain forest tree communities on Mount Kinabalu,
Borneo. Plant Ecology, 140, 139-157.

ALBUQUERQUE, U.P., SOLDATI, G.T., SIEBER, S.S., MEDEIROS, P.M., SA, J.C.,
AND DE SOUZA, L.C. 2011. Rapid ethnobotanical diagnosis of the Fulni-6
Indigenous lands: Floristic survey and local conservation priorities of medicinal
plants. Environment, Development, and Sustainability, 13, 277-292

AMES, O. 1907. Orchidaceae halconenses: An enumeration of the orchids collected on or
near Mount Halcon, chiefly by Elmer D. Merrill. Philippine Journal of Science C,
2(4), 311-337.

BALANGCOD, T.D. AND BALANGCOD, A.K. 2011. Ethnomedicinal knowledge of
plants and healthcare practices among the Kalanguya tribe in Tinoc, Ifugao, Luzon,
Philippines. Indian Journal of Traditional Knowledge, 10(2), 227-238.

BANATICLA, M.C.N. AND BUOT, LE.Jr. 2005. Altitudinal zonation of pteridophytes
on Mt. Banahaw de Lucban, Luzon Island, Philippines. Plant Ecology, 180, 135-
151.

BELONIAS, B.H. AND AGUILAR, N.O. 2004. Altitudinal zonation of dicots on Mt.
Pangasugan, Leyte Island, Philippines. Journal of Environmental Science and
Management, 7(2), 47-66.

20

BENZ, B.F., CEVALLOS, J.E., SANTANA, F.M., ROSALES, J.A. AND GRAF, S.M.
2000. Losing knowledge about plant use in the Sierra de Manantlan Biosphere
Reserve, Mexico. Economic Botany, 54(2), 183-191.

BERKES, F., FOLKE, C., AND GADGIL, M. 1995. Traditional ecological knowledge,
biodiversity, resilience and sustainability. In Perrings, C. A., Miller, K. G., Folke,
C., Holling, C. S. & Jansson, B. O. (Eds.). Biodiversity Conservation (pp. 281-299).
Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

BODNER, C.C. AND GEREAU, R.E. 1988. A contribution to Bontoc ethnobotany.
Economic Botany, 42, 307-369.

BREHM, J.M., MAXTED N., MARTINS-LOUGAO, M.A., AND FORD-LLOYD, B.V.
2010. New approaches for establishing conservation priorities for socio-
economically important plant species. Biodiversity Conservation, 19, 2715-2740.

BROTHERUS, V.F. 1907. Musci Halconenses. Philippine Journal of Science C, 2(4), 339-
343.

BUOT, I.E.Jr. 2007. Vegetation zonation of Mt. Akiki, Cordillera Mountain Range,
Benguet Province, Philippines. Asia Life Sciences, 16(1), 53-70.

BUOT, L.E.Jr. 2008. Vertical distribution and zonation pattern of woody vegetation on the
northwestern slope of Mt. Mayon, Philippines. Asia Life Sciences, 17(2), 189-205.

BUOT, LE.Jr. AND OKITSU, S. 1998. Vertical distribution and structure of the tree
vegetation in the montane forest of Mt. Pulog, Cordillera mountain range, the
highest mountain in Luzon Is., Philippines. Vegetation Science, 15, 19-32.

BUOT, LE.Jr. AND OSUMI, K. 2011. Land use Pattern and Woody Species Composition
Near Human Disturbed Landscapes on Mount Makiling, Luzon Island. American
Journal of Environmental Sciences, 7(4), 306-315.

CADIZ, G.E. AND BUOT, I.E.Jr. 2011. Physico-chemical factors affecting vascular plant
diversity of a lowland forest in Mt. Tabunan, Cebu Island, Philippines. Asia Life
Sciences Supplement, 6, 1-12.

CARINGAL, A.M. AND GUARDE, J.A.D. 2015. Nature farming and himalaynization:
Food subsistence strategies by the Mangyan Alangan Tribe of Mindoro,
Philippines. Asia Life Sciences, 24(2), 601-627.

CONKLIN, H.C. 1955. The Relation of the Hanundo Culture to the Plant World. PhD
Dissertation. Yale University.

CONKLIN, H.C. 1967. Ifugao ethnobotany 1905-4965: The 1911 Beyer-Merrill report in
perspective. Economic Botany, 21(3), 243-272.

21

COPELAND, E.B. 1907. Pteridophyta halconenses: A list of the ferns and fern-allies
collected by Elmer D. Merrill on Mount Halcon, Mindoro. Philippine Journal of
Science, 2(4), 119-155.

CULMSEE, H. AND LEUSCHNER, C. 2013. Consistent patterns of elevational change
in tree taxonomic and phylogenetic diversity across Malesian mountain
forests. Journal of Biogeography, 40(10), 14.

DELOS ANGELES, M.D. AND BUOT, LE.Jr. 2015. Diversity and distribution of
pteridophytes along the altitudinal gradient of the northeastern slope of a secondary
forest in Mt. Makiling, Philippines. IAMURE International Journal of Ecology and
Conservation, 16, 25-46.

DENR DEPARTMENT ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER (DAO) NO. 2017-11. Updated
national list of threatened Philippine plants and their categories. Retieved 18
August 2017 from http://server2.denr.gov.ph/uploads/rmdd/dao-2017-11.pdf

DHAR, U., RAWAL, R.S., AND UPRETI, J. 2000. Setting priorities for conservation of
medicinal plants — a case study in the Indian Himalaya. Biological Conservation,
95, 57-65.

DIXIT, A.M. AND SILORI, C.S. 2010. Setting conservation priorities for medicinal and
other ethnobotanical resources. Case study of Kachchh District, Gujarat (India). In
Kala, C. P. (Ed.) Medicinal Plants and Sustainable Development. India: Nova
Science Publishers, Inc.

DZEREFOS, C.M. AND WITKOWSKI, E.T.F. 2001. Density and potential utilization of
medicinal grassland plants from Abe Bailey Nature Reserve, South Africa.
Biodiversity and Conservation, 10, 1875-1896.

ENGELS, J.M.M., DEMPEWOLF, H., AND HENSON-APOLLONIO, V. 2011. Ethical
considerations in agro-biodiversity research, collecting, and use. Journal of
Agricultural and Environmental Ethics, 24, 107-126.

FAJARDO, W.T., CANCINO, L.T., DUDANG, E.B., DE VERA, I.A., PAMBID, R.M.
AND JUNIO, A.D. 2017. Ethnobotanical study of traditional medicinal plants used
by indigenous Sambal-Bolinao of Pangasinan, Philippines. Pangasinan State
University Journal of Natural and Applied Sciences, 1(1), 45-55.

FERNANDO, ES., CO, L.L., LAGUNZAD, D.A., GRUEZO, W.S.M., BARCELONA,
J.F.. MADULID, D.A., LAPIS, A.B., TEXON, G.I, MANILA, A.C., AND
ZAMORA, P.M. 2008. Threatened plants of the Philippines: a preliminary
assessment. Asia Life Sciences Supplement, 3,1-52.

FOX, R.B. 1952. The Pinatubo Negritoes: Their useful plants and material culture.
Philippine Journal of Science, 81 (3-4), 173-414.

22

GADGIL, M., BERKES, F. AND FOLKE, C. 1993. Indigenous knowledge for
biodiversity conservation. Ambio, 22(2-3), 151-156.

GERIQUE, A. 2006. An introduction to ethnoecology and ethnobotany: Theory and
methods. Integrative assessment and planning methods for sustainable agroforestry
in humid and semiarid regions. Advanced Scientific Training. Loja, Ecuador.
Retrieved 5 May 2014 from http://www.researchgate.net/profile/Andres_Gerique/
publication/239591352_An_Introduction_to_ethnoecology_and_ethnobotany._Th
eory_and_Methods__Integrative_assessment_and_planning_methods_for_sustain
able_agroforestry_in_humid_and_semiarid |_regions/links/0f3 1753c6699fe2f5b00
0000.pdf

GIVEN, D.R. AND NORTON, D.A. 1993. A multivariate approach to assessing threat
and for priority setting in threatened species conservation. Biological Conservation,
64, 57-66.

GORENFLO, L.J.. ROMAINE, S., MITTERMEIER, R.A.. AND WALKER-
PAINEMILLA, K. 2012. Co-occurrence of linguistic and biological diversity in
biodiversity hotspots and high biodiversity wilderness areas. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 109(21), 8032-8037.

HEMP, A. 2006. Continuum or zonation? Altitudinal gradients in the forest vegetation of
Mt. Kilimanjaro. Plant Ecology, 184, 27-42.

KALA, C.P., FAROOQUEE, N.A., AND DHAR, U. 2004. Prioritization of medicinal
plants on the basis of available knowledge, existing practices and use value status
in Uttaranchal, India. Biodiversity and Conservation, 13, 453-469.

KITAYAMA, K. 1992. An altitudinal transect study of the vegetation on Mount Kinabalu,
Borneo. Vegetatio, 102(2), 149-171.

LOZANO, F.D., SAIZ, J.S.M. AND OLLERO, H.S. 2003. Rarity and threat relationships
in the conservation planning of the Iberian flora. Biodiversity and Conservation,
12, 1861-1882.

LUCENA, RF.P., LUCENA, C.M., ARAUJO, E.L., ALVES, A. G. C., AND
ALBUQUERQUE, U.P. 2013. Conservation priorities of useful plants from
different techniques of collection and analysis of ethnobotanical data. Annals of the
Brazilian Academy of Sciences, 85(1), 169-186.

MAFFI, L. 2007. Cultural Diversity and Sustainability. In Pretty, J., Ball, A. S., Benton,
T., Guivant, J. S., Lee, D. R., Orr, D., Pfeffer, M. J., & Ward, H (Eds). The Sage
Handbook of Environment and Society (pp. 267-277). London: Sage Publications.

MANDIA, E.H. 2004. The Alangan Mangyan of Mt. Halcon, Oriental Mindoro: Their
Ethnobotany. Philippine Quarterly of Culture & Society, 32, 96-117.

23

MANDIA, E.H. 1998. The vegetation on the Northeastern summit of Mt. Halcon, Mindoro
Island, Philippines. PhD Dissertation. University of the Philippines Los Bafios.

MARTINEZ, G.J., PLANCHUELO, A.M., FUENTES, E. AND OJEDA, M. 2006. A
numeric index to establish conservation priorities for medicinal plants in the
Paravachasa Valley, Cordoba, Argentina. Biodiversity and Conservation, 15, 2457-
2475.

MERRILL, E.D. 1907a. The ascent of Mt. Halcon, Mindoro, Philippines. Philippine
Journal of Science, 2(4), 251-309.

MERRILL, E.D. 1907b. The flora of Mt. Halcon. Philippine Journal of Science, 2(4), 251-
309.

N’DANIKOU, S., ACHIGAN-DAKO, E.G. AND WONG, J.L.G. 2011. Eliciting local
values of wild edible plants in Southern Bénin to identify priority species for
conservation. Economic Botany, 65(4), 381-395.

NGUYEN, T.V., MITLOHNER, R., AND BICH, N.V. 2015. Environmental Factors
Affecting the Abundance and Presence of Tree Species in a Tropical Lowland
Limestone and Non-limestone Forest in Ben En National Park, Vietnam. Journal of
Forest and Environmental Science, 31(3), 177-191.

OLIVEIRA, R.L.C., LINS NETO, E.M.F., ARAUJO, E.L., AND ALBUQUERQUE, U.P.
2007. Conservation priorities and population structure of woody medicinal plants
in an area of Caatinga vegetation (Pernambuco State, NE Brazil). Environmental
Monitoring Assessment, 132, 189-206.

OLOWA, L. AND DEMAYO, C.G. 2015. Ethnobotanical uses of medicinal plants among
the Muslim Maranaos in Iligan City, Philippines. Advances in Environmental
Biology, 9(27)), 204-215.

ONG, H.G. AND KIM, Y.D. 2014. Quantitative ethnobotanical study of the medicinal
plants used by the Ati Negro indigenous group in Guimaras Island, Philippines.
Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 157, 228-242.

PARTEL, M., KALAMEES, R., REIER, U., TUVI, E.L., ROOSALUSTE, E., VELLAK,
A. AND ZOBEL, M. 2005. Grouping and prioritization of vascular plant species
for conservation: combining natural rarity and management need. Biological
Conservation, 123(3), 271-278.

PEI, S. 2013. Ethnobotany and the sustainable use of biodiversity. Plant Diversity and
Resources, 35(4), 401-406.

PHILLIPS, O.L. 1996. Some quantitative methods for analyzing ethnobotanical
knowledge. In Alexiades, M. N. (Ed.) Selected guidelines for ethnobotanical
research: A field manual (pp. 171-197).

24

PRETTY, J., ADAMS, B., BERKES, F., ATHAYDE, S.F., DUDLEY, N., HUNN, E.,
MAFFI, L., RAPPORT, D., ROBBINS, P., STERLING, E., STOLTON, S.,
TSING, A., VINTINNER, E. AND PILGRIM, S. 2009. The Intersections of
biological diversity and cultural diversity: Towards integration. Conservation and
Society, 7(2), 100-112.

RATERTA, R., DE GUZMAN, G.Q. AND ALEJANDRO, GJD. 2014. Assessment,
inventory and ethnobotanical survey of medicinal plants in Batan and Sabtang
Island (Batanes Group of Islands, Philippines). International Journal of Pure and
Applied Bioscience, 2(4), 147-154.

RICHTER, M. 2008. Tropical mountain forests — distribution and general features. In
Gradstein, S.R., Homeier, J. and Gansert, D. (Eds). The Tropical Mountain Forest
— Patterns and Processes in a Biodiversity Hotspot (pp. 7-24). Germany:
Universitatsverlag Gottingen.

SARMIENTO, G. 1986. Ecologically crucial features of climate in high tropical
mountains. In Vuilleumier, F., Monasterio, M. (Eds): High Altitude Tropical
Biogeography (pp. 11-45). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

SOPSOP, L.B. AND BUOT, ILE.Jr. 2013. The forest types in Aborlan Guba System,
Palawan Island, Philippines. IAMURE International Journal of Ecology and
Conservation, 7, 88-104.

STEPP, J.R., CERVONE, S., CASTANEDA, H., LASSETER, A., STOCKS, G., AND
GICHON, Y. 2004. Development of a GIS for global biocultural diversity. Policy
Matters, 13, 267-270.

VAN, Y.T., AND COCHARD, R. 2017. Tree species diversity and utilities in a contracting
lowland hillside rainforest fragment in Central Vietnam. Forest Ecosystems, 4(1),
9.

VAN STEENIS, C. G. G. J. 1964. Floristic altitudinal zones in Malesia. Botanical Journal
of the Linnean Society, 89, 289-292.

YEN, D.E. AND GUTIERREZ, H.G. 1974. The ethnobotany of the Tasaday: The useful
plants. Philippine Journal of Science, 103(2), 75-140.

CHAPTER III

GENERAL METHODOLOGY

Study Area

This study was conducted in an Alangan Mangyan community in Brgy. Paitan,
Naujan, Oriental Mindoro, Philippines (Figure 3.1). The collection of primary data was

conducted from April-May 2016, which included interviews and vegetation sampling.

1 fi, N
’ | | a. A
&
Oriental
\ Mindoro’
} Occidental
Mindoro
\
2p
>, ed
hy :
(Rm | eo ¥

Figure 3.1. [L] Map of the Philippines showing the location of Mindoro Island (boxed).
[R] Map of Mindoro Island indicating the location of Mt. Ilong and Mt.
Halcon (marked as A), as well as Brgy. Paitan (marked as star). The maps are
generated using QGIS v.2.18.13.

26

Documentation of Information on the
Use of Plants by the Alangan People

For the collection of information on plant use by the Alangan people, a mixed
methods approach was applied. Sixty key informants (each a representative of a household
in Brgy. Paitan) were interviewed face-to-face to provide a list of plants they use in their
everyday living. The interview included socio-demographic information and a free-listing
(Appendix 2) of all the plants they know, including information on their uses, the plant
parts that were used, as well as the habitat of these plants. The information gathered from
this were later verified with elderly key informants and crosschecked with ethnobotanical

studies of the Alangan people (Mandia, 2004).

Vegetation Analysis on the Plants
in Mt. Ilong, Halcon Range

To confirm and gather species data of the useful plants in the field, vegetation
sampling was performed by means of quadrat method. Fourteen 10m x 10m quadrat was
plotted per 100-m elevation along the altitudinal gradient of Mt. Ilong. Within these plots,
trees, as well as associated herbs and shrubs were identified. Information on importance
values (Curtis and McIntosh, 1951) were computed, and these included data on their

relative density, relative frequency, and relative dominance per species (Mueller-Dombois

27

and Ellenberg, 1974). Other environmental variables such as elevation, temperature, and
soil properties were also collected per sampling plot.

Multivariate analyses were performed for vegetation classification and ordination
in Mt. Ilong. To identify the major plant communities, density values of tree species per
plot were subjected to cluster analysis (van Tongeren, 1995) in unweighted pair-group
arithmetic mean (UPGMA) algorithm, using Bray-Curtis similarity index (Bray and Curtis,
1957). A dominance analysis (Ohsawa, 1984) was also performed to know the dominant
species per plot and to the the identified plant communities (zones). Floristic diversity for
each plot was also calculated. To analyze the tree species-environment interaction, a

canonical correspondence analysis (CCA) was also used (ter Braak, 1986).

Localized Conservation Priority Setting
of Plant Species

The data collected from ethnobotanical and vegetation survey, as well as useful
bibliographic information were all utilized and triangulated in the application of the
localized conservation priority index. Prior to this, an evaluation index (adapted and
modified from Brehm et al., 2010; Dzerefos and Witkowski, 2001) was devised using
point-scoring procedure for conservation priority setting of useful plant species. The index
was composed of seven criteria (Table 6.1), which considered sociocultural and ecological
aspects essential for conservation priority setting, as well as threat assessments in global

and national levels. To further analyze how the assessed criteria influence these species, a

28

nonlinear principal component analysis (Michailidis and de Leeuw, 1998) was performed.

The outcome of this study was then presented to the community for validation

Literature Cited

BRAY, J.R. AND CURTIS, J.T. 1957. An ordination of the upland forest communities of
Southern Wisconsin. Ecological Monographs, 27(4), 325-349.

BREHM, J.M., MAXTED N., MARTINS-LOUGAO, M.A., AND FORD-LLOYD, B.V.
2010. New approaches for establishing conservation priorities for socio-
economically important plant species. Biodiversity Conservation, 19, 2715-2740.

CURTIS, J.T. AND MCINTOSH, R.P. 1951. An upland forest continuum in the prairie-
forest border region of Wisconsin. Ecology, 32(3), 476-496.

DZEREFOS, C.M. AND WITKOWSKI, E.T.F. 2001. Density and potential utilization of
medicinal grassland plants from Abe Bailey Nature Reserve, South Africa.
Biodiversity and Conservation, 10, 1875-1896

MANDIA, E.H. 2004. The Alangan Mangyan of Mt. Halcon, Oriental Mindoro: Their
Ethnobotany. Philippine Quarterly of Culture and Society, 32, 96-117.

MICHAILIDIS, G. AND DE LEEUW, J. 1998. The Gifi system of descriptive
multivariate analysis. Statistical Science, 13(4), 307-336.

MUELLER-DOMBOIS, D. AND ELLENBERG, H. 1974. Aims and Methods of
Vegetation Ecology. USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

OHSAWA, M. 1984. Differentiation of vegetation zones and species strategies in the
subalpine region of Mt. Fuji. Vegetatio, 57, 15-82.

TER BRAAK, C.J.F. 1986. Canonical Correspondence Analysis: A new eigenvector
technique for multivariate direct gradient analysis. Ecology, 67(5), 1167-1179.

VAN TONGEREN, E.C. 1995. Cluster Analysis. In Jongman, R.H.G., ter Braak, C.J.F.
and van Tongeren, E.C. (Eds.). Data analysis in Community and Landscape
Ecology. (pp. 174-212). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

CHAPTER IV

USEFUL PLANTS OF THE ALANGAN MANGYANS OF HALCON RANGE,
MINDORO ISLAND, PHILIPPINES

Abstract

Quantitative studies on plant use by the local people has been slowly
growing in the Philippines, yet the application of this field has not been fully
utilized in a Philippine setting. This study documented the useful plants of
the Alangan Mangyan community in Paitan, Naujan, Oriental Mindoro,
Philippines. Based from the face-to-face interview of 60 key informants
informant interviews, this study recorded 199 local names of plants
classified into different uses. Results showed that there were more
cultivated than wild plant species for food, fodder, medicine, and firewood
use categories, while more wild than cultivated species were recorded for
construction and timber use categories. The present knowledge on the use
of plants is reflective of the changing subsistence strategies over time, as a
result of population pressure and influence of the outside social
environment.

KEYWORDS: Alangan Mangyan, plant use categories, subsistence
strategies, shifting cultivation

Introduction

People evolved from the beginning how to interact with nature particularly plants
in terms of utilizing them. This is very evident especially with our indigenous peoples. The

Philippines has many indigenous groups from the north to the south of the archipelago.

30

One of them is the Alangan of Halcon Range. These people are horticulturists, who
progressed from foragers in the forests to cultivators of root crops (Mandia, 2004). The
Alangan, together with the seven other indigenous groups in Mindoro Island, are
collectively called Mangyan, a term that is used to define the indigenous people living in
Mindoro. As the main and the oldest users of the natural resources of the forests of Halcon
Range, it is important to know how these people have used the plant resources of Mt.
Halcon.

To date, existing studies about plant use of the Alangan were qualitative in nature
(Mandia, 2004; Caringal and Guarde, 2015). Quantitative approaches in the study of plant
uses by the local people has been recently growing (Phillips and Gentry, 1993a,b; Oliveira
et al., 2007; Lucena et al., 2007; Albuquerque et al., 2011; Lucena et al., 2013), as these
have been found to be useful in addressing issues on sustainable use and conservation (Pei
et al., 2009). Though there were few studies of quantified plant uses in the Philippines (Abe
and Ohtani, 2013; Ong and Kim, 2014), these were all focused on medicinal plants and
were not fully utilized in the context of conservation. This study is a quantitative
assessment of the plant use patterns of the Alangan people of Mt. Ilong, Halcon Range,
which was later applied in a methodology for localized conservation priority setting.

The objectives of the study were as follows: (1) to determine the useful plants of
the Alangan Mangyan community at the foothold of Mt. Ilong in Paitan, Naujan, Oriental
Mindoro; (2) to document the distribution of plant per use categories; and (3) to analyze
how the current knowledge on plant use reflect the subsistence strategies of the Alangan

people.

31

Study Area and Methods

Study Area

Paitan is a barangay in the municipality of Naujan, Oriental Mindoro. It is a
lowland settlement near the foothold of the Halcon Range, particularly Mt. Ilong. This
settlement in Paitan was described by Mandia (2004) as a more acculturated community
compared to other settlements in the upland area, with some houses made of concrete and
galvanized roofs. As of 2015, the population recorded in Brgy. Paitan is 1,519 (Philippine
Statistics Authority, 2010), and is composed of 292 households. The annual growth rate of
Brgy. Paitan from 2010-2015 is 1.30%, a rate that is lower compared with the growth rate
of the province of Oriental Mindoro (1.38%) and of the Philippines as a whole (1.72%).

The barangay is covered with one of the three ancestral domains claimed by the
Alangan Mangyan. This Certificate of Ancestral Domain Claim (CADC No. 04-124) has
an area of 32,000 hectares (MBCFI, 2012) and includes both the summit of Mt. Halcon

and Mt. Ilong (Figure 4.1).

UN
*
“ *
Paitan
A
Oriental Mindoro.
Occidentat Mindoro
25 5 18 410 km.
SS  _  _

32

Figure 4.1. Map showing the location of the study area (marked with a red star). The
boundaries of the CADC (No. 04-124) is highlighted in orange, which
includes the peaks of Mt. Ilong and Mt. Halcon (marked as green triangles).
Map is generated using QGIS v.2.18.13.

Methodology

A prior informed consent was secured from Samahan ng Nagkakaisang Mangyan

Alangan (SANAMA), a people’s organization representing the Alangan Mangyan. The

researcher also asked consent from the barangay chairman of Paitan, Naujan, Oriental

Mindoro.

33

In this research, survey (written in Filipino language) was used as a means of
gathering the necessary data (Appendix A). The samples were obtained using systematic
random sampling. The survey material was administered as a face-to-face interview and
was be divided into two parts: socio-demographic profile of the household and knowledge
on the use of plants found in the Halcon Range (Appendix A). The semi-structured survey
is written in Filipino. The informants were asked to free-list all the plant that they know.
After providing an initial list of plants, the informants were asked how they use these
resources, whether which part is for food, firewood, medicine, construction, and others to
extract more information on plants and their use.

The heads of the household served as the informants in this study. In case the
household head was not available, any adult (18 years old and above) in the family who
can answer the questions was chosen as informant. Since the aim is to measure knowledge
of plant use of the people quantitatively, the informants came from varying age groups,
gender, and occupation, most of which being involved in swidden farming.

Moreover, key informant interviews were also conducted with the elders or tribal
leaders to further verify the data. Guided tours were also utilized, where the researchers
walked with the informants in the vegetation to record their comment and identifications

of the plants.

34

Results

There were 60 informants from this survey (29 male and 31 female informants).
Among these informants, 26.43% were from Sitio Bagong Buhay, 14.23% from Sitio
Guna, 13.22% from Sitio Bayanan, and 7.12% from Sitio Bagong Pook. The age and
gender distribution of the informants is summarized in Figure 4.2. The age pyramid of the
household members of the informants is shown in Figure 4.3. Among these informants,

84.33% had a family member involved in swidden farming (kaingin).

8 = Male

3
7
| me ° a

31-40 41-50 51-60 61-70 71-80 81-85

& Female

Figure 4.2. Graph showing the age and gender distribution of the informants.

Majority of the informants range from 31-60 years old. The graph above shows that

highest number of male informants age were at around 51-60 years old, while the highest

35

number of female informants range from 41-50 years old. The average number of years of
education (counting from primary year or Grade 1 onwards) was 4.43 years for male
informants, and 7.10 years for female informants.

The informants came from varying occupations, but majority of which were
farmers (55.0%). The rest were composed of housewives (25%), hired workers (6.7%),
barangay officials/workers (6.7%), unemployed individuals (3.3%), NGO worker (1.7%)
and gardener (1.7%).

The age pyramid of the informants (Figure 4.3) shows that the composition of their
households were young, with the youngest age groups comprising the bottom of the

pyramid.

91-100
81-90

71-80

61-70

51-60

41-50

31-40

11-20

0-10

60 40 20 0 20 40 60
5Female mMale

Figure 4.3. Age pyramid of the household members of the informants.

36

The Useful Plants of the Alangan People

A total of 199 plant names was reported during the interview and were classified
according to use categories (Food, Fodder, Lumber, Medicine, Ornamental, Construction,
Firewood/Charcoal, Insecticide/Insect Repellant, Cash Crop, and Cultural). Note that
except for cultural use, the rest of the recorded uses can be classified as provisioning
ecosystem services (MEA, 2005). Figure 4.4 shows the distribution of plant names per use

category, differentiating both wild and cultivated plants.

90

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

Food Fodder Lumber Medicine Construction Firewood
=Cultivated Wild

Figure 4.4. Number of local names mentioned by the informants per use category.
Cultivated plants are represented by black bars, whereas wild plants are
represented by patterned bars. Only the top use categories were shown in this
graph.

37

The graph shows that the people had more knowledge on food and medicinal plants.
It was also noticeable that for food, fodder, medicine, and firewood, there were more
cultivated than wild plants reported. For lumber and construction, there were more known
wild plants than cultivated ones. To further give light to the distribution of plants per use
category, the floristics summary per use category is shown in Table 4.1, indicating the

number of identified families, genera, and species per use category.

Table 4.1.  Floristics summary showing the number of identified families, genera, and
species per use category. The assignment of categories for a plant is not
mutually exclusive — a plant can have more than one use recorded, thus can
be assigned to two or more use categories..

USE CATEGORIES FAMILIES GENERA SPECIES
Food 34 61 74
Fodder 7 7 7
Medicine 44 74 77
Construction 28 45 52
Lumber 7 11 14
Cash crop 20 25 25
Handicraft 3 3 3
Pesticide/Insect
Deterrent 5 ss
Ornamental 10 9 9
Cultural 8 9 9

The Alangan people used a wide variety of species for different use categories. The

highest number of families, genera and species were recorded from medicine, food, and

38

construction categories (Table 4.2). Information on its uses, growth habit, plant part used,

and habitat is also shown in this table.

Table 4.2. List of useful plants of the Alangan people of Halcon Range, Mindoro Island,
Philippines, as revealed from the interviews.

LOCAL/
FAMILY/SPECIES = Eovhiel 6 Crowe uses PARTS HABITAT
NAME
Achariaceae
Pangium edule Reinw. kulilis tree Construction stem forest
Acoraceae
Amaranthaceae
Aerva lanata(L.) Schult agad-agad herb Medicine eee homegarden
Amaranthus spinosus L./ Medicine leaf, homegarden
A. cruentus L. uray net root 8
Amaryllidaceae
. . Food,
Allium sativum L. bawang herb Medicine bulb homegarden
Anacardiaceae
Medicine, homegarden,
Food, Cash . >
Mangifera indica L. mangga tree crop, fruit swidden
Firewood boa
Spondias pinnata (L. f. . 7
ia tz P Lf) libas tree Food fruit forest
Annonaceae
Medicine,
Food, Cash leaf, _ homegarden,
Annona muricata L. guyabano tree crop, , shoot,  swidden
Firewood bark farm
Cananga odorata(Lam.) . . + swidden
Hook.f. & Thomson ilang-ilang tree Construction stem farm

Apocynaceae


39

Table 4.2 Continued...
LOCAL/
ENGLISH GROWTH PARTS
FAMILY/SPECIES COMMON HABIT USES USED HABITAT
NAME
Construction, a
Alstonia macrophylla . Medicine, stem,  [Orest,
Wall. Ex G.Don eeliTa tree Firewood, bark — $widden
Lumber arm
paruiliersia pilosa urimot tree Construction stem widen
(A.DC,) Fern.-Vill. 8 —
Ervatamia pandacaqui kampupot shrub Medicine sap homegarden
Araceae
. Food, Cash homegarden,
Colocasia esculenta (L.) gabi herb an leaf, swidden
Schott P stem farm
Colocasia sp. abalong herb Fodder leaf —homegarden
Schismatoglottis forest,
calyptrata (Roxb.) Zoll. —_salidang herb Food root — swidden
& Moritzi farms
Schismatoglottis sp. Zoll. mamba herb Food fruit, forest
& Moritzi leaf
PA homegarden,
Xanthosoma sagittifolium Food, Fodder, —_Jeaf, megarden,
(L.) Schott. San Fernando herb Cash crop root swidden
Araliaceae
Schefflera elliptica Ornamental
(Blume) Harms five fingers Li
Arecaceae
eal forest,
edicine, i
Areca catechu L. bunga tree Cultural fruit ——
homegarden
Cal ID hrub Construction,
‘'alamus/Daemonorops shru Handicraft
uway/yantok 5 ‘andicratt, stem _ forest
spp. ne (liana) Cultural
Food,
Construction,
Lumber, fruit,  omegarden,
Cocos nucifera L. niyog tree Medicine, > swidden
Fodder, stem farms
Firewood,
Cash crop
Asparagaceae
Dracaena angustifolia . Construction, bark,
(Medik,) NEBr. Hibanwa shrub Medicine fea forest


Table 4.2 Continued...

FAMILY/SPECIES

Aspleniaceae
Asplenium nidus L.

Asteraceae

Ageratum conyzoides (L.)
L.

Artemisia vulgaris L.
Blumea balsamifera (L.)
DC.

Chromolaena odorata
(L.) R.M.King & H.Rob
Chrysanthemum indicum
es
Mikania cordata
(Burm.f.) B.L.Rob.
Tagetes erecta L.
Athyriaceae
Diplazium esculentum
(Retz.) Sw.
Balsaminaceae

Impatiens balsamina L.

Blechnaceae

Stenochlaena palustris
(Burm. f.) Bedd.

Boraginaceae
Heliotropium indicum L.
Brassicaceae

Brassica juncea (L.)
Czern.

Brassica rapa L.

Raphanus raphanistrum
subsp. sativus (L.) Domin
Bromeliaceae

Ananas comosus (L.)
Merr.

Burseraceae
Canarium sp.
Cannabaceae

LOCAL/
ENGLISH
COMMON
NAME

pakpak-lawin

bugasnay
kamarya

sambong
hagonoy
mansanilya

uting

amarilyo

pako

kamantigue

hagnaya

aritis-aritisan

mustasa

pechay

labanos

pinya

sahing

GROWTH
HABIT

herb

herb
herb
shrub

shrub

herb

herb
herb

herb

herb

herb

herb

herb
herb
herb

herb

tree

USES

Omamental

Medicine
Medicine
Medicinal
Pesticide
Medicine
Medicine
Omamental

Food, Fodder

Medicine,
Omamental

Food,
Construction

Medicine

Food
Food

Food

Food,
Medicine

Medicine

PARTS
USED

leaf
leaf
leaf

leaf
leaf

leaf

flower

leaf

fruit

leaf

leaf

leaf
leaf
root
fruit,

young
leaf

resin

40

HABITAT

forest,
homegarden

homegarden
homegarden

homegarden
homegarden
homegarden

homegarden

homegarden

swidden
farms

homegarden

forest

homegarden
homegarden
homegarden
homegarden

swidden
farm,
homegarden

forest


41

Table 4.2 Continued...
LOCAL/
ENGLISH GROWTH PARTS
FAMILY/SPECIES COMMON HABIT USES UsEp HABITAT
NAME
nema orientalis (L.) anadyong tree Medicine bark —_ homegarden
Capparidaceae
. . shrub Food 5 swidden
Capparis zeylanica dawa (liana) fruit farms
Caricaceae
Food, Hi
i Medicine, eal, — swidden
Carica papaya L. papaya tree Cash crop stem, farms,
sap homegarden
Clusiaceae
Garcinia brevirostris basal Constraction
Scheff. asa tree stem _ forest
Garcinia sp. L. bagyuan tree Construction — stem swidden
Combretaceae
Se indicum (L.) niyog-niyogan shrub Medicine fruit homegarden
Convolvulaceae
on aquatica kangkong herb Food leaf —homegarden
Food, Cash swidden
Ipomoea batatas (L.) kamote herb crop, Fodder pot bli 4
jomegarden
Ipomoea sp. L. aps herb Food root _ forest
Merremia peltata (L.) herb Medicine swidden
Merr. bulakan (vine) shoot farm
Crassulaceae
(lan)Pers ail kataka-taka herb Medicine leaf — homegarden
Cucurbitaceae
Benincasa hispida Food .
(Thunb.) Cogn. kundol herb fruit homegarden
Cucumis sativus L. pipino pei Food fruit homegarden
Cucurbita maxima herb Food, Cash . .
swidden
Duchesne kalabasa (vine) “TOP fruit —
Lagenaria siceraria herb Food, Cash . homegarden,
(Molina) Standl. tabayag/upo vine) top fruit swidden


42

Table 4.2 Continued...
LOCAL/
ENGLISH GROWTH PARTS
FAMILY/SPECIES COMMON HABIT USES USED HABITAT
NAME
swidden
a acutangula (L.) patola herb Food fruit farms,
oxb. (vine) homegarden
herb Food, ; homegarden,
Momordica charantiaL. ampalaya F Medicine, fruit swidden
(vine) Cash crop farm
Medicine, .
Momordica sp. lige layang ae Food fruit _forest
Sechium edule (Jacq.) Sayote Gi) Food fruit homegarden
Cunoniaceae
wanmannia aT talaki tree Construction stem _ forest
Dioscoreaceae
Food, Cash .
Dioscorea alata L. ube herb crop root  swidden
farms
Dioscorea divaricata labey herb Food stem swidden
Blanco farm
a hispida namu herb Food root _ forest
Dipterocarpaceae
Dipterocarpus Construction,
grandiflorus (Blanco) apitong tree Lumber stem _ forest
janco
Construction,
Shorea contorta S.Vidal  lawaan tree Lumber stem _ forest
Sh i Construction, forest,
— negrosensis lawaang pula tree Lumber stem — swidden
farm
Construction,
Shorea polysperma Merr. _ tangile tree Lumber stem _ forest
Euphorbiaceae
di 5
a Rumph, mea a San Francisco shrub ~—- Ommamental leaf  homegarden
Euphorbia hirta L. tawa-tawa herb Medicine aia homegarden
oe leaf. homegarden,
Jatropha curcas L. tuba tree Medicine b k swidden
an farm
Macaranga bicolor amilig tree Construction stem _ forest

Miill.Arg.


B

Table 4.2 Continued...
LOCAL/
ENGLISH GROWTH PARTS
FAMILY/SPECIES COMMON HABIT USES UsED HABITAT
NAME
Food, Fodder, idd
. , Cash cro root, — Swid’en
Manihot esculenta Crantz balinghoy shrub \ crop, farms,
Medicine leaf >
homegarden
Fabaceae
Construction, leaf
Acacia mangium Willd. tree Lumber, cal, forest
igium 1 mangyum Medicine stem
Caesalpinia sappan L. sibukaw tree Medicine bark — arden
Cajanus cajan (L.) hadyos herb Food fruit  SWidden
Millsp. farms
Derris elliptica (Wall.) tubli herb Pesticide root homegarden
Benth. (vine)
Falcataria moluccana Construction, widd
(Migq.) Barneby & palakata tree Lumber stem — Aa
J.W.Grimes ,
lop ; Construction, swidden
Cinicidia sepium (Jacq) kakawate tree Medicine, stem farm,
aup. Fodder homegarden
| homegarden,
peenene leucocep! nla ipil-ipil tree Firewood stem — swidden
(Lam.) de Witt farm.
Mimosa pudica L. makahiya herb Medicine root homegarden
herb swidden
Phaseolus lunatus L. patani 7 Food fruit —_ farms,
(vine) homegarden
. . herb —_—-Food, Cash .  swidden
Phaseolus vulgaris L. sitaw (vine) FOP fruit farm, garden
Psophocarpus kalamismis/ga herb Food fruit SWidden
tetragonolobus (L.)DC. bay (vine) farms
Pterocarpus indicus Construction,
, narra tree Lumber stem _ forest
Willd.
Senna alata (L.) Roxb. akapulko tree Medicine leaf —homegarden
pesbania grandiflora (L.) katuray tree Food fruit homegarden
Vigna unguiculata (L.) : herb 7
k . Food
Walp. ibal (vine) fruit homegarden
Hypericaceae
Cratoxylum sumatranum . Construction swidden
(Jack) Blume baksilay tree stem farm

Lamiaceae


Table 4.2 Continued...

44

LOCAL/
ENGLISH GROWTH PARTS
FAMILY/SPECIES COMMON HABIT USES USED HABITAT
NAME
Clerodendrum balitungtong — Construction stem Widen
macrostegium Schauer farm
Gmelina arborea Roxb. — gmelina tree Construction stem swidden
Mentha spp. herba buena herb Medicine leaf  homegarden
Food, homegarden,
Ocimum basilicum L. samoro herb Medicine leaf — swidden
farm
(once oregano herb Medicine leaf —homegarden
Vitex negundo L. lagundi shrub Medicine leaf —homegarden
Lauraceae
Cinnamomum mercadoi kali a Construction, —_ stem, a
S. Vidal aNingag oe Medicine bark Ss
. . Construction,
Litsea sp. Lam. magurilaw tree Lumber stem _ forest
Food, hae
Persea americana Mill. avocado tree Medicine, eat, _swidden
Firewood bark, farms,
stem homegarden
Phoebe sterculioides Construction,
(Elmer) Mer. kaburo tree Lumber stem _ forest
Lecythidaceae
Barringtonia acutangula ; Construction, stem
subsp. acutangula (L.) tipalang tree Medicine b k forest
Gaertn. an
Lycopodiaceae
Hi ia phl ia (L.
anne te egmaria (L.) salanggumay herb Omamental homegarden
Lygodiaceae
hrub Construction,
Lygodium sp. Sw. nito sor Handicraft, stem _ forest
3 us (liana) Cultural
Malvaceae
Abelmoschus esculentus Food, Cash ; swidden
(L.) Moench okra herb crop Fruit _ farms,
homegarden
Corchorus olitorius L. saluyot shrub Food leaf —homegarden
Diplodiscus paniculat Pan
iP! P anus balugo tree Medicine leaf —_ forest

Turez.


45

Table 4.2 Continued...
LOCAL/
ENGLISH GROWTH PARTS
FAMILY/SPECIES COMMON HABIT USES USED HABITAT
NAME
Durio zibethinus L. durian tree Food Fruit swidden
arms
Food,
Hibiscus sp. gumamela shrub ne flower homegarden
mamen
Sterculia sp. L. balinad tree Construction stem _ forest
Food, . homegarden,
Theobroma cacao L. cacao tree Medicine, a swidden
Cash crop see farms
Marantaceae
Donax canniformis Construction
(GForst.) KSchum. banban shrub stem _ forest
Maranta arundinacea. urado herb Food stem _ forest
Melastomataceae
eee saransok shrub _ Firewood stem Widen
malabathricum L. farm
Meliaceae
Food, Cash
Lansium parasiticum crop, fruit swidden
(Osbeck) K.C. Sanhi & lanzones tree Construction, > farm,
Bennet ane Sten homegarden
Irewoo
Sandoricum koetjape Food, fruit,
(Burm.f) Mer. santol tree Firewood stem homegarden
Construction, a
Swietenia macrophyll. Lumber, Be
King Pyne mahogany tree Medicine, pa farm, forest,
Firewood homegarden
Toona calantas Merr. & kalantas oe Lumber, pon
Rolfe eri forest
Menispermaceae
Anamirta cocculus (L.) . shrub pesticide
Wight & Arn. bayati (liana) seed homegarden
Tinospora glabra shrub Medicine forest,
(Burm.f.) Merr. makabuhay (liana) stem homegarden
Moraceae
Artocarpus altilis swidden
(Parkinson ex F.A.Zom) — kamansi/rimas tree Food Fruit farms,

Fosberg

homegarden

46

Table 4.2 Continued...
LOCAL/
ENGLISH GROWTH PARTS
FAMILY/SPECIES COMMON HABIT USES USED HABITAT
NAME
(aes wus Dlancot antipolo tree Construction stem _ forest
Food, Cash a
crop, it,  Swidden
Artocarpus heterophyllus nangka tree aera fruit, farms,
Lam. ’ stem
Firewood homegarden
esi Food, +
clei a odoratissimus marang/uloy tree Baton Fruit swidden
arms
forest,
Ficus sp. anongo tree Cultural bark — swidden
area
. . Construction, bark,
Ficus sp. balite tree Medicine root, forest
stem
Moringaceae
Food,
Moringa oleifera Lam. malunggay tree Medicine, leaves homegarden
‘ash crop
Musaceae
Food, .
; Medicine, fruit, .
Musa spp. saging herb Cash crop, leaf,  swidden
Fodder sap farms,
Myrt homegarden
lyrtaceae
Eucalyptus globulus pacaintan ee Construction t swidden
Labill. dd stem farm
a ‘ homegarden,
Psidium guajava L. bayabas shrub Medicine abs swidden
farm
Syzygium cumini (L.) Food, fruit, — swidden
Skeels duhat tree Medicine bark farms
Tristaniopsis decorticata ,
(Merr.) Peter G.Wilson & bunglas tree Construction stem _ forest
J.T.Waterh.
Orchidaceae Orchids herb Omamental ria ee
Oxalidaceae
Averrhoa bilimbi L. kalamias tree Food fruit homegarden
Pandanaceae
Pandanus radicans Construction, ,
Blanco ulango shrub Cyttural leaf _ riverside


Table 4.2 Continued...

LOCAL/
ENGLISH GROWTH
FAMILY/SPECIES COMMON HABIT USES
NAME
Phyllantaceae
Antidesma bunius (L.) . Medicine
Spreng. bignay tree
Sauropus villosus Construction
(Blanco) Merr. bangrat use
Piperaceae
. . Medicine,
Piper betle L. mam-in herb Cultural
Piper nigrum L. paminta herb Food
Poaceae
Food,
. Construction,
Bambusoideae kawayan shrub Firewood,
Handicraft
Coix lacryma-jobi L. adlay/tigbi herb Food
Cymbopogon citratus Food,
wo Cc) a fan f. tanglad herb Medicine
Eleusine indica (L.) . Medicine
Gaertn. parag-is herb
op . shrub Construction,
Flagellaria indica L. balingway (liana) Handicraft
Gigantochloa sp. Kurz ex Construction
Munro bolo shrub
Imperata cylindrica (L.) Construction,
Raeusch. cogon herb Medicine
Oryza sativa L. palay herb Food
Sacch i Food,
race jarum officinarum abe a ae
Schizostachyum ,
brachycladum (Kurz) buho tree Construction
Kurz
Setaria italica (L.) 7 Medicine
P.Beauv. bikaka herb
Zea mays L. mais herb Food

Polygalaceae

PARTS
USED

stem

stem

leaf

stem

leaf

root

stem

stem

root,
leaf

stem

stem

47

HABITAT

forest

swidden
farm

forest,
homegarden,
swidden
farms
swidden
farms

forest,
swidden
farm

swidden
farms
homegarden,
swidden
farm

homegarden

forest

forest,
swidden
farm
swidden
farm

tice field

homegarden,
swidden
farm

swidden
farm
homegarden

swidden
farms


48

Table 4.2 Continued...
LOCAL/
ENGLISH GROWTH PARTS
FAMILY/SPECIES COMMON HABIT USES USED HABITAT
NAME
Xanthophyllum Construction
t forest
bracteatum Chodat kangmun tree stem forest
Rhamnaceae
Alphitonia zizyphoid Construction, A a
iphitonia zizyphoides Lumber, stem, = swidden
(Sol. Ex Spreng.) A.Gray tangulay tree Medicine bark _ farm, forest
Rosaceae
Rosa spp. rosas shrub Omamental flower  homegarden
Rubiaceae
Food,
Coffea canephora Pierre kape — Construction, stem, —_ swidden
ex A.Froehner P Firewood, seed farm
Cash crop
Gardenia Jasminoides rosal shrub Ormamental flower
J.Ellis homegarden
Ixora sp. santan shrub Omamental homegarden
Rutaceae
Citrus aurantifolia Food, — .
(Christm.) Swingle dayap tree Medicine fruit homegarden
i i Food,
wires maxima (Burm.) lukban tree Medicine fruit | homegarden
Food, i :
Citrus reticulata Blanco __sinturis tree Firewood fruit, swidden
stem farms
x Citrufortunella heotine
microcarpa (Bunge) kalamansi tree Cash crop fruit swidden
- . > farms,
Wijnands Firewood i"
homegarden
Sapindaceae
Food, Cash
Nephelium lappaceumL. rambutan tree aan fruit swidden
farms
Sapotaceae
Food, ;
Chrysophyllum cainito L. kaimito tree Medicine Hay homegarden
Solanaceae
Capsicum anuum L. sili herb Medicine homegarden
Cultural, swidden
Nicotiana tabacum L. tabako/sadiwa herb Pesticide leaf —_ farm,

homegarden

49

Table 4.2 Continued...
LOCAL/
ENGLISH GROWTH PARTS
FAMILY/SPECIES COMMON HABIT USES UsED HABITAT
NAME
7 ; Food, swidden
Solanum americanum barakway/unti herb Witte leaf farm,
Mill. -an edicine
. homegarden
Solanum lycopersicum L. _kamatis herb Food fruit homegsrden
Food, Cash ; swidden
Solanum melongena L. talong herb crop fruit farm,
homegarden
Theaceae
Ehretia microphylla tsaang gubat tree Medicine leaf homegarden
Urticaceae
taba- a
Elatostema sp. taba/ambubuw tree Medicine leaf —_ homegarden
ay
Poikilospermum fa
suaveolens (Blume) anopol tree Medicine stem _ forest
Merr.
Verbenaceae
Premna odorata Blanco —alagaw shrub Medicine leaf — homegarden
Zingiberaceae
Alpini 1 . | Medicine,
ie galanga (L.) tagibulog herb Cultural stem _ forest
Alpinia purpurata luyang Medicine
(Vieill.) K.Schum. pula/itim Bete stem forest
Food, Cash homegarden,
Curcuma longa L. luyang dilaw herb crop, — srem _ swidden
Medicine farm
Kaempferia galanga L. kusor herb Medicine pe homegarden
Food, Cash h
Zingib: inal 7 jomegarden,
a er officinale luya herb crop, — stem — swidden
oscoe Medicine farm
[unidentified] aram Construction puiades
farm
[unidentified] mangume tree Construction stem swidden
[unidentified] ilupakon tree Construction stem _ forest
[unidentified] inggiw Construction stem _ forest
[unidentified] pakpak tree Construction stem _ forest
[unidentified] talwan Construction stem _forest


Table 4.2 Continued...

50

LOCAL/
ENGLISH GROWTH PARTS
FAMILY/SPECIES COMMON HABIT USES USED HABITAT
NAME

[unidentified] batoryon Medicine stem _ forest
[unidentified] dawuy Medicine sap _ forest
[unidentified] guta Medicine bark _ forest

Food,
[unidentified] lawuy Medicine root _ forest

Medicine,
[unidentified] salugim tree Construction stem _ forest
[unidentified] aribagraw Medicine leaf homegarden
[unidentified] gita tree Medicine sap homegarden
[unidentified] pauail herb Medicine homegarden

sandukan

[unidentified] taka-taka Medicine homegarden
[unidentified] anigyaw tree Construction stem _ forest
(unidentified] anlaway tree Construction stem _riverside

Food, idd
[unidentified] apilan Medicine stem — en
[unidentified] lusong Handicraft stem _ forest
[unidentified] marayaw Cultural
[unidentified] pagsibar Medicine leaf swidden
[unidentified] singapor Food fruit
[unidentified] atsiba Medicine homegarden
[unidentified] bakus kabayo Construction stem _riverside

The Alangan people utilized a variety of cultivated and wild plants as food sources.

They cultivated plants either in their swidden farms or homegardens. The major

carbohydrate source of the Alangan people were “root crops”, which mostly belong to

families Araceae and Dioscoreaceae. One notable plant from the forest, namu (Dioscorea

51

hispida), is a semi-cultivated one consumed during times of famine. Although this plant
was poisonous, the tubers can be consumed with proper preparation to make it edible
(Mandia, 2004). The tubers were sliced thinly and soaked in water in a wooden container
overnight, washed and soaked again overnight. Aside from root crops, a few grains
(Poaceae) were also added in their diet as carbohydrate sources, such as corn and rice. A
few legumes (Fabaceae) were also planted and consumed, which can be considered as good
protein sources.

They planted common vegetables for consumption, mostly coming from Family
Cucurbitaceae and some solanaceous vegetables. A few leafy vegetables were also reported
to be part of their diet, such as mustasa (Brassica juncea), pechay (Brassica rapa),
kangkong (Ipomoea aquatica), and malunggay (Moringa oleifera) (Table 4.2).

Fruit trees were also cultivated in their swidden farms, and these were usually being
sold as cash crops as well (Table 4.2). These trees include avocado (Persea Americana),
duhat (Syzygium cumini), durian (Durio zibethinus), calamansi (xCitrufortunella
microcarpa), jackfruit (Artocarpus heterophyllus), sinturis (Citrus reticulata), uloy
(Artocarpus odoratissimus), coconut (Cocos nucifera), guyabano (Annona muricata) and
papaya (Carica papaya).

Also included in this use categories were condiments, and these plants are easily
gathered from their homegardens, such as luya (Zingiber officinale), luyang dilaw
(Curcuma longa), bawang (Allium sativum), samoro (Ocimum basilicum), kalamias
(Averrhoa bilimbi), paminta (Piper nigrum), tanglad (Cymbopogon citratus), and sili

(Capsicum anuum).

52

There were also a variety of plants that were reported to have medicinal properties
(Table 4.3). These medicinal plants have different forms of preparation, and can be used in
treating a variety of illnesses. Their homegardens served as most accessible source of
medicinal plants, helpful in times of emergency. Some medicinal plants were also obtained

from their swidden farms and forests.

Table 4.3. List of plants with medicinal values as revealed from the interviews.

BOTANICAL PART/S

NAME/FAMILY LOCAL NAME USED MEDICAL USE/S
Acoraceae
Acorus calamus L. lubidan/dusol stem for stomachache
Amaranthaceae
Amaranthus spinosus L./ abortive
A. cruentus L. uray foot
Anacardiaceae
Mangifera indica L. mangga bark for stomachache
Annonaceae
directly applied for headache
. leaf/shoot, and stomachache (leaf/shoot);
CENT Raa guyabano bark bark as a decoction for
diarrhea
Apocynaceae
Voacanga globosa i For stran; /stomachach
(Blanco) Merr. aliwas leaf Bury! ene
Jasminum
sambac/Ervatamia kampupot sap for wounds
pandacaqui
aisionia ek Ha batino bark decoction to alleviate fever

Araceae

53

Table 4.2 Continued...
BOTANICAL PART/S
E/S
NAME/FAMILY LOCAL NAME USED MEDICAL US!
poulticed and applied on
Colocasia esculenta (L.) gabi leaf wound to stop bleeding; also
Schott used in treating athlete's foot
Arecaceae
for usog; fruit used as a
Areca catechu L. bunga stem; fruit purgative
juice (endosperm) used to
Cocos nucifera L. niyog seed treat UTI
Asparagaceae
a for fracture (bark); leaf heated
Dr haieniend angustifolia tibanwa bark, leaf and applied to affected area
(Medik.) Roxb. for body pain
Asteraceae
. pound, heated and directly
Ageratum conyzoides bugasnay leaf applied to wound to stop
(L.)L. bleeding; also for diarrhea
decoction for stomach pains;
Artemisia vulgaris L. kamarya leaf can also be applied directly on
stomach
decoction for cough, kidney
Blumea balsamifera (L.) ., ; ailments, hyperacidity; leaf
Dc. sambong leaf can also be directly applied to
alleviate fever
Cheyscantherm indicum mansanilya leaf decoction for flatulence
Mikania cordata i oultice applied to wounds
(Burm.f) B.L Rob. uting leaf Pp PP:
Balsaminaceae
crushed and placed on the
. stomach for the mother for the
Impatiens balsaminaL. —_ kamantigue fruit infant come out from the
womb
Boraginaceae
Ehretia microphylla , used to treat stomach pains;
Lam. tsaang gubat leaf purgative in children


54

Table 4.2 Continued...
BOTANICAL PART/S
NAME/FAMILY LOCAL NAME USED MEDICAL USE/S
heated and extracted for
Heliotropium indicum L. _ aritis-aritisan leaf asthma and cough
Bromeliaceae
Ananas comosus (L.) nite oung leaf for boils
Merr. piny' young
Burseraceae
Canarium sp. sahing sap sap is chewed for binat
Caricaceae
leaf is directly applied on
. wounds to stop bleeding; sap
Carica papaya L. papaya leaf, sap is used to stop milk
production when weaning
Combretaceae
Combretum indicum (L. . . ‘
DeFilipps. (L.) niyog-niyogan root decoction used to treat UTI
Convolvulaceae
Ipomoea batatas (L.) kamoteng baging shoot increase blood level
Lam.
Crassulaceae
. directly applied for headache;
Bryophyllum pinnatum ya taka leaf can also be extracted for
(Lam.) Pers. burns and bee sting
Cucurbitaceae
Momordica sp. amp alayang fruit for diabetes
ligaw
Momordica charantiaL. ampalaya fruit anti-diabetes
Euphorbiaceae
Manihot esculenta . whipped on the stomach as a
Crantz. balinghoy leaf cure against flatulence
Euphorbia hirta L. tawa-tawa flower for dengue
Jatropha curcas L. tuba leaf directly applied to fracture
Fabaceae
prepared as decoction to
Caesalpinia sappan L. sibukaw bark increase blood levels; used as
a massage for fracture
applied to wounds; for fungal
Senna alata (L.) Roxb. akapulko leaf skin diseases


Table 4.2 Continued...

BOTANICAL PART/S
NAME/FAMILY __ LOCALNAME —ugep
Gliricidia sepium (Jacq.) kakawate leaf
Walp.
Mimosa pudica L. makahiya root
Caesalpinia sappan L. sibukaw bark
Gliricidia sepium (Jacq.) leaf
Walp. kakawate
Lamiaceae
Mentha spp. herba buena leaf
Plectranthus amboinicus egan leaf
(Lour.) Spreng oregano
Ocimum basilicum L. samoro leaf
Cinnamomum mercadoi .
S.Vidal kalingag bark
Vitex negundo L. lagundi leaf
Lauraceae
Persea americana Mill. avocado leaf, bark
Malvaceae
Piplodiscus paniculatus balugo leaf
urez.
Theobroma cacao L. cacao leaf
Hibiscus sp. gumamela flower
Meliaceae
Lansium parasiticum
(Osbeck) K.C. Sanhi & lanzones bark
Bennet
Swietenia macrophylla mahogany bark

King
Menispermaceae

55

MEDICAL USE/S

extract to treat scabies; also
for headache

decoction for urinary
problems

for fracture

extract to treat scabies; also
for headache

used to treat cough of
newborn babies; also for body
pain and stomachache

extract/decoction used for
cough, colds, stomach pains,
bronchitis

decoction for diarrhea,
vomiting and headache

decoction for stomachache
and bleeding

decoction for cough, fever
and asthma

decoction for stomach pains,
diarrhea and vomiting

leaf directly applied for fever
and headache

for headache

for boils

for diarrhea

decoction for stomach pains


56

MEDICAL USE/S

Table 4.2 Continued...
BOTANICAL PART/S

NAME/FAMILY —_LOCALNAME usep
Tinospora glabra
(Burm.f.) Mer. makabuhay stem
Moraceae
Ficus sp. balite bark
Moringaceae
Moringa oleifera Lam. malunggay leaf
Musaceae
Musa spp. saging leaf, sap
Myrtaceae
Psidium guajava L. bayabas leaf
Syzygium cumini (L.)
Skeels duhat is
Phyllantaceae
Antidesma bunius (L.) .
Spreng. bignay bark
Piperaceae
Piper betle L. mam-in leaf
Poaceae
Setaria italica (L.) .
P Beauv. bikaka* root
Imperata cylindrica (L.)
Raeusch. cogon root
Eleusine indica (L.) arag-i t
Gaertn, parag-is roo
Cymbopogon citratus
(DC,) Stapf. tanglad leaf
Saccharum officinarum PAN a

L.

decoction for cough and
stomachache

bark directly applied for
fracture and sprain

increases blood levels

leaf directly applied to
forehead to alleviate fever;
sap is used to treat oral thrush

for wound cleaning, diarrhea
and stomach ache

decoction for diarrhea

decoction for body pains

directly applied for fever,
pambuga*; poultice is also
mixed with lime for
stomachache and cough

for stomachache
for strangury

decoction for strangury

used as a bath to remove
binat**; decoction used for
fever, cough, urinary
problems; also lowers blood
pressure

heated and extracted to treat
neck pains

57

Table 4.2 Continued...
BOTANICAL PART/S
NAME/FAMILY LOCAL NAME USED MEDICAL USE/S

used as a bath to remove

Cynh binat**; decoction used for

‘ymbopogon citratus fever, cough, urina:
tanglad leaf > > ry

(DC.) Stapf. é problems; also lowers blood
pressure

Saccharum officinarum heated and extracted to treat

L. tubo stem neck pains

Rhamnaceae

Alphitonia zizyphoides

(Sol. ex Spreng.) A.Gray  tangulay bark for cough

Rutaceae

Citrus aurantifolia . for asthma and cough, used as

(Christm.) Swingle dayap fruit aluop***

. . . . for cough; leaf is crushed and
Citrus microcarpa kalamansi fruit, leaf smelled to cure diziness
Citrus maxima (Burm.) decoction used against
Merr. lukban leaf binat**

, for cough; leaf is crushed and
N . 3
oneal a kalamansi fruit, leaf smelled to cure diziness
Sapotaceae
Chrysophyllum cainito L. kaimito bark, leaf for diarrhea
Solanaceae
sonun americanum barakway/unti-an — fruit, leaf for rabies
. oe extracted or applied as
Capsicum anuum L. sili leaf poultice for wounds and boils
; . decoction/eaten as raw for
Solanum nigrum L. barakway/unti-an leaf dog bite
Urticaceae
taba- for strangu
Elatostema sp. taba/ambubuway leaf gury
Poikilospermum .
suaveolens (Blume) anopol stem for eye diseases
Merr.
Verbenaceae
Premna odorataBlanco _alagaw leaf taken as a decoction for cough

Zingiberaceae


58

Table 4.2 Continued...
BOTANICAL PART/S
MEDICAL USE/S
NAME/FAMILY __ LOCALNAME sep
Alpinia purpurata iti i used as a contraceptive
(Vieill.) K.Schum. luyang pula/itim rhizome
Alpinia galanga (L.) q for stomachache
Willd. tagibulog root
extract for cough, flatulence,
. fever, asthma; can also be
Curcuma longa L. luyang dilaw rhizome mixed with kalamansi and
lime to treat skin diseases
extract for cough and
Kaempferia galanga L. a leaf stomachache
for fever, stomachache, sore
a . rhizome throat, cough; pambuga
Zingiber officinale kaya against balis****
extract for cough, flatulence,
. fever, asthma; can also be
rhizome mixed with kalamansi and
Curcuma longa L luyang dilaw lime to treat skin diseases
[unknown] batoryon fruit for body pains
[unknown] dawuy sap for mouthsore
for fever and stomachache,
(unknown] guta bark bark directly applied while
warm
[unknown] lawuy root burned; used as a purgative
[unknown] salugim mast/bark? for balis****
. directly applied to head for
[unknown] aribagraw leaf fever and headache
[unknown] gita sap for stomachache
directly applied for
[unknown] sanduk-sandukan  \eaf stomachache
leaf directly applied to
[unknown] taka-taka leaf forehead to alleviate fever

*Buga (pambuga) is a practice wherein the plant part is being chewed by the healer and then will be spitted

to the patient.

** Binat is a local term for relapse.
***Luop is a practice wherein the plant part is burned and the patient is exposed to the smoke.

**** Balis or usog is a condition wherein a person (usually an infant or a child becomes distressed/afflicted,
which is believed to be caused by meeting a stranger. There is no equivalent term in Western medicine for

these words.

59

Construction plants refer to those plants that are used for building houses, either for
pillars, walls, roofs, flooring, or even fences. Cordages used in building houses were also
included under this category. Most of the plants that were used for house construction were
woody trees. Some of the notable construction plants were members of Family
Dipterocarpaceae, Lauraceae, and Fabaceae (Table 4.2). Majority of the trees that fall
under the construction category were generally gathered from forests and were also used
as sources of lumber. Some other species used by the Alangan people can be found in the
swidden farms, and these include a few wild woody trees (a combination of native and
exotic trees), fruit trees, species of bamboo (Bambusoideae), and cogon (Jmperata
cylindrica). For cordage, the Alangan used some forest shrubs such as tibanwa (Dracaena
angustifolia), uway (Calamus/Daemonorps spp.), hagnaya (Stenochlaena palustris), nito
(Lygodium spp.), banban (Donax canniformis), ulango (Pandanus radicans), and
balingway (Flagellaria indica) (Table 4.2).

Some plants were also utilized as sources of charcoal and firewood (Table 4.1).
These were all woody plants useful in building fire for cooking. These firewood sources
were mainly composed of fruit trees such as avocado (Persea americana), guyabano
(Annona muricata), kalamansi (x Citrufortunella microcarpa), kape (Coffea canephora),
lanzones (Lansium parasiticum), mangga (Mangifera indica), nangka (Artocarpus
heterophyllus), niyog (Cocos nucifera), rambutan (Nephelium lappaceum), santol
(Sandoricum koetjape), and sinturis (Citrus reticulata). The other plants that are used as

firewood include batino (Alstonia macrophylla Wall ex G.Don), ipil-ipil (Leucaena

60

leucocephala  (Lam.) de Witt), mahogany (Swietenia macrophylla),kawayan
(Bambusoideae), and saransok (Melastoma polyanthum Brum.f.).

The Alangan also used to weaved baskets and containers either used or sold in the
market. Some of the plant materials that they use come from balingway (Flagellaria indica
L.), different species of kawayan (Bambusoideae), nito (Lygodium sp.), uway, and yantok
(Calamus/Daemonorps spp.).

The Alangan practiced chewing betel nut, (Areca catechu), which has always been
an important part of their culture. The betel nut (locally known as bunga) is usually mixed
with apog (lime), mam-in (Piper betle), and tabako/sadiwa (Nicotiana tabacum). These
four ingredients, when mixed together, is collectively called as nganga. A few plants were
also used in making their costumes, such as anongo (Ficus sp.), which is used in making
abayan, nito (Lygodium sp.) and uway (Calamus/Daemonorops spp.), which can be used

in making yakis.

Discussion

Patterns in Plant Use Categories

The results from Tables 4.1 and 4.2 showed that the Alangan people of Brgy.
Paitan, Naujan, Oriental Mindoro were able to utilize a wide variety of plants — both wild
and cultivated types — from the forest, their swidden farms, up to their own homegardens.

Some of these plants were recounted to have multiple uses. The floristic diversity per use

61

category was summarized in Table 4.1, showing the highest species number from medicine,
food, and construction categories.

There were some ethnobotanical studies that quantified the number of species per
use category. Cunha and Albuquerque (2006) conducted a quantitative ethnobotanical
study of tree and shrub species in northern Brazil. It was found out in their study that the
use categories with most number of species were related to obtaining wood, such as house
construction, firewood and charcoal production, which is very similar to how the Alangan
people made use of their plant resources at the Halcon Range. Another study by Torre-
Cuadros and Islebe (2003) assessed the TEK of the Maya people in northern Quintana Roo
(southeastern Mexico). The most common uses of plants were construction, medicine,
crafts, and food. Moreover, a study in Central Western Spain, Iberian Peninsula analyzed
the floristic diversity of plant use (Gonzales et al., 2013). The use categories with highest
recorded number of plants were medicine, food, industry, and handicraft. An
ethnobotanical study in Eastern Tanzania (Luoga et al., 2000), found out that the major
plant use categories of Kwere and Zigua tribes include charcoal, firewood, medicine, and
poles.

The major plant use categories in the Alangan context was relatively similar with
other indigenous people in the world. For food and medicine categories, most of the species
that were reported by the Alangan informants were readily accessible as these can mostly
be found in their swidden farms and homegardens. Furthermore, members of this use
categories were mostly composed of cultivated plants making these plants more available

than the wild plants from the forest area.

62

High diversity of cultivated crops in various habitat types reduces the pressure on
wild plant resources, leading to a more sustainable forest use (Pei et al., 2009).
Furthermore, cultivation of these various plants in such as homegardens and swidden farms
provides subsistence at least in their basic needs (Soemarwoto, 1987) such as food and
medicine. It also provides additional income for the people.

The food plants of the Alangan share relative similarity with food plants used by
other indigenous peoples in the Philippines, like the Aytas (Fox, 1952), Hanunoo
Mangyans (Conklin, 1955), and the Bontoc people (Bodner and Gereau, 1988). It is worth
noting, moreover, that these groups, including the Alangan Mangyan, share the same
subsistence strategy as swidden cultivators, and thus having relatively similar and diverse
staple crops, fruits and vegetables. Aroids such as gabi (Colocasia esculenta) and root
crops such as kamote (Jpomoea batatas) are some of the common and widely used staple
crops in the kaingin farms of the indigenous peoples in the Philippines (Matthews et al.,
2012; Pardales, 1997; Caringal and Guarde, 2015). Fruits and vegetables of different
species were also similar and cultivated alongside with these crops.

There were a variety of plants that were utilized for construction purposes (Table
4.2), and whether trees or shrubs, these were all woody in nature. For this use category,
there were more wild species utilized than from cultivated ones. This only shows that the
Alangan people were dependent on the forest for some resources, at least in terms of the
woody species for construction purposes.

As shifting cultivators, it is only natural that the Alangan people know a lot about

their cultivated plants. While they were mainly utilizing plants from their swidden farms,

63

the Alangan people of Paitan preferred to obtain some local flora from the forests. This
only means that they have not completely abandoned their nature as foragers, as they were
still able to name some useful plants from their forests. Perhaps, as they interacted with
nature, they tried as much as possible to cultivate some plants of daily importance but

retained the nature harvesting practice for some plants which they don’t need daily anyway.

Evolution of Subsistence Strategies in
the Alangan Context

It has been attested that the forest has better protection when the traditional
practices is well-maintained (Pei et al., 2009). However, in the context of changing
environment, it is evident that the subsistence strategies of the Alangan people have
gradually evolved over time. As an adaptive response to the changing environmental and
socio-economic conditions, the traditional ecological knowledge of the indigenous people
can also change (Gomez-Baggethun and Reyes-Garcia, 2013).

In the Aytas of Pampanga, Philippines, for example, in an ethnobotanical survey
by Ragragio et al. (2013), it was observed that there was a decrease in their knowledge of
useful plants, as compared from the earlier study of Fox (1952). The authors argued that
this happened as contributed by some factors, including the displacement of the people and
acculturation, as well as loss of forest cover due to the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo.

In the Alangan setting, it can be seen from the results of this study (Table 4.2 and

4.3) knowledge on plant use of the Alangan people is more than a byproduct of the oral

64

culture that is passed from generation to generation. For instance, it was observed that in
the case of plants categorized as medicine, there were plants found in their homegardens
that are not naturally growing in their forest. They make use of these medicinal plants the
same way with the lowlanders. These people somehow managed to plant these species for
an easier access to herbal medicine in times of emergency. Some of the local health workers
were able to gain knowledge through the trainings and seminars that they attend to. The
older people and traditional healers, meanwhile, remain knowledgeable on forest plants.

The Alangan people in Paitan were able to adapt the culture of the lowlanders. The
Alangan culture should not be considered as an isolated system: these people interacted
with the lowlanders with their cultures. These practices should not be seen as static, but
rather as dynamic which is evolving as a response to the changing conditions (Wiersum
1997; Soemarwoto, 1986).

However, this influence from the outside social environment can cut both ways.
Indigenous knowledge can be achieved by accepting new knowledge and disregard some
components that were less suitable in their everyday living. This change can only be
considered healthy if they are able to apply their own knowledge (Gomez-Baggethun and
Reyes-Garcia, 2013); otherwise, the influence will result to the detriment of their own
culture.

An evidence of this adaptation in the Alangan context was documented by Caringal
and Guarde (2015) in their study in Paitan and Bualao, another Alangan community in the
upland of the Alangan Valley. The Alangan people were able to develop a food security

strategy called himalay, a practice where they glean leftover rice grains upon harvest on

65

the land of the lowlanders. This adaptation is not an old one, as the Mangyans in general
once inhabited the plains and the coastal areas of Mindoro Island. They migrated to the
forest and mountain areas as lowlanders began settling in the island circa 50 years ago. As
they developed this rice gleaning practice, they retained knowledge on several varieties of
their staple upland root crops such as kamuti (Ipomoea batatas) and gabi (Colocasia
esculenta), which they cultivate in their swidden farms.

The changing patterns in the food subsistence practices of the Alangan is a likeness
of the theory of Esther Boserup (1965), which states that the increasing population leads to
a more intensified agricultural production. The population of Brgy. Paitan is gradually
growing at an annual growth rate of 1.3% from 2010-2015 (PSA, 2010; 2015). To meet the
needs of their people, the traditional clearing-fallowing cycle was less observed in their
swidden farms. Recently, their practice is slowly transforming into a more permanent form
of agriculture (Mandia, 2004). During the interview with the key informants, from the
previously reported fallow period of 5-10 years (Mandia, 2004), the resting period for the
swidden farms was shortened to three years. It is worth noting, moreover, that the harvest
in their farms is not primarily for consumption but for trade to help secure lowland goods
(Quiaoit, 1997).

This shortening of the fallow period among swidden farms has been a trend in the
Philippines (Lasco et al., 2001) and in Southeast Asia (Rasul and Thapa, 2003). This trend
was also observed in the swidden farms of Hanunuo Mangyan in Bulalacao, Oriental

Mindoro (Gascon, 1998). From 10-15 years (as reported by Conklin, 1955), fallow period

66

was shortened to 1-3 years. This practice was described as unsustainable, as it can result to
lower soil fertility and increased erosion rates (Dressler et al., 2017).

Given this situation, if their present agroforest lands cannot meet the needs of the
people, there is a possibility of an increasing demand for agroforest lands in the future,
leading to encroachment to the upper slopes of the forest area. This scenario, however,
remains a possibility as the forests of the Halcon Range remain to play an integral part of
the Alangan people. They consider the mountains as sacred and have a deep respect for
their lands. In fact, the Alangan word kubat means “world”, and this term has a double
connotation. Kubat also means “forest”, which implies that the world is forest for them
(Schult, 2001). As one of the key informants have stated: Kung gagamitin mo siya [ang
kalikasan] gagamitin ka rin nito. Kung iingatan mo ang kalikasan, iingatan ka rin nito (If
you dominate over nature, it will also make use of you. If you will take care of nature, it
will also take care of you.). Their understanding of the forest-people interaction and culture
of valuing the forest is deeply rooted and can play a crucial role in the protection of their

lands.

Conclusion and Recommendations

This study was able to collect information on the use of plants by the Alangan
people of Halcon Range, Mindoro Island, Philippines. Results showed that the plants
remain an important component of their life by providing their necessities such as food,

medicine, and house construction, just like in other indigenous communities worldwide.

67

The Alangans have many plants easily domesticated in their swiddens but some
periodically needed plants are still harvested from the nearby forest. The use of these plants
is reflective of their evolving subsistence strategies. They are gradually moving to a more
permanent form of agriculture, which can be attributed to increasing population pressure.
The transition from shifting cultivation to permanent agriculture only shows the dynamic
adaptation of the Alangan culture through time.

While other influences such as acculturation and population pressure is inevitable
in the Alangan community in Paitan, Naujan, Oriental Mindoro, their traditional ecological
knowledge, particularly on the use of plants can play a vital part in conserving biodiversity
of Mindoro. Therefore, in creating local policies to safeguard the sustainability of their
agricultural practices, a close collaboration between the local government units (LGU’s)
and indigenous community is highly recommended.

Moreover, intergenerational transmission of the knowledge on the use of plants and
values on the importance of the forest ecosystem is recommended by teaching the younger
generation of Alangan people on their culture and the use of plants. This study also gives
light on the potential of homegardens for in situ conservation of plant species from their
forest. As this study primarily dealt with provisioning ecosystem services from plants, it
would also be interesting to document and quantify how these people perceive other

ecosystem services.

68

Literature Cited

ABE, R. AND OHTANI, K. 2013. An ethnobotanical study of medicinal plants and
traditional therapies of Batan Island, Philippines. Journal of Ethnopharmacology,
145, 554-565.

ALBUQUERQUE, U.P., SOLDATI, G.T., SIEBER, S.S., MEDEIROS, P.M., SA, J.C.,
AND DE SOUZA, L.C. 2011. Rapid ethnobotanical diagnosis of the Fulni-6
Indigenous lands: Floristic survey and local conservation priorities of medicinal
plants. Environment, Development, and Sustainability, 13, 277-292.

BODNER, C.C. AND GEREAU, R.E. 1988. A contribution to Bontoc ethnobotany.
Economic Botany, 42, 307-369.

BOSERUP, E. 1965. The Conditions of Agricultural Growth: The Economics of Agrarian
Change under Population Pressure. Transaction Publishers.

CARINGAL, A. M. AND GUARDE, J. A. D. 2015. Nature farming and himalaynization:
Food subsistence strategies by the Mangyan Alangan Tribe of Mindoro,
Philippines. Asia Life Sciences, 24(2), 601-627.

CONKLIN, H.C. 1955. The Relation of the Hanundéo Culture to the Plant World. PhD
Dissertation. Yale University.

CONSERVATION INTERNATIONAL PHILIPPINES, DEPARTMENT OF
ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES-PROTECTED AREAS AND
WILDLIFE BUREAU, AND HARIBON FOUNDATION FOR THE
CONSERVATION OF NATURE. 2006. Priority Sites for Conservation in the
Philippines: Key Biodiversity Areas. Quezon City, Philippines: Conservation
International Philippines. Retrieved 20 May 2015
from http://www.conservation.org/global/philippines/publications/Pages/Priority-
Sites-for-Conservation-Key-Biodiversity-Areas.aspx

CUNHA, L.V.F. AND ALBUQUERQUE, U.P. 2006. Quantitative Ethnobotany in an
Atlantic Forest Fragment of Northeastern Brazil — Implications to Conservation.
Environmental Monitoring and Assessment, 114, 1-25.

DRESSLER, W.H., WILSON, D., CLENDENNING, J., CRAMB, R., KEENAN, R.,
MAHANTY, S., BRUNN, T.B., MERTZ, O., AND LASCO, R.D. 2017. The
impact of swidden decline on livelihoods and ecosystem services in Southeast Asia:
A review of the evidence from 1990 to 2015. Ambio, 46, 291-310.

FOX, R.B. 1952. The Pinatubo Negritoes: Their useful plants and material culture.
Philippine Journal of Science, 81 (3-4), 173-414.

69

GASCON, C.N. 1998. Sustainability indicators of the Hanunuo Mangyan Agroforestry
Systems, Sitio Dangkalan, Bulalacao, Oriental Mindoro, Philippines. PhD
Dissertation. University of the Philippines Los Bafios.

GOMEZ-BAGGETHUN, E. AND REYES-GARCIA, V. 2013. Reinterpreting change in
traditional ecological knowledge. Human Ecology, 41, 643-647.

GONZALEZ, J.A. GARCIA-BARRIUSO, M., RAMI{REZ-RODRIGUEZ, R.,
BERNARDOS, S., AND AMICH, F. 2013. Ethnobotanical resources management
in the Arribes del Duero Natural Park (Central Western Iberian Peninsula):
Relationships between plant use and plant diversity, ecological analysis, and
conservation. Human Ecology, 41, 615-630.

HOOGERBRUGGE, I. AND FRESCO, L.O. 1993. Homegarden Systems: Agricultural
Characteristics and Challenges. International Institute for Environment and
Development Gatekeeper Series No. 39. Wageningen: Wangeningen Agricultural
University.

LASCO, R.D. AND PULHIN, J.M. 2001. Secondary forests in the Philippines: Formation
and transformation in the 20" century. Journal of Tropical Forest Science, 13(4),
652-670.

LUCENA, R.F.P., ARAUJO, E.L. AND ALBUQUERQUE, U.P. 2007. Does the local
availability of woody Caatinga plants (Northeastern Brazil) explain their use
value? Economic Botany, 61(4), 347-361.

LUCENA, R.F.P., LUCENA, C.M., ARAUJO, E.L., ALVES, A.G.C., AND
ALBUQUERQUE, U.P. 2013. Conservation priorities of useful plants from
different techniques of collection and analysis of ethnobotanical data. Annals of the
Brazilian Academy of Sciences, 85(1), 169-186.

LUOGA, E.J., WITKOWSKI, E.T.F. AND BALKWILL. 2000. Differential utilization
and ethnobotany of trees in Kitulanghalo Forest and surrounding communal lands,
Eastern Tanzania. Economic Botany, 54, 328-343.

MANDIA, E.H. 2004. The Alangan Mangyan of Mt. Halcon, Oriental Mindoro: Their
Ethnobotany. Philippine Quarterly of Culture and Society, 32, 96-117.

MATTHEWS, P.J., AGOO, E.M.G., TANDANG, D.N. AND MADULID, D.A. 2012.
Ethnobotany and ecology of wild taro (Colocasia esculenta) in the Philippines:
Implications for domestication and dispersal. Senri Ethnological Studies, 78, 307-
340.

MILLENNIUM ECOSYSTEM ASSESSMENT. 2005. Ecosystems and Human Well-
being: Synthesis. Island Press, Washington, DC.

70

MINDORO BIODIVERSITY CONSERVATION FOUNDATION, INC. 2012. Mount
Halcon Conservation and Management Plan. Retrieved 26 November 2016 from
http://mbcfi.org.ph/media/Technical_Reports/1_%20Mt_Halcon_Conservation_M
anagement_Plan.pdf

OLIVEIRA, R.L.C., LINS NETO, E.M.F., ARAUJO, E.L., AND ALBUQUERQUE, U.P.
2007. Conservation priorities and population structure of woody medicinal plants
in an area of Caatinga vegetation (Pernambuco State, NE Brazil). Environmental
Monitoring Assessment, 132, 189-206.

ONG, H.G. AND KIM, Y.D. 2014. Quantitative ethnobotanical study of the medicinal
plants used by the Ati Negro indigenous group in Guimaras Island, Philippines.
Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 157, 228-242.

PARDALES, J.R.Jr. 1997. Ethnobotanical survey of edible aroids in the Philippines I:
Farmers, beliefs, experiences. Philippine Journal of Crop Science, 22(1), 1-7.

PEI, S., ZHANG, G. AND HUAI, H. 2009. Application of traditional knowledge in forest
management: Ethnobotanical indicators of sustainable forest use. Forest Ecology
and Management, 257, 2017-2021.

PHILIPPINE STATISTICS AUTHORITY. 2010. 2010 Census of Population and
Housing. Retrieved 1 April 2017 from _http://psa.gov.ph/sites/default/files/
attachments/hsd/pressrelease/(MIMAROPA. pdf

PHILIPPINE STATISTICS AUTHORITY. 2015. 2015 Census of Population and
Housing. Retrieved 1 April 2017 from https://www.psa.gov.ph/sites/default/files
/attachments/ hsd/pressrelease/RO4B.xlsx

PHILLIPS, O. AND GENTRY, A.H. 1993a. The useful plants of Tambopata, Peru I.
Statistical hypotheses tests with a new quantitative technique. Economic Botany,
47(1), 15-32.

PHILLIPS, O. AND GENTRY, A.H. 1993b. The useful plants of Tambopata, Peru II.
Additional hypothesis testing in quantitative ethnobotany. Economic Botany,
47(1), 33-43.

QUIAOIT, J.S. 1997. The changing patterns in the man-land relationship of the Alangan
Mangyan of Oriental Mindoro. Master’s Thesis. Xavier University, Cagayan de
Oro.

RAGRAGIO, E.M., ZAYAS, C.N. AND OBICO, J.J.A. 2013. Useful plants of selected
Ayta communities from Porac, Pampanga, twenty years after the eruption of Mt.
Pinatubo. Philippine Journal of Science, 142, 169-181.

71

RASUL, G. AND THAPA, G.B. 2003. Shifting cultivation in the mountains of South and
Southeast Asia: Regional patterns and factors influencing the change. Land
Degradation and Development, 14(5), 495-508.

SCHULT, V. 2001. Deforestation and Mangyan in Mindoro. Philippine Studies: Historical
and Ethnographic Viewpoints, 49(2), 151-175.

SOEMARWOTO, O. 1986. Homegardens: a traditional agroforestry system with a
promising future. In Steppler, H. A. and Nair, P. K. R. (Eds.). Agroforestry: A
decade of development. (pp. 157-170). Nairobi: International Council for Research
in Agroforestry.

TORRE-CUADROS, M.D.LA. AND ISLEBE, G.A. 2003. Traditional ecological
knowledge and use of vegetation in Southeastern Mexico: a case study from
Solferino, Quintana Roo. Biodiversity and Conservation, 12, 2455-2476.

WIERSUM, K.F. 1997. Indigenous exploitation and management of tropical forest
resources: an evolutionary continuum in forest-people interactions. Agriculture,
Ecosystems and Environment, 63, 1-16.

CHAPTER V

LAND USE TYPES ALONG THE ALTITUDINAL GRADIENT OF MT. ILONG,
HALCON RANGE, MINDORO ISLAND, PHILIPPINES

Abstract

The vegetation of Halcon Range is diverse, unique, and culturally
important, leading to various land use types along altitudinal gradients.
However, there is a very limited information on its vertical distribution and
structure leading to formation of land uses triggering problems in
sustainable management decisions for the mountain. This study analyzed
the vegetation in land use types distribution along the altitudinal gradient of
Mt. Ilong, Halcon Range, Mindoro, Philippines. Fourteen plots of 10 x 10m
were established along the slope from 100m — 1400m elevation. The tree
species that were sampled from the plots were subjected to classification
and ordination analyses. The dendrogram showed three distinct vegetation
zones corresponding land use types: Zone I (agroforest land use), Lansium
- Artocarpus - Swietenia - Ficus - Nephelium - Mangifera zone; Zone II
(forest land use zone), Cyathea - Astronia - Syzygium - Garcinia - Ficus -
Psydrax - Diplodiscus zone; and Zone III (forest land use zone), Agathis -
Suli - Alitugba - Ardisia zone. Canonical correspondence analysis (CCA)
indicated that elevation, temperature and pH level are the environmental
variables that strongly influenced the vegetation distribution in various land
uses, a characteristic that is similar to other tropical mountains.

KEYWORDS: Ilong Peak, Halcon Range, Cluster Analysis, Canonical
Correspondence Analysis (CCA), Dominance Analysis

73

Introduction

Studying the vertical structure of vegetation in tropical mountain areas has been of
interest to many scientists, especially to conservationists, because of its fascinating shifts
of vegetation along elevational gradients.

There were some studies about the vegetation of Mt. Halcon, a tropical mountain
located in Mindoro, Philippines. The oldest and most comprehensive of which were
conducted during an exploration study during the early 1900s (Ames, 1907; Brotherus,
1907; Copeland, 1907; Merrill, 1907a,b). In a more recent study by Mandia (1998), the
vegetation in the summit zone of Mt. Halcon was explored. These researches have proven
the unique biodiversity of the mountain range, thus making it one of the Key Biodiversity
Areas of the island (Ambal et al., 2012).

Mt. Ilong is one of the peaks along the Halcon Range. Dutson et al. (1992) provided
a description of the forests in Mt. Ilong. The lower edge of the forest begin at 750m. It was
also recorded that there was an intensive pit-saw logging in the area (at 750-850 m),
resulting to a severe damage in the forest at that time. The primary forest occurred at 850-
1000 m and above, which is a lowland/mid-mountain transition type, with a canopy
reaching at approximately 15m. It then reaches its plateau at its peak (1,310-1440 m), with
a stunted and uneven canopy with needle-leaved trees.

While it has been evident that the flora in Halcon Range is diverse and unique, there
is no information on the vertical distribution and structure along the gradient of the Halcon

range. Altitudinal zonation studies will be of great help to conservation managers as these

74

studies provide a more detailed understanding of the vegetation distribution as well as its
interplay with the environmental factors.

The vertical structure and distribution of vegetation has been studied in the tropical
mountains of the Philippines: in Mt. Pulag (Buot and Okitsu, 1998), Mt. Akiki (Buot,
2007), Mt. Mayon (Buot, 2008), Aborlan Guba System (Sopsop and Buot, 2011), Mt.
Tabunan (Cadiz and Buot, 2011), Mt. Pangasugan (Belonias and Aguilar, 2004). These
studies emphasize the floristic characteristics of the Philippine tropical mountains, most of
which were found to be similar with tropical mountains in the Malesian region (van Steenis,
1964; Kitayama, 1992; Aiba and Kitayama, 1999). In another study by Buot and Osumi,
(2011), the structure and distribution of vegetation has been applied to observe the land use
type patterns in Mt. Makiling. It has been seen in the studies in the Philippine tropical
mountains that the anthropogenic disturbance can influence the vegetation distribution and
structure, leading to variation in land use types.

This study aims to analyze the structure and dynamics of the tree species
distribution along the altitudinal gradient of Mt. Ilong, situated in Halcon Range. This study
was done to monitor the plants that were mentioned by informants from the previous
chapter of this thesis. Specifically, the study identified plant communities along the 100-
1,400m elevation. Furthermore, selected environmental variables that influence species

distribution were investigated.

75

Materials and Methods

Study Area

This study was conducted along the altitudinal gradient of Mt. Ilong, one of the
peaks of the Halcon Range with an elevation of approximately 1,440 mas] (Dutson et al,
1992). The highest peak in Mindoro Island is Mount Halcon (2,582 m). It is situated near
the middle of the island separating two geopolitical areas, namely the provinces of Oriental
and Occidental Mindoro (Figure 5.1). The foothold of the mountain range is inhabited by
the Alangan people, the native inhabitants of the area. The Alangan, along with the other
7 indigenous groups in Mindoro Island, make up the Mangyan, which is a collective term
for the indigenous people living in Mindoro Island.

Mindoro Island experiences two weather types under the modified Corona’s
classification: Type I and Type III. Type I, which is identified on the western side of the
island, has two pronounced seasons: dry from November to April and wet for the rest of
the year. Type III, which is the climate type on the eastern side, has no pronounced
maximum rain period, with a short dry season ranging from one to three months, either
during December to February or from March to May (PAGASA, n. d.).

There is no available meteorological record monitoring specifically for Mt. Halcon;
however, some accounts by previous explorers have emphasized the very high humidity of
the mountain, just like in other tropical mountains in the Philippines like Mt. Makiling and

Mt. Pulag. Merrill (1907a,b) described Mt. Halcon as probably the most humid mountain

76

in the Philippines, with rains occurring for nine months every year (May to January).
Because of this condition, the abundance of ferns, mosses and epiphytes are very
remarkable especially in the forest zones. The summit zone, on the other hand, has a drier
climate having a temperature of around 16 °C, with mostly stunted vegetation interspersed

with patches of tall shrubberies and forested areas (Mandia, 1998).

Figure 5.1. Map of the Philippines showing the location of the study area. The inset photo
shows a map of Mindoro Island showing a more detailed location of Mt.
Halcon and Mt. Ilong (marked as A). Map is generated using QGIS v.2.18.13.

77

Field Data Collection

Field data collection was done during the first week of May 2016. The vegetation
sampling was conducted along the slopes of Mt. Ilong using quadrat method (Cottam and
Curtis, 1956). Fourteen sampling plots were established along the slopes of Mt. Ilong, each
as a representative of 100-meter altitude (Figure 5.2). Within each plot, the trees, as well
as the associated shrubs and herbs were identified. For tree species, individuals with 1-
meter height and above were considered, a quadrat of 10m x10m starting from 100-meter
up to 1400-meter elevation. Within each quadrat, a 2m x 2m area was laid out for shrubs

and 1m x Im for herbaceous vegetation.

Figure 5.2. Map showing the sampling points along the altitudinal gradient of Mt. Ilong.
Map is generated using QGIS v.2.18.13.

78

2m x 2m

10m x 10m

1m x 1m

Figure 5.3. An illustration of a sample 10m x 10m plot layout used in vegetation
sampling. Note that the subplots were positioned depending on the availability
of the shrub or herbaceous vegetation within the main plot.

Soil samples from the topsoil layer of approximately 30-centimeter depth were also
collected from each of the sampling points. The samples were tested for pH, nitrogen,
phosphorus and potassium levels using a soil test kit obtained from the Agricultural

Systems Cluster, College of Agriculture, University of the Philippines Los Bafios.

For each species, the importance value (IV) (Curtis and McIntosh, 1951) of each

species was calculated as follows:
IV = Relative density + Relative dominance + Relative frequency

To compute for the relative density, relative dominance and relative frequency, the

following formula were used (Mueller-Dombois and Ellenberg, 1974):

79

Number of individuals of a species

Density = Total area of sampling

Relative density = Density of a species
oranive Gensity = Density of all species

Number of plots of which a particular species occurs

F =
requency Total number of plots

Frequency of a species

Relative frequency = Sum frequency of all species

Basal area or cover

B =
asal Area Total area of plots

Basal area of a species

Relative Basal Areq= Total basal area of all species

x 100

The basal area was derived from the diameter at breast height (DBH) data of the

trees using the formula
1 2
BA=(5d) xx
where d is equal to DBH (at 1.5m). For the herbs and shrubs, the dominance was measured
using cover, which is the percent area covered by each species in a quadrat. Instead of
relative dominance, the relative cover was used for herbs.
All vascular plants were identified, except for epiphytes and lianas. Photographs

were taken for each species for identification. These samples were identified by using keys

or by consulting experts and confined with the International Plant Names Index (IPNI).

80

Cluster Analysis

To identify the major plant communities along the altitudinal gradient of Mt. Ilong,
cluster analysis was done using abundance data of the tree species. Bray-Curtis similarity
index was calculated from the dataset using Paleontological Statistics (PAST) Software
version 3.13 (Hammer, 2001). This index is a measure of similarity that is applicable for
abundance data (Bray and Curtis, 1957). A dendrogram was then constructed using the
unweighted pair-group method with arithmetic mean (UPGMA) hierarchical clustering
method.

Floristic diversity of each identified zone was also investigated. Shannon- Wiener

index, Simpson’s diversity index, and Fisher’s alpha were all computed and graphed.
Dominance Analysis

The dominance was based on the relative density of each tree species. The number
of dominant species for each quadrat and identified zones were determined using the
equation of Ohsawa (1984):

1 z)2 2
d= Va-# +) 4
ier jeu
where d is the deviation between the actual relative density values and the expected share

of corresponding co-dominant-number model, N is the total number of species, x; is the

81

actual percent share (relative density) of the top species T, < is the ideal percent share based
on the model, and x; is the percent share of the remaining species U.

In this equation, it is assumed that the ideal dominance (the “expected share”) of a
single species is 100%, 50% if it is shared by two co-dominants, 33.3% for three co-
dominants, and so on. Consequently, the number of dominant species is determined by the

one that showed the least deviation value.

Canonical Correspondence Analysis

To determine the environmental variables influencing species distribution,
canonical correspondence analysis (CCA) (ter Braak, 1986) was used. Influences from
environmental variables such as elevation, temperature, soil pH, nitrogen, phosphorus, and
potassium levels were investigated. From these data, a CCA ordination diagram was
created using statistical software R version 3.4.2 (vegan package) (Oksanen et al., 2007).
Temperature at different elevation levels was extracted from the climatic data obtained
from PAGASA using the assumption of Sarmiento (1986) that there is a corresponding

decrease of 0.6°C in temperature for every 100-meter elevation rise.

Results

There were 66 tree species belonging to 37 genera in 27 families (Table 5.1) that

were found from the 14 sampling plots examined along the gradient of Mt. Ilong. The plant

82

families with the most number of species were Lauraceae (6), Moraceae (4), Myrtaceae
(4), and Clusiaceae (3) (Table 5.1). The tree genera that were recorded with more than one

representative species include Ficus, Garcinia, Syzygium, Hopea, and Ardisia.

83

[seaoeapepy] ‘zo snynjnoiund snosipoydiq

«LO «9ST
£8 “9 L907 7H 49ST [oecoeewoysepay] ‘ds vivogsy
[aeaoedmesosjdiq] ‘mxoy oiqypu vadopy
[2eson10p] 1y ung suyadwup sn3t-y
ee ve [oeocemey] [SuefSueAe] «ds vasy7

9 eOEL «EET ST = 60S7 STI [zea0aeapeX5] supumupjuoo vaysod>

[es0eiprunsy) “uo sisuasopur vnvsnng
[2esoeousdéH)

auinig (3}9ef) wnupynuns winj<xow4D
[aeaoeiqny] ‘wuseD sosz021p xmupasg
[ovaoe ny] oBung vdanoosoiu x snatD
{aesoesopy] wre] snypAydosajay sndivoojay
[ze2oe10y]] ‘ds snory

[oeaoenayn) 2y4ydosonm Diuajaimg

[2eeovsary] “] puafionu so20D

[oescerpmeseuy) “J vorpur vsafisunyy
[2eacepurdes] “] wnaonddn; wntyayday

[seace19\] ouUeg
tyues'D yi (1999S) wnouIspsnd wnisuDT

aa aa aa a aa aa aa a aa aa aa a [ATIAVA SHIDAdS 10 DAWN
8s Sly 9E L8z 196 Lgz $6 TLI ssp SLi S81 oe 86S Sez (m9) Had WAWIXV
oor 001 oor 001 oor 001 001 001 ool ool 001 001 001 ool G@) aZIS LOTd

s s O€ZI = S1601 966 Stvl6 OL STEOL SLOID 6b ST6GE SLE6ZT SLLEI $769 (@) AGN.LLLTV
T89ET L671
bas er a ia or 6 8 L 9 s v € 4 T ALIS DNITAWVS

aul] @ Xq posopsog ore pur (,,) Systiojse Aq poyeorpul ore sarsads yueuTWIOp-09 pure yUeUTWIOG
‘sonyea Ayisuap Woy poaliap % ul (Gy) Allsuop oane[oy ‘s}ojd Surpdures snorea oy} ut UoNIsoduios saroads sel, “1 °S BIGUL

84

Lg

9S

ee

al OT
4005
Lg
es
“go
Lg
Lg
ey
aa aa aa a aa a aa aa aa
8st Sly FE L8@ 196 Lgz S'6 TLI Ssh
001 oor 001 001 oor 001 001 001 001
s s O€Z1 = S1601 966 StHI6 %6L STEOL SLOID
T89E1 L671
ol €I a IW or 6 8 L 9

StL

vel

SIL

LIL

[2ea0eisn]D] ‘ds puaouvH

16 [aesoerqioydng)] “ds pSunsvoppy

ool [oeaoerquoydng]
“Bry ION 20/0019 DBupuD2DYy
[2ea0ejnunsg] ‘ds orsipay

[2ee0euvonery]

“qe sisuauddiyiyd siyosy
[oe2oeAydequag]

“qow'a'D voudija vapuruipy
[oevsoefe84jog)

TepOUD wnywajonsq wnyjkydoysuny

[2ee0rrsnjp) ‘ds putou05
[oeaoejnumig] ‘ds orstpay

[ovaoeuAy]] ‘ds wnidAedg
[aeaoeiquoydng]

“Bry TOW NSununs sro
[aecoruApy] ds unde

[eesoesney] “us| sapiojnosajs aqaoyg

[aeooesney] ‘ds auydppounop

[oecoeuAW)

“LW (U9) wnrofyun313 wni3A2dg

aa a a a a TATIWVAT SHIDadS TO TAVN
SLI $81 Of9 = 86S 87 (m) Had WAWIXVA
oor oor 001 ool ool (0) AZIS LOTd
tp —STOHE SLEST SLLGI S769 (@) aqQ.LILTV
s % € t I ALLIS ONITAWVS

““panunuoy “1° e198.

85

[aeaoeyny] “ds mypoaq
ge [oesoeipery] suey Dondija vsayffoyos

us [2eaoe1preseuy]
aumyg (auinjg) suaosasogap Diupupyong

Lg

ty [evaorjasquioD])

“quoeq pdupsosoiu DIypuIuLsa |

ty ssl

ee ty [ovsoemey] ‘ds pXav20;dD
ce ty Srl
9s €€ te SEL
ve SOL

Ve €9L

Te [aeaoeuausen] mp3u0jgo vépunjsd

T€ [oeaoepipAoaq] “Busids (7)

pjnBunjno ‘dsqns pjn3upinop piuoj3uiuog

Te [oesoetsnjD]
Astoy> (oourjg) ovonuiq
ev “[pury voyiusou

16 [evaoes0py] “ds sony
€8 Oz
€8 6IL
€8 SIL

{aesoedresopog])
“qne] oq (2uinjg) snyporsqua sndapotusvq
a [ors] a [ons] aa aa a aa aa ae a a [or] a TATINVA] SHDIdS 10 TAWVN
sss Sly 9E% LBZ 19 «LOTL «SHH | 6TLT SSH BLT SBT OED 86S BHT (m9) Had WAWIXVN
oor = 00T-— «(0 oor = 001 CC) a) rr) oor = 00T.-——«éT 001 (9) AZIS LOTd

s s O€z@l = S'1601 966 STHI6 WL STEOL SLOID 6h ST66E SLEGT SLLOI S769 (@) aqN.LIL TV
T89E1 L671
Las €I rai af or 6 8 L 9 s Ld € 4 T ALIS DNITAWVS

a

“"ponunuod *1°s 2198.

£8


86

oS
oS
9s

os

LeL
[eesoedresosndiq] fepia’s 7108njd vadoyy
[seaoesary]

“900g (909g) Myjiziau DIpIuOpy

[seaceudyy] “wore ny Lf 7 YOSTIM
“D Jaj2q (2) DIDINW402ap sisdoiunjs14],

[oezoemey] ‘wusg vuojfiyjnu auydopounsy
[aee0esney]

FPIA‘S 1opposau wnwounmuut >

sel

[seooepnpfooq]

Suaidg vsowaons piuojSurung

Lol

Sel

aa
ET
001
O€ZI
rai

ia
ev
ev
Lg
ee
ee
aa aa
L87 196
oor oor
$1601 966
Wr or

a TATINVAT SHIDAdS 10 FAWN
Sz (m2) Had WAWIXVN
001 (@) AZIS LOTd

St69 (@) gan.LILTV

T LLIS SNITAWVS

“-panunuoy “T's 21981

87

1
00,01 02 03 pane 06 o7 08 o9 to Elev. Dominant Species Land use
2 a
500
600
700
4000 Cyathea - Astronia - Syzygium - Forest Zone Il
Garcinia - Ficus irisana (mixture of
pioneer and
bod climax species)
900
1300
4100
1200
Agathis - Suli* - Alitugba* - Ardisia Forest Zone lil
1400
400
300
Lansium - Artocarpus - Swietenia -
5 ‘ P Agroforest 1
200 + Ficus- Nephelium- Mangifera 9 v cone
100

Figure 5.4. Dendrogram of 14 sampling sites on the altitudinal zones in Mt. Ilong, Halcon
Range obtained by UPGMA using Bray-Curtis index of similarity. The
elevation of each sampling site and its dominant species are indicated at the
right side of the diagram. The zonations identified are as follows: Zone I)
Lansium — Artocarpus — Swienenia — Ficus — Nephelium — Mangifera; Zone
II) Cyathea — Astronia — Syzygium — Garcinia - Ficus; Zone III) Agathis —
Suli* - Ardisia — Alitugba*. Species in asterisk (*) are unidentified, thus
written in its local name. Bootstraping was done at n=100; cophenetic
correlation is 0.9268.

88

Figure 5.4 shows the dendrogram of the 14 sampling sites along the altitudinal
gradient of Mt. Ilong, Halcon Range. At a similarity index of around 0.05, there was a
delineation of each sampling site into three distinct clusters. Zone I was identified as

agroecosystem zone, while Zones II and III were identified as forest zones.

Altitudinal Zones

Zone I: Lansium — Artocarpus — Swienenia —Ficus — Nephelium — Mangifera
(agroforest land use)

The first zone was delineated from the cluster diagram (Figure 5.3) at a similarity
index of around 0.04, which is composed of plots from 100 to 400m altitude. This zone
was a kaingin (swidden) area maintained by the Alangan people. The vegetation mainly
composed of fruit trees such as Lansium parasiticum, Nephelium lappaceum, Mangifera
indica, and Cocos nucifera. Aside from tree species, coffee (Coffea robusta) is also planted
in this area. Some associated herbs are fern species (Diplazium sp., Nephrolepis sp.), weeds
and grasses that are representatives of families Asteraceae, Poaceae, and Cyperaceae
(Table 5.2). The dominant land use in this zone is agroforestry. The maximum diameter at

breast height (DBH) recorded in this zone was at 63.0cm in the third sampling plot.

89

Table 5.2. Associated shrub and herbs in Zone I: Lansium — Artocarpus — Swienenia —
Ficus — Nephelium — Mangifera (agroecosystem zone).

LOCAL NAME SCIENTIFIC NAME FAMILY RD RF RDo Iv*

Shrubs

kape Coffea canephora Pierre Rubiaceae 25.00 33.33 25.00 83.33
ex A.Froehner

saransok Melastoma p olyanthum Melastomataceae 58.33 33.33 62.50 154.17

balitongtong _C/erodendron Lamiaceae 16.67 33.33 12.50 62.50
macrostegium Schauer

Herbs

ae Diplazium sp. Athyriaceae 9.76 9.09 15.38 34.23

A Axonopus compressus

kulapi (Sw.) P.Beauv. Poaceae 15.45 18.18 7.69 41.32

uting (enna > Asteraceae 081 9.09 7.08 16.98

Unidentified Cyperus sp. Cyperaceae 24.39 9.09 9.23 42.71
Pollia secundiflora F

dulangan (Blume) Bakh. f Commelinaceae 2.44 9.09 1.54 13.07

laplapi Unidentified Poaceae 28.46 9.09 23.08 60.62

itos Pteris sp. Pteridaceae 4.07 9.09 7.69 20.85

habu-habu Plephantopus fomentOsus 4 steraceae 244 9.09 6.15 17.68

baybalu Nephrolepis sp. Nephrolepidaceae 9.76 9.09 9.23 28.08

*RD = relative density, RF = relative frequency, RDo = Relative dominance, and IV = Importance Value

Zone II: Cyathea — Astronia — Syzygium — Garcinia — Ficus irisana (forest land use)

At around a similarity index of 0.05, the two forest zones were further defined from
the dendrogram. The first forest zone delineated was Zone II, which is a huge cluster from
500-1,100m and 1,300m elevation. This zone had a lot of co-dominant species (15) based
from the dominance analysis. This zone is a mossy forest that was composed of a mixture

of pioneer and climax species. Tree ferns (Cyathea contaminans) were frequently

90

occurring among all the plots in this zone. Also, the tree trunks and branches in this zone
were mostly colonized with mosses, which can be attributed to its very humid environment.
Because this zone is primarily dominated by trees, there were only a few plots in this zone
which were found out to have plants of smaller habits (Table 5.3). Shrubs were found to
be present at 500, 600, and 800m, while herbs were found at 500 and 900m. Zone II. The
top three species with the highest DBH were Garcinia sp. (94.54cm), Syzygium sp.

(126.69cm), and barang (96.1cm).

Table 5.3. Associated shrub and herbs in Zone II: Cyathea — Astronia — Syzygium —
Garcinia — Ficus irisana (forest zone).

LOCALNAME _ SCIENTIFIC NAME FAMILY RD RF RDo Iv*
Shrubs
uyason Freycinetia sp. Pandanaceae 12.5 25 32.79 70.29
, Dracaena angustifolia
tibanwa (Medik.) Roxb. Asparagaceae 12.5 25 8.20 45.70
pulbabuyon Mussaenda p hilippica Rubiaceae 75 50 59.02 184.02
A.Rich
Herbs
pako (paku- ep F
pakuan) Diplazium sp. Athryriaceae 20.00 25.00 21.43 66.43
Hydrangea chinensis
arantoy Maxi Hydrangeaceae 40.00 25.00 14.29 = 79.29
jaxim.
urat Carex filicina Nees Cyperaceae 20.00 25.00 35.71 80.71
alangniwang Begonia sp. Begoniaceae 20.00 25.00 28.57 73.57

*RD = relative density, RF = relative frequency, RDo = Relative dominance, and IV = Importance Value

91

Zone III: Agathis — Suli — Ardisia — Alitugba (forest zone)

The last identified zone was a mossy forest represented by two sampling points, at
1,200m and 1,400m. Some gymnosperms thrive in high-altitude zone such as Dacrycarpus
imbricatus and Agathis philippinensis. Other identified trees found in this zone were
Ardisia sp., Astronia sp., Xanthophyllum bracteatum, Tristaniopsis decorticata, and
Adonidia merrillii. Shrubs and herbs were only found at a sampling point at 1,400 and are
shown in Table 5.4. The highest DBH among all tree species in this study was recorded in
this zone, which is exhibited by a lone species of D. imbricatus (158.5cm). Other tree
species with the highest DBH include X. bracteatum (20.7cm), alitugba (26.4cm) and A.

Philippinensis (23.6cm).

Table 5.4. _ Associated shrub and herbs in Zone III: Agathis — Suli — Ardisia — Alitugba
(forest zone).

LOCAL

*
NAME SCIENTIFIC NAME FAMILY RD RF Rdo_ ‘IV
Shrubs
balais Leea sp. Leeaceae 65.00 50.00 66.67 181.67
uyason Freycinetia sp. Pandanaceae 35.00 50.00 = 33.33. :118.33
Herbs
Hydrangea chinensis
arantoy Maxi Hydrangeaceae 64.71 50.00 = 21.05 135.76
axim,
itos Pteris sp. Pteridaceae 35.29 50.00 78.95 = 164.24

*RD = relative density, RF = relative frequency, Rdo = Relative dominance, and IV = Importance Value

92

Structural Characteristics of the Forest Zones

The changes in the floristic characteristics in each sampling plot is illustrated in
Figure 5.5. The graphs show the changes in the measures of diversity (number of species,
Shannon- Wiener Diversity Index, Simpson Index, and Fisher’s Alpha) across an increasing
elevation gradient. It was observed that the diversity of agroforestry zone (Zone I) is lower
than that of the forest zones (Zones II and III). The usual situation in tropical mountains is
that the lower elevations contain the higher diversity than in the higher altitudes; however,
this is not the case in Mt. Ilong, which had a lower diversity in the lower altitudes. This is
a characteristic shared by other tropical mountains in the Philippines (Buot and Okitsu,

1998; Buot, 2007; Buot, 2008; Buot and Osumi, 2011).

93

‘o “eydye s.Joysiy pue (q pure ‘g-7 xopuy uosdurg (5 ‘H xopuy AVISIOAIC JoUSI\-UOUURYS

(a ‘g sotoads Jo soqumy (y :oduey uoolep] ‘BuOT] “Yl JO Souoz palyUapl OAL aU} JO SoNsLO}OBIeYD JeIMONNS “¢°¢ OINBI{

(wu) uoyeaa|y (w) uojeas|y
N Ng. N N SI N N ~ N SI

NOX LM NS © Sb CO SM GS LS ND DN SD © @ CS CEN
CHK KGKTETEFK EFI EFVCFIFEFEFS SLL KEES KE EFSF EFIPS
0 0
$7 vo
a z0
£0

OL ®
ay v0
Sb w feito)
S 90

=
02 5 L0
sz 2 80
60
oe L

el N N Ne \ N Ne ~ ho ~~

WX LM MN SN © 2 2 4 we dio WD DM SS © 2 J OC OC AM Gb
SKK KEE F KOE SFESS LPL KH HK HK MEF HFK PHS
0 0
Fa ‘4

so8
S v

ce}
1 2 9
= 8

gig
® OL
zs ZL
e vb

oz Xx
Ge gL

Co
«o

(d-L) xepu; uosduwis

S) salseds jo JequinN

Relationship of the Environmental Variables to

Vegetation Distribution in Land Use Types

94

The environmental variables that were used in canonical correspondence analysis

(CCA) include elevation, temperature, soil pH, nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium levels.

The list of environmental variables recorded per sampling plot is recorded in Table 5.5.

Table 5.5. Environmental variables of the plots grouped according to identified zones in
the cluster analysis.

ZONE PLOT Elevation

Soil Properties

pH N P K
1 69.25 6.4 high low sufficient
I 2 205 6.8 high high deficient
3 293.75 6 high low deficient
4 399.25 6 high low sufficient
5 492 6 high low sufficient
6 610.75 6 medium low sufficient
7 703.25 5.8 low low deficient
Ul 8 792 6 medium low sufficient
9 914.25 6 medium low sufficient
10 996 6 low low sufficient
11 1091.5 5.8 low low deficient
13 1230 6 high low sufficient
12 1292.75 6 low low sufficient

Il

14 1368.25 6 high low sufficient

95

Calapan City, Onlental Mindoro
Elevation: 40.6m

*c

0.0 0.0
JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC

Figure 5.6. Climogram (average of 30 years for temperature and rainfall data) of Calapan
City, Oriental Mindoro, the nearest weather station to the study area.

Using the assumption of Sarmiento (1986) on the temperature changes across
altitudinal gradients in tropical mountains, the temperature data for each sampling plot used
in CCA was extrapolated from the average 30-year data in Calapan City, Oriental Mindoro,
the nearest weather station from Mt. Ilong. The climogram (Figure 5.6) shows that there is
no pronounced dry season in Oriental Mindoro, with the least rainfall recorded within the
first quarter of the year. The lowest average rainfall was recorded during the months of
February (70.0mm) and March (93.8mm). The temperature, on the other hand, ranges from

25.9 to 28.7 °C.

Figure 5.7.

96

Agatphil elevation

>~Lanspara

= tic Ficuiris

v
Cyatgont

Psysidico

Artohete

Macabico

CCAN

CCA ordination diagrams of tree density data in Mt. Ilong showing [a] sampling
plots only (@); and [b] sampling plots and species (+), both of which are
positioned with respect to environmental variables (blue arrows). First axis is
horizontal; second axis is vertical. The environmental variables are: elevation =
mean elevation, temp = temperature, pH = soil pH, N = nitrogen level, P =
phosphorus level, and K = potassium level. The eigenvalues of axis 1 (CCA1)
and axis 2 (CCA2) are 0.9340 and 0.8246 respectively. The eigenvalues of axes
3, 4, 5 and 6 (not shown in the diagram) are 0.6767, 0.5787, 0.5066, and 0.3907
respectively. The most abundant species are labeled in this diagram with their
abbreviated names: Lanspara = Lansium parasiticum, Citrmicr = Citrufortunellla
microcarpa, Artohere = Artocarpus heterophyllus, Mangindi = Mangifera indica,
Macabico = Macaranga bicolor, Psyddico = Psydrax dicoccos, Macasp =
Macaranga sp., Cyatcont = Cyathea contaminans, Ardisp = Ardisia sp., Ficuiris
= Ficus irisiana, and Agatphil = Agathis philippinensis. The figure shows 21.23%
of the total inertia (weighted variance) and 44.96% of the variance in the weighted
averages and class totals of the species with respect to the environmental
variables.

97

The CCA ordination diagram (Figure 5.7) was generated to show how the tree
species were distributed along the selected environmental variables. The biplot, in general,
is consistent with the clustering formed in the dendrogram (Figure 5.4). The encircled
sampling plots (marked as @) in Figure 5.6a were the three vegetation zones corresponding
to land uses identified in the cluster analysis.

A remarkable pattern among the distribution of tree species was that species of
Zone I were positioned at the left side of the biplot while tree species of the forest zones
(Zones II and III) were situated on the right side of the biplot (Figure 5.7b). Among the
five given variables, the elevation and temperature were found out to be the most important
variables that affected the species distribution, as most of the species were plotted near
these environmental variables. Moreover, the environmental arrows representing the soil
properties were also oriented towards the left side of the diagram, indicating that the soil

properties have affected the distribution of trees from the agroecosystem zone (Zone I).

Discussion

Vegetation Structure and Land Use Types
in Mt. Ilong

This study delineated three zones based from the cluster analysis of the abundance
data of the tree species (Figure 5.4). These zones were reflective of the current land use

types across the altitudinal gradient of Mt. Ilong. Zone I can be identified as agroforestry

98

zones, which were mostly made up of cultivated fruit trees that cater the needs of the the
Alangan people, the inhabitants on the lower slopes of Mt. Ilong. Zones II and III, on the
other hand, were identified as a forest zones made up of a mixture of pioneer and climax
species and had a lot of co-dominants.

Generally, the lower montane forests in Southeast Asia are mainly composed of
dipterocarps or an ‘oak-laurel' assemblage (Ashton 2003). This pattern was observed at
least in some mountains in the Philippines, like the oak-laurel forest in Mt. Pulag (Buot
and Okitsu, 1999) and the dipterocarp forest of Mt. Makiling (Buot and Osumi, 2011). In
Mt. Ilong, several trees from Family Lauraceae such as Litsea, Actinodaphne, Phoebe,
Cinnamomum, and Cryptocarya were found in the two forest zones (Zones II and III). A
few dipterocarps were also identified, belonging to genus Hopea (Table 5.1).

Another striking observation in the tree composition of Mt. Ilong is the dominance
of tree ferns (Cyathea contaminans) in most of the plots, especially in Zone II, the largest
cluster in the dendrogram (Figure 5.4). Cyathea is known to play a prominent role in lower
mountain forest areas (Richter 2008), as these species tend to thrive in an environment with
high humidity (Banaticla and Buot, 2005; Delos Angeles and Buot, 2015). Tree ferns are
common inhabitants of tropical mountain cloud forests (Penafiel, 1995). The humid climate
prevalent in Mt. Ilong (Figure 5.6) is conducive for these tree ferns, as well as for the
mosses, to grow. Meanwhile, towards the high-altitude Zone III, presence of southern
conifers such as Agathis and Dacrycarpus was observed (Table 5.1). These trees were
known to be thriving in mountain areas of higher elevations in the Malesian region (Enright

and Jaffré, 2010).

99

The usual trend in the diversity patterns of plant species in tropical mountains is
that the number of species, genera and families and tree assemblages decreases with
increasing elevation (Aiba and Kitayama, 1999; Kitayama, 1992); however, this trend was
not observable in some of the tropical mountains in the Philippines, such as in Mt. Pulag
(Buot and Okitsu, 1998), Mt. Mayon (Buot, 2008), and Mt. Makiling (Buot and Osumi,
2011). Similarly, in Mt. Ilong (Figure 5.5), this was also the case, wherein the lower
elevations generally exhibited lower diversity than in the plots of higher elevations.
Anthropogenic disturbances have played a role in modifying vegetation in tropical forests
of the Philippines (Sopsop and Buot, 2013), leading to observable changes in land use
along elevational gradients in most of the mountains in the country. In Mt. Ilong, the
vegetation composition in the lower elevations were being limited by the agroforestry
practices. This was evidenced by the presence of fruit trees mostly dominating in the Zone
I (Table 5.1), such as Janzones (Lansium parasiticum), rambutan (Nephelium lappaceum),

mangga (Mangifera indica), and niyog (Cocos nucifera).

Species-Environment Interaction in Mt. Ilong

The results in the ordination analysis (Figure 5.7) showed that the elevation and
temperature are the major environmental variables that have contributed to the tree species
distribution in Mt. Ilong. Altitude is known to be the greatest influencing factor in the
changes in floristic composition and diversity in tropical mountains (Hemp, 2006),

including the mountains in Southeast Asian region (Kitayama, 1992; Van and Cochard,

100

2017; Nguyen et al., 2015) and in the Philippines (Buot and Okitsu, 1998; Buot, 2007;
2008). The composition of the tree assemblages is determined primarily by elevation and
the associated environmental gradients such as temperature (Culmsee and Leuschner,
2013). There is a decreasing temperature trend across an increasing elevation gradient
(Sarmiento, 1986). This decline in temperature affects the respiratory processes of trees, as
well as organic matter storage and decomposition (Culmsee and Leuschner, 2013).

The environmental variables can also have an impact in the presence of dominant
species in a tropical forest like in Mt. Ilong. By comparing the dominants of the two forest
zones, it was observed that forests in lower elevations (Zone II) had more co-dominants
than in higher elevations (Zone III) (Figure 5.4). A structure having many co-dominants in
the lower formations of tropical forests is natural due to interspecific competition among
tree species (Grubb, 1977). Culmsee and Leuschner (2013) further explained this
characteristic, stating that in lower elevations there is a strong competition among species
for light and the presence of a higher number of taxa. However, towards higher elevations,
the effect of environmental filtering to the plants species tends to increase, as the decreasing
temperature limits productivity and nutrient cycling becomes increasingly important.
Furthermore, taxa sensitive to cold environments become excluded increasingly at higher
elevations. This environmental filtering was evidently illustrated in the ordination diagram
of sampling plots generated from the results of CCA (Figure 5.7a). The plots in Zone III
were plotted inversely with the soil variables, and the species were different (Table 5.1)
and less diverse (Figure 5.6).

The soil nutrients can affect the vegetation structure in a tropical forest ecosystem.

101

This has been evident in some studies in the forest formations in the Philippines, where it
was also found that soil nutrients (Sopsop and Buot, 2013), as well as its water holding
capacity (Cadiz and Buot, 2011) can affect the vegetation structure. In tropical mountains,
soil nutrients such as nitrogen are known to decrease in level while the altitude increases
(Aiba and Kitayama, 1999; Kitayama, 1992). High plant diversity in low-nutrient soils in
the tropical forests is possible because of the soil’s ability to limit the domination of the
strong plant competitors. This therefore allows many species to co-exist in an ecosystem
(Richter, 2008). This characteristic is very much applicable to the two forest zones (II and
III), which have many co-dominant species.

The two forest zones (II and III were delineated in the dendrogram (Figure 5.4) as
these two zones have different dominant species, as shown in their tree species composition
(Table 5.1). Zone II in general is mostly dominated by tree ferns (Cyathea contaminans),
which were absent in Zone III. Gymnosperms such as Agathis and Dacrycarpus, on the
other hand, were found in Zone III, which are naturally occurring in high-altitude areas.

In general, in tropical mountain ecosystems, the distribution of tree species is a
result of the interaction of multiple environmental factors that limit the species distribution
simultaneously (Tanner et al., 2008). Edaphic factors such as soil pH and nutrient levels,
as well as climatic variable like temperature were found to be varying across an altitudinal
gradient in Mt. Ilong, which in turn resulted to delineation of specialized the tree

communities reflecting different land use types.

102

Conclusion and Recommendations

Contrary to the usual trend in tropical mountains, the structural characteristics of
Mt. Ilong were found to be similar with other mountains in the Philippines, wherein the
tree species diversity tends to increase along the altitudinal gradient. The vegetation of Mt.
Tlong in Halcon Range, Mindoro Island was distributed through a complex interplay of
environmental factors. Among the environmental variables examined, elevation,
temperature, and pH have strongly influenced the distribution of tree species in Mt. Ilong,
which in turn resulted to specialization of the three identified plant communities reflecting
different land use types.

Among the three identified zones, Zone I was distinct from Zones II and III as these
were mainly agroforestry areas, a land use that is shaped by the Alangan people, the
primary users of Mt. Ilong. Towards Zones II and III, the two forest zones, the influence
of environmental variables, especially temperature and elevation were evident.

In future studies, it is recommended to account the effect of human disturbance in
the ordination analysis as this has a crucial role in the changes in vegetation structure in
tropical mountains such as Mt. Ilong. To improve and update the information on the floral
diversity of Halcon Range, further vegetation studies in the other areas of Halcon Range is
also recommended. A higher number of plots to be established will also be helpful in
providing a more comprehensive picture of the vegetation structure of the Halcon Range

in general.

103

Literature Cited

AIBA, S. AND KITAYAMA, K. 1999. Structure, composition and species diversity in an
altitude-substrate matrix of rain forest tree communities on Mount Kinabalu,
Borneo. Plant Ecology, 140, 139-157.

AMBAL, R.G.R., DUYA, M.V., CRUZ, M.A., COROZA, O.G., VERGARA, S.G., DE
SILVA, N., MOLINYAW, N. AND TABARANZA, B. 2012. Key biodiversity
areas in the Philippines: Priorities for conservation. Journal of Threatened Taxa,
4(8), 2788-2796.

AMES, O. 1907. Orchidaceae halconenses: An enumeration of the orchids collected on or
near Mount Halcon, chiefly by Elmer D. Merrill. Philippine Journal of Science C,
2(4), 311-337.

ASHTON, P.S. 2003. Floristic composition of tree communities on wet tropical mountains
revisited. Perspectives in Plant Ecology, Evolution and Systematics, 6(1,2), 87-104.

BANATICLA, M.C.N. AND BUOT, L.E.Jr. 2005. Altitudinal zonation of pteridophytes
on Mt. Banahaw de Lucban, Luzon Island, Philippines. Plant Ecology, 180, 135-
151.

BARTHLOTT, W., RAFIQPOOR, D., KIER, G. AND KREFT, H. 2005. Global centers
of vascular plant diversity. Nova Acta Leopoldina, 92(342), 61-83.

BELONIAS, B.H. AND AGUILAR, N.O. 2004. Altitudinal zonation of dicots on Mt.
Pangasugan, Leyte Island, Philippines. Journal of Environmental Science and
Management, 7(2), 47-66.

BRAY, J.R. AND CURTIS, J.T. 1957. An Ordination of the Upland Forest Communities
of Southern Wisconsin. Ecological Monographs, 27(4), 325-349.

BROTHERUS, V.F. 1907. Musci Halconenses. Philippine Journal of Science C, 2(4), 339-
343.

BUOT, LE.Jr. 2007. Vegetation zonation of Mt. Akiki, Cordillera Mountain Range,
Benguet Province, Philippines. Asia Life Sciences, 16(1), 53-70.

BUOT, LE.Jr. 2008. Vertical distribution and zonation pattern of woody vegetation on the
northwestern slope of Mt. Mayon, Philippines. Asia Life Sciences, 17(2), 189-205.

BUOT, ILE.Jr. AND OKITSU, S. 1998. Vertical distribution and structure of the tree
vegetation in the montane forest of Mt. Pulog, Cordillera mountain range, the
highest mountain in Luzon Is., Philippines. Vegetation Science, 15, 19-32.

104

BUOT, I.E.Jr. AND OSUMI, K. 2011. Land use pattern and woody species composition
near human disturbed landscapes on Mount Makiling, Luzon Island. American
Journal of Environmental Sciences, 7(4), 306-315.

COTTAM, G. AND CURTIS, J.T. 1956. The Use of Distance Measures in
Phytosociological Sampling. Ecology, 37(3), 451-460.

CADIZ, G.E. AND BUOT, L.E.Jr. 2011. Physico-chemical factors affecting vascular plant
diversity of a lowland forest in Mt. Tabunan, Cebu Island, Philippines. Asia Life
Sciences Supplement, 6, 1-12.

COPELAND, E.B. 1907. Pteridophyta halconenses: A list of the ferns and fern-allies
collected by Elmer D. Merrill on Mount Halcon, Mindoro. Philippine Journal of
Science C, 2(4), 119-155.

CULMSEE, H. AND LEUSCHNER, C. 2013. Consistent patterns of elevational change
in tree taxonomic and phylogenetic diversity across Malesian mountain
forests. Journal of Biogeography, 40(10), 14.

CURTIS, J.T. AND MCINTOSH, R.P. 1951. An upland forest continuum in the prairie-
forest border region of Wisconsin. Ecology, 32(3), 476-496.

DELOS ANGELES, M.D. AND BUOT, LE.Jr. 2015. Diversity and distribution of
pteridophytes along the altitudinal gradient of the northeastern slope of a secondary
forest in Mt. Makiling, Philippines. IAMURE International Journal of Ecology and
Conservation, 16, 25-46.

DUTSON, G.C.L., EVANS, T.D., BROOKS, T.M., ASANE, D.C., TIMMINS, R.J. AND
TOLEDO, A. 1992. Conservation Status of birds on Mindoro, Philippines. Bird
Conservation International, 2, 303-325.

ENRIGHT, N.J., AND JAFFRE, T. 2011. Ecology and distribution of the Malesian
podocarps. Smithsonian Contributions to Botany, 95, 57-78.

GRUBB, P.J. 1977. Control of forest growth and distribution on wet tropical mountains:
with special reference to mineral nutrition. Annual Review of Ecology and
Systematics, 8(1), 83-107.

HAMMER, @., HARPER, D.A.T., AND RYAN, P.D. 2001. PAST: Paleontological
Statistics Software Package for Education and Data Analysis. Palaeontologia
Electronica, 4(1): 9pp.

HEMP, A. 2006. Continuum or zonation? Altitudinal gradients in the forest vegetation of
Mt. Kilimanjaro. Plant Ecology, 184, 27-42.

KITAYAMA, K. 1992. An altitudinal transect study of the vegetation on Mount Kinabalu,
Borneo. Vegetatio, 102(2), 149-171.

105

MANDIA, E.H. 1998. The vegetation on the Northeastern summit of Mt. Halcon, Mindoro
Island, Philippines. PhD issertation. University of the Philippines Los Bajios.

MANDIA, E. H. 2004. The Alangan Mangyan of Mt. Halcon, Oriental Mindoro: Their
Ethnobotany. Philippine Quarterly of Culture and Society, 32, 96-117.

MERRILL, E. D. 1907a. The flora of Mt. Halcon. Philippine Journal of Science, 2c(4),
251-309.

MERRILL, E. D. 1907b. The ascent of Mt. Halcon, Mindoro. Philippine Journal of
Science, 2a(3), 179-205.

MORIOKA, H. AND SISON, R.V. 1987. Birds of the highlands of Mt. Halcon, Mindoro,
Philippines. Japanese Journal of Ornithology, 35, 109-124.

MUELLER-DOMBOIS, D. AND ELLENBERG, H. 1974. Aims and Methods of
Vegetation Ecology. USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

MYERS, N. 1988. Threatened biotas: “Hot Spots” in tropical forests. The
Environmentalist, 8(3). 187-208.

MYERS, N., MITTERMEIER, R. A., MITTERMEIER, C. G., FONESCA, G. A. B. AND
KENT, J. 2000. Biodiversity hotspots for conservation priorities. Nature, 403(24)
853-858.

NGUYEN, T.V., MITLOHNER, R., AND BICH, N.V. 2015. Environmental factors
affecting the abundance and presence of tree species in a tropical lowland limestone
and non-limestone forest in Ben En National Park, Vietnam. Journal of Forest and
Environmental Science, 31(3), 177-191.

OHSAWA, M. 1984. Differentiation of vegetation zones and species strategies in the
subalpine region of Mt. Fuji. Vegetatio, 57, 15-82.

OKSANEN, J., KINDT, R., LEGENDRE, P., O’HARA, B., STEVENS, M.H.H.,
OKSANEN, M.J., AND DO, T.V. 2015. SUGGESTS, M.A.S.S. 2007. The vegan
package. Community ecology package, 10, 631-637.

PENAFIEL, S.R. 1995. The biological and hydrological values of the mossy forests in the
central Cordillera Mountains, Philippines. In Hamilton, L.S., Juvik, JO, and
Scatena, F. N (Eds.). Tropical montane cloud forests (pp. 266-273). New York, NY:
Springer.

RICHTER, M. 2008. Tropical mountain forests — distribution and general features. In
Gradstein, S.R., Homeier, J. and Gansert, D. (Eds). The Tropical Mountain Forest
— Patterns and Processes in a Biodiversity Hotspot (pp. 7-24). Germany:
Universitatsverlag Gottingen.

106

SARMIENTO, G. 1986. Ecologically crucial features of climate in high tropical
mountains. En: Vuilleumier, F., Monasterio, M. (Eds): High Altitude Tropical
Biogeography, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 11-45.

SOPSOP, L.B. AND BUOT, LE.Jr. 2013. The forest types in Aborlan Guba System,
Palawan Island, Philippines. IAMURE International Journal of Ecology and
Conservation, 7, 88-104.

TANNER, E.V.J.. VITOUSEK, P.A., AND CUEVAS, E. 1998. Experimental
investigation of nutrient limitation of forest growth on wet tropical
mountains. Ecology, 79(1), 10-22.

TER BRAAK, C.J.F. 1986. Canonical correspondence analysis: a new eigenvector
technique for multivariate direct gradient analysis. Ecology, 67(5), 1167-1179.

VAN, Y.T., AND COCHARD, R. 2017. Tree species diversity and utilities in a contracting
lowland hillside rainforest fragment in Central Vietnam. Forest Ecosystems, 4(1),
9.

VAN STEENIS, C.G.G.J. 1964. Floristic altitudinal zones in Malesia. Botanical Journal
of the Linnean Society, 89, 289-292.

CHAPTER VI

SETTING LOCALIZED CONSERVATION PRIORITIES OF THE USEFUL
PLANT SPECIES OF THE ALANGAN MANGYAN OF MT. ILONG,
HALCON RANGE, MINDORO ISLAND, PHILIPPINES

Abstract

Conservation priority setting has been a useful tool in conservation strategy;
however, this has not been applied in the Philippine setting, particularly in
the local level. This study is a first attempt for a localized conservation
priority setting of plants in the Philippines, integrating both ecological and
socio-cultural dimensions of biodiversity. This study aimed to set
conservation priorities of plant species that are useful to the Alangan people
of Mindoro Island, Philippines. A localized conservation priority index was
created for conservation priority setting of the plant species in the forest
zones of Mt. Ilong, Halcon Range. Using a point scoring procedure, seven
criteria of the index (Conservation Priority Index) were applied to the plant
species for conservation priority setting. This index utilized available
bibliographic information, field surveys, and vegetation surveys. A
multivariate analysis using non-linear principal component analysis was
also performed. Among the 72 species, 17 species were categorized as
medium priority plants at the local level, and these were classified into three
groups identified from the nonlinear PCA. The management
recommendations need to be implemented in the local level, as this is crucial
in preserving the plant biodiversity as well as the Alangan culture.

KEYWORDS: conservation priority setting, conservation priority index,
Alangan, Mt. Ilong, Halcon Range, DENR DAO 2017-11

108

Introduction

Setting conservation priority is a key step in any conservation strategy (Brehm et
al., 2010). It enables the conservation managers and organizations (private and government
agencies) to identify which taxa need to be targeted for conservation. Establishing priorities
for conservation can be done in different levels (ecosystem, species, genetic).

Some of the criteria that are usually included in conservation priority setting include
threat, rarity, endemicity, species abundance, utilization, and economic value (Brehm et
al., 2010). In the context of the indigenous knowledge, it is essential to consider how the
plant resources are being utilized by the people, may it be cultural or economical. By
focusing the conservation priority setting on the resources important to them, the local
people can participate in the conservation efforts in the local level (Dalle and Potvin, 2004).
Few studies have conducted localized conservation priority setting for plant species, mostly
with medicinal uses (Dhar et al., 2000; Kala et al., 2004; Martinez et al., 2006; Oliveira et
al., 2007; Albuquerque et al., 2010) and useful plants in general (Lucena et al., 2013). This
type of study has not been applied yet in the Philippines, a country that is diverse
biologically and culturally. This is the first attempt to provide conservation priority setting
of plant species in the Philippines in a local level, which integrates both ecological and
socio-cultural dimensions.

Conservation priority setting is very much relevant especially in the Philippines, a
country that is known as the “hottest hotspot” in terms of biodiversity (Myers et al., 2000).

Its relatively small land area compared with other hotspots hosting 1.9% of the world’s

109

endemic plants. Despite this, Philippine biodiversity remains to be threatened by habitat
loss. Conservation priority setting will be a wise investment to minimize further extinction
in a biodiversity hotspot like the Philippines (Mittermeier et al., 1998).

This study primarily aimed to set conservation priorities of their useful plant species
utilized by the Alangan people of Paitan, Naujan, Oriental Mindoro. Specifically, it
developed an evaluation index to set priorities for conservation in the species level using
the local knowledge on plant utilization, cultural significance, distribution, as well as its
threatened status. The index was then applied in the context of Mt. Ilong, Halcon Range,
where the Alangan people take their plant resources. The results from the index were

further analyzed using a multivariate analysis.

Materials and Methods

This study was conducted along the slopes Mt. Ilong, Halcon Range in Brgy. Paitan
(13° 15’ 58.4” N and 121° 5’ 3.7” E), municipality of Naujan, Oriental Mindoro. The
landscape was composed of agroforest in the lower slopes, while the upper slopes are made
up of mossy forests. The indigenous people residing in the foothold of the range are the
Alangan people, one of the eight indigenous groups in Mindoro Island collectively known
as Mangyan. The Alangan are cultivators of the lower slopes of the Halcon Range through

swidden farming with fruit and root crops as their products.

110

Several data gathering procedures were done to collect the information needed from
the computation of the conservation priority scores. These included semi-structured
interview with the key informants, vegetation sampling, and exhaustion of available related

bibliographic information.

f > |
Ay 500 tC) 500 oda “4500, 2000 'm
LV ————

+

Figure 6.1. The study area. The Philippine map is shown in the lower left with Mindoro
Island emphasized in red box. Photo on the upper left shows a map of Mindoro
Island with a more detailed location of Mt. Halcon and Mt. Ilong (marked as
A). The positions of the sampling points are shown on the right, marked as
red dots. Maps are generated using QGIS v.2.18.13.

111

Construction of the Conservation Priority Index

The index was created using point scoring procedure (adapted and modified from
Brehm et al., 2010; Dzerefos and Witkowski, 2001), with scores in each criterion ranging
from 1 (lowest) to 5 (highest). The criteria in scoring covers both the cultural and biological
significance of a plant. The scores from each criterion was then summed up to obtain the

conservation priority score, using the formula:

Conservation Priority Index = Harvesting Risk + Economic Use + Cultural Use +
Species Distribution + Relative Frequency + Global Threatened Status +
National Threatened Status

A plant can have a maximum total score of up to 35 points. The higher the score a
plant had, meant a higher conservation priority. Plants with scores 1-12 were categorized
as low priority species, and are suitable for high impact harvesting; 13-24 as medium
priority plants, and can be harvested with specific quotas; while 25-35 as high priority

plants, requiring strict regulation in harvesting (Table 6.1).

Table 6.1. | Conservation priority classification based on CPI scores.

Score Priority Level Decision
1-12 Low Suitable for high-impact harvesting
13-24 Medium Can be harvested with specific quotas

25-35 High Requires strict regulation in harvesting


112

Collection of Ethnobotanical and Vegetation Data

For the collection of primary data, a one-on-one semi-structured interview was
conducted among 60 respondents. These key informants were composed of Alangan people
residing at Brgy. Paitan, who were at least 18 years of age. They were asked of the plants
that they use in their everyday living. They were asked on how these plants are used,
including the plant part utilized for each use, as well as to where these plants can be found.
The information from the respondents were verified with the elderly key informants.

To obtain the vegetation data, plants from 10m x 10m plot samples were included
in conservation priority setting. Along the slope of Mt. Ilong, one plot per 100 meter above
sea level (masl.) elevation was taken as a sample from 100-1,400m. Within the 10m x 10m
plot, a subplot of 2m x 2m was used for shrubs and 1m x 1m for herbs. The relative
frequency of each plant was then used for the index. The wild plant species that were seen
from the vegetation sampling was subjected to computation of the conservation priority
scores.

The information that was used for scoring of the other criteria was obtained from
several bibliographic references. The sources of information for each criterion is

summarized in Table 6.2.

113

Non-linear Principal Components Analysis

To analyze the relationship of the distribution of the species and the criteria in a
multidimensional space, non-linear principal components analysis (NLPCA) was also done
for the identified species, using the homals package in R (version 3.4.2) (de Leeuw and
Mair, 2009). Multivariate approaches to conservation priority setting are not new and have
been used in some studies (Given and Norton, 1993; Partel et al., 2004; Lozano et al.,
2003). NLPCA is a non-parametric equivalent of principal components analysis (PCA),
which can handle categorical variables and missing data (Michailidis and de Leeuw, 1998;
Linting and der Kooij, 2012; Linting et al., 2007). In this analysis, frequency was used
instead of the relative frequency, and the cultural use was set as a binomial variable (with

cultural use and without cultural use).

Validation of the Results to the Community

Upon the analysis and collation of the data of the useful plants for conservation
priority setting, the results of this thesis were presented to the community during the
assembly of Samahan ng Nagkakaisang Mangyan Alangan (SANAMA), the people’s
organization of the Alangan on April 15, 2018 at Brgy. Paitan, Naujan, Oriental Mindoro

(Figure 6.2).

114

Figure 6.2. Photos showing the validation of the results conducted during an assembly of
SANAMA at Brgy. Paitan, Naujan, Oriental Mindoro.

115

Results

Conservation Priority Index

This localized conservation priority index was constructed to fit in the context of
the study area. The criteria (Table 6.2) were composed of sociocultural (Harvesting Risk,
Economic Value, Cultural Value) and ecological (Species Distribution, Relative
Frequency) aspects of plant conservation. The existing policies (Threatened Status in
Global and National Level) were also considered. An equal scoring was assigned for each
criterion, with 1 being the lowest and 5 as the highest score. As the score goes higher from
1 to 5, a species becomes more at risk to extinction, and therefore can be considered as of
higher priority.

This index puts consideration on both biological and socio-cultural significance of
plants. It is a combined approach that combines these two aspects which are, in fact, not
from separate systems. The intersection of culture and nature must be highly considered in
conservation policies (Gadgil et al., 1993; Pretty et al., 2009). Moreover, it meets both the

perspectives of both the users and the conservation authorities.

116

Table 6.2. Criteria and scores used in calculating conservation priority scores of the useful
plants using point scoring procedure. The sources of information that are
considered in scoring was also indicated on the rightmost column of this table.

CRITERIA CATEGORIES SCORE SOURCES OF INFORMATION
Harvesting Harvesting represents the removal of the
Risk whole plant (includes all the basic parts: 5

root, stem, leaf, flower, stem).
Harvesting of four out of the five basic
parts Interview (key informants)
Harvesting of three out of the five basic
parts
Harvesting of two out of the five basic parts
Harvesting of at least one basic plant part

a

Economic Use Five or more economic uses

Four economic uses
Three economic uses
Two economic uses
One economic use

Literature review (Mandia
1987; 2004), Interview (key
informants)

Cultural Use

Five or more cultural uses
Four cultural uses

Three cultural uses

Two cultural uses

One cultural use

Literature review (Mandia
1987; 2004), Interview (key
informants)

Species
Distribution

Within Mt. Halcon/Halcon Range

Within Mindoro Island
Within Luzon
Within the Philippines
Cosmopolitan

Merrill (1923-1925),
Catalogue of Life (2017),
IPNI (2017)

Relative
Frequency

Threatened
Status (Global
level)

Not recorded (0) - 20
21-40

41-60

61-80

81 - 100

Critically Endangered
Endangered
Vulnerable

Near Threatened
Least Concern

Threatened
Status
(National level)

Critically Endangered
Endangered

Vulnerable

Other Threatened Species

Vegetation sampling in the
forest zones

TUCN Red List of
Threatened Species

Ke Nw WJHE Nw UE NW Ee UE NY BUEN BUEN w eB UlEDNY w

DENR DAO 2017-11

Other Wildlife Species

117

Conservation Priority Scores of the Plant Species

The plant species that were studied were composed of 72 species and 39 genera
from 30 families. These species were the samples found in the 10 x 10m quadrats along
Mt. Tlong.

The conservation priority scores that were computed for the species ranged from 5-
20, as shown in Table 6.3. The species were classified as either low or medium priority
species. There were 17 species which were identified as medium priority, while the rest
were low priority species. Medium priority species come from various plant families such
as Araucariaceae, Dipterocarpaceae, Euphorbiaceae, Fabaceae (Faboideae), Hypericaceae,
Lauraceae, Lecythidaceae, Malvaceae, Myrtaceae, Poaceae, and Polygalaceae.

It can also be observed medium priority species were also identified as threatened
species in either national (DENR DAO 2017-11) or global (IUCN List of Threatened
Species) level. These plants are also woody species that are usually utilized for
construction, firewood, and lumber.

The rest of the species that do not fall under medium priority have accumulated
scores lower than 13, and therefore can be classified as low priority species. While these
species have high scores in when the relative frequency (RF), these species had lower
scores in other criteria like economic and cultural use, or lack information in threatened

status as these species were not assessed.

118

To some species, like those identified up to the genus level and the unidentified
species, there were information gaps, like in distribution and threatened status. The scores

for these species do not reflect their actual conservation priority scores.

119

wnipay, 61 I € S Z € S 3p “BIV TIN 40/0219 DSuvwony = eaoelquoydng
ump LI s s s @ uosunj3vd “MXO,] OJDgujpU Dadopy
wnIpsyy SI € S Ss i I uynuvg IPPlA’S 2D8njd vadozy —aea0edres010\dIq
MOT 8 I I is I oan SOON DUIDIIf Xa4DD aeoovsadA>
*jedog (‘yooH,
MOT is v S I oypd XO “T]BA\) SuDuIUDjUOD DayIDAD avooroyyedZ
MOT 8 if i z SBuodpuny Astoy ovonuig viu1s4p
MOT s S SDIDUDY “ds piuizapH
MoT ral S (ns upnds3nq ‘ds piursan5
MoT a S zs qourjo ‘ds piuizapy avoorisn|[D
MoT 8 I s I I SBuiquoanu “audeq pdups04o1U DI;DUIULAA aeOOE}OIQUIOD
MOT 9 S I SBupmiuszunjo “ds piuo3ag avaorluoseg
“Qxoy
MoT I I S I Z Z pmungy (pe) V10fusn3uv Duavoviq ovooesesedsy
MOT Il € Z S I upmpsDg ‘o00g (999g) Mpj144alu DIpIuopy aeooRooly
UnIpaW, rl € € S I I I D3ISDUID (qavy) sisuauiddyiyd siyjwsp ovoorleonely
MoT L I S I ojpuiny suey voudija vaayffayos avoorlery
ound
MOT L I S I osodqoq (auIn|g) suassasogww DiupuDyong = —s seaDeIpIesvUY
MOT 4 I s v I I 1010810 “LOW Sisuasopuiu pinvanvg oeaoRIpIUOy
ximomg TVLOL NsL ost aw ds 9 na wn AWN GINVN OIALLNAIOS XTOAVA

“(smejg pousjyeomyy, feuoNeN,
=NSL ‘smeig pousjeam] [eqo[D = OSI ‘Aouonbery sanepoy = TY ‘Uornquysiq saroedg = qs ‘asc feMyND = ND
‘as¢) orWoUONg = 4 “YsTY SuNsearey] = YH) Sel09s ALOU uoeArosuod satoadsa: say} YIM Sorseds yuejd Jo 3st] “¢"9 IQR,

120

UND1AYIOGDIDU
MOT 6 s I z I yosuvavs “dsqns wnoiayjoqujpu puojsnjay
MOT 9 s I uDADADUL ‘ds piuoasp

MOT IW S S I apjosuvd ‘|pur] voyfiusow vyuipayy —seaoeyeUlO\sejaW

unis €l I € S Zz I I o8nj0q ‘ZOM J, Snyojnaiund snosipojdiq avoorAle
MOT 9 S I Iw3uvi Buoidg vsowaons piuoj3ul4avg
“upeed ("]) ojn3unjnov

winipa ai S I € S Bupjody -dsqns pjn3uvjnop piuoj8uising avooeplyyAoa]
MOT s s s13up} “ds ptuvs0jddup
wnIpay 07 Z € S Z € ¢ SBvZuyoy TePlA’S 10pposaw wniuowupuutrd
winipay, st I s z z s oanqvy “MW Saplolnosajs aqaoyd
MOT Ir I € s z aojt “wuog D4opfiznu auydopoujoy
wpa, st it s I € Ss ojn3unq TePlA ani2403 vasjiT
MoT s S Bunjsuvjdv “ds vasyiT

MOT s S suiusuiuo ‘ds pasty avoorine’y
ounig

wipe rl I S I I I S Aopisyog (yoep) wnun4youns unjdxowsD aevoovotiedAy,

MOT 9 I v I Aojuvap “UNXRIA SISuauIYyD DasuDApAHE —- seaDeeBULIPAH,

MoT 6 I s € Bupdnq-dryp} “LOW DjDZUu0{Go vapuvjdD avooRLIOUSOH)

umIpaW, 61 € € S I Z S D4iDU “PITA Snoiput sndunz04a1g ovaoeqey
MoT 8 i s I I upjndnspy “SIV TINW N8ununs snjoyoy
“Loy
wipe SI I € Ss I € Z  Buousuouny (oour|g) v1ofipuns3 vSuvavsnpy

auwoma TVLOL NSL ost AY GS no nad WH a TIAVN OLULLNaIOS ATOAVA

““panunuod €°9 21981

121

MOT 8 I s z pypdnd “QOU'd'D voNdYja Dapupupy
Moy or 1 y I I I Z uodnqoqnd “yony' Wy vaiddijiyd ppuavssnyy
unyadpy
MoT 6 € s I -advy “upaeD soo2001p xvapdsg
MOT s is pvduou ‘ds visipap
Moy s s uomp3uisj0q ‘ds visipay
MoT L I s I a100 | unpyyjod unizvjdiq
MOT s is sont ‘ds stuajdoduq
winipoy, st I s € I $ unu3uoy —- yepoyD wnywajovaq winyjAydoyjuny
“qn
MO] or Z I $ I I yowod — ap (auinyg) snywotaquit sndarokioog
“LOW
umntpow €l so zs 1y1q—— (our g) wnsnffip wndyovisoz1y2g
s1quiep
umIpaW Las I 9 z I Ss opjog asuasopuiu undyovjsojpydaD
MOT L I v I I uospdn “LOW D4oyfiyjnu vyauisdady
“Le
wpa, vl I S Z I S josun} (ay) wnyofijun313 unizdzdg
MOT 9 S I mpdsuyoqoy ‘ds wni3Azdg
Moy cai $ zs osndi3zpu ‘ds uni8dzdg
“YEA LL FB UOSTIA'D 1030
wnIpay| LI € s z I I is sojgunq (oJ) DIDINNA0Iap sisdoiupjstA],
MOT 6 I S I z sojdi ‘TY wang spjadup sn31q
MoT L I s I qpiapy py wang vodas sn21q
MOT s S 01041109 ‘ds sno1j
arwoma TWVLOL SL ost JW dS 9 na ww aor TIAVN OLILNGIOS

aeooroy

avooriqny,
avooR|Nud

aeooepHo}d
avaoresAjog

avooedses0pog

aeaor0d
ovoovurpued

aesoeLIA]

aeadBlOW,

ATINVA

““panunuod £°9 21921

122

OT s s uBup}
MOT s s qyns
MOT s S omndvjnd
MOY Ss S osndpjnd
MOY Ss S ispdpjou
MoT s s oqnqpy
MOT s s ouoqny
MOT s s 109194
Moy I s Ios uoyodny}
MOT s Ss 4nqyng
MOT s S p3unyvjoq
MOT s S up3univg
MOY Ss S Buping
MOY Ss S ojunnd3nq
MOT s s idpynsjo
MOT s S pq3nyp
Moy 6 I $ o£ Bupdng-diyo}
MoT s s S10]Dq
auwoma TWLOL Ns osk JU GS M9 na YH Or

pelyuopius)
peynuspruy)
pelnuopius)
pelnuopiur)
Paynuspiuy)
Paynuspiuy)
Peynuepiuy)
Paynuspiuy)
pelynuoprur)
peynuopiur)
pelynusprur)
pelnuopiur)
peyhuepiur)
peynuoprur)
Paynuspiuy)
Peynuspiuy)
“LOW o1jofiuspu peaT
‘ds p2aT aB208I A,

GINVN OLILNGIDS ATINVA

““panunuod €'9 21921

Multivariate Analysis on the Identified
Plant Species Data

The summary of the nonlinear PCA was tabulated in Table 6.4, for two dimensions
with seven variables over 57 identified species. The eigenvalues for the two dimensions
were 0.069 and 0.037 respectively. Moreover, Figure 6.3 shows the loading plot of the

seven criteria, with each criterion represented by arrows.

Table 6.4. Component loadings, total variance accounted for, and eigenvalues for the

descriptors of the NLPCA.

Component
Variable ——Loadings _

D1 D2
Harvesting Risk (HR) 0.032 0.055
Economic Use (EU) -0.014 0.112
Cultural Use (CU) -0.215 0.392
Species Distribution (SD) -0.024 -0.051
Frequency (F) 0.513 0.168
Global Threatened Status (TSG) -0.010  -0.106
National Threatened Status(TSN)  -0.065 -0.227
Eigenvalue 0.069 0.037

Figure 6.3 showed that the seven variables have varying lengths in the loading plot.
Variables and criteria with short arrows (SD and HR) did not fit well in the solution, as
indicated by low VAF values (Linting et al., 2007). The information in these variables were

not retained well during the analysis. Frequency and cultural use were the variables with

Total
Variance
Accounted
For (VAF
0.004
0.013
0.200
0.003
0.291
0.011
0.056

124

the longest arrows, which could mean that these were the variables that were best retained

in the analysis.

04

Dimension 2

134

Figure 6.3.

T T T T T
02 00 02 04 06

Dimension 1

Loading plot showing the component loadings of the seven criteria. HR =
Harvesting Risk, EU = Economic Use, CU = Cultural Use, SD = Species
Distribution, F = Frequency, TSG = Global Threatened Status, TSN =
National Threatened Status. Eigenvalues for Dimensions 1 and 2 are 0.069
and 0.037 respectively.

Furthermore, the object plot in Figure 6.4 shows the distribution of the species

analyzed. The species tend to clump towards the center, because of its low eigenvalues and

VAF.


Dimension 2

Dimension 2

01 00 04 02

02

0.00 0.02 0.04

0.02

125

a
a
Cyscarer
er
out
5a sya
(eos:
ale
Hogieea
0.1 00 01 02 03 04 05
met
Veo LUtgar Coad
FCO oul " MaCora yen
Cyrobt carfl Prerind Fremut
ey
‘ira
-0.04 -0.02 0.00 0.02 0.04
Dimension 1

Figure 6.4. [a] Object plot showing the scores of the 57 species subjected to NLPCA. [b]
shows the closer view on the clumped species plotted in [a].


126

However, the plots can still provide information on how the 17 medium priority
species can be further classified based on the variables most closely related to them. Table
6.5 shows the groupings of the species. The first group were the species siturated in the
quadrant I along the coordinate plane (+,+), which can be described as those that have high
frequency value and/or harvesting risk. The second group of species were situated in the
quadrant II (-,+), which were the species having a socio-cultural significance. The last
group situated in quadrant III of the plot were species with available threat assessment

(from IUCN and/or DENR) and/or have a limited species distribution.

Table 6.5. Three groups of medium priority species based on their distribution in the
nonlinear PCA ordination diagram.

Group I Il Tl
Species with high ; ; ; Species with available
Description | frequency or harvesting Species with socio- threat assessment
risk cultural significance and/or limited species
distribution

Barringtonia acutangula

Diplodiscus paniculatus subsp. acutangula

Agathis philippinensis

Phoebe sterculioides Cinnamomum mercadoi —_Cratoxylum sumatranum
. . arn 7 Cephalostachyum
*
Syzygium gigantifolium  Hopea malibato mindorense
Species ee la Macaranga grandifolia  Hopea plagata
Macaranga bicolor Pterocarpus indicus
Tristaniopsis

Schefflera diffusum decorticata
Schizostachyum

diffusum

127

Discussion

The Localized Conservation Priority Index:
Urgent Need and Relevance

The devised localized conservation priority index is not purely biological as it was
constructed in such a way that it considers both socio-cultural and ecological significance
of a plant. This approach is not new; in fact, this has been employed in studies that are
ethnobotanical in nature (Albuquerque et al., 2011; Dhar et al., 2000; Kala et al., 2004;
Lucena et al., 2013; Martinez et al, 2006; Oliveira et al., 2007; Partel et al., 2005). By
focusing the conservation efforts on plant resources that are useful and culturally
significant to the local people, conservation organizations and local government units can
involve the local people in conservation efforts (Dalle and Potvin 2004), which is almost
always a critical gap.

The methodology that was utilized, basically a point-scoring procedure, is easy to
compute and pragmatic (Brehm et al., 2010). The data that utilized, either from on-site or
literature sources, can easily be converted into scores if the categories are tangible and
properly defined.

It has been established in this paper that a species prioritization procedure that
considers sociocultural relevance is vital to reflect context and involve the local people in
conservation efforts. Indigenous knowledge goes along with plant diversity (Gadgil et al.,

1993). This means that species prioritization in the local level cuts both ways: as it

128

promotes conservation of plant diversity in the area, it is also a way of conserving the
culture of its users, in this case, the Alangan people. The plant diversity in Halcon Range
is closely knitted to the Alangan culture (Mandia, 2004). Consequently, conservation of
their useful plants is necessary as this also preserves their cherished culture as well.

Most of the species that are categorized as medium priority are wild plants found
in the forest zones of the study area, which are woody species reported as firewood or for
construction purposes. The criteria that had contributed to their high scores include their
existing threatened status in global and national levels and their relative frequency.

Previous studies that used conservation priority index emphasized the need for
considering the knowledge of the local people in a localized conservation priority setting
(Oliveira et al., 2007; Albuquerque et al., 2011; Lucena et al., 2013). The previous version
of the index included the percentage of the respondents who reported the plant (termed as
Local Importance) in their criteria. Other forms of indices used for conservation priority
setting (for medicinal plants), considered other criteria, such as the mode of propagation
(Dhar et al., 2000) and the number of ailments a medicinal plant can occur (Kala et al.,
2004). From these studies, it is only evident that in any localized conservation priority
setting, the criteria to be considered depend on the context of the study as well as the
availability of useful information for assessment.

This index, however, has its limitations. First, this procedure assumes linearity of
the index (Given and Norton, 1993). This procedure cannot capture the interaction of
factors (may it be ecological or sociocultural) affecting the threat of a species in an

environment setting that is multidimensional in nature. Moreover, equal weighting

129

prevents to highlight the actual influence of the factors being studied. The scores also do
not reflect the variation of reasons why these species have such total scores (Brehm et al.,
2010). Finally, this method is also prone to subjectivity from the perspective of the
researchers.

To address these limitations, a multivariate technique using non-linear principal
component analysis was performed. This non-parametric analysis was used since the
criteria for the conservation priority setting was mostly categorical, thus quite unfit for a
normal PCA that classically requires purely quantitative and standardized data. The
weighting of the variables was also generated by this analysis. The resulting plots (Figures
6.3 and 6.4) show how the criteria influenced the species, which can be useful for the
management decisions.

As to any species conservation priority setting methods, the procedure in general is
static since it reflects the status of a species within a certain period. The ecological scenario
and the sociocultural importance of these plants are changing over time and therefore are
dynamic. There is a need to conduct conservation priority setting studies on a regular basis
by updating all the necessary information that can fit into the criteria.

While most of the species here were identified up to the species level, some were
only identified up to the genus level with a few remained unidentified. Species
identification is crucial in priority setting, as this is helpful in exhausting related
information to justify its biological value. There is a need to identify a plant up to the

species level for the conservation priority index to fully assess a plant species.

130

Species Priority Setting and Perspectives
in Biodiversity Across Scales

Differences in conservation priorities can be observed in different scales: from
global, national and to local scales. There can be discrepancies in the population decline or
area of occupancy as the spatial scale of analysis changes (Brito et al., 2010), i.e. from
global to national or vice versa. It is possible that a species that listed as threatened
nationally is not listed as a priority for conservation the local level.

For instance, the tree fern (Cyathea contaminans) is an endangered species listed
in DENR DAO 2017-11. In the context of this study, however, the tree fern is considered
a low priority species as this species has no recorded use. This species was found to be a
frequent species in the forest zone. Moreover, in the local list of threatened plants in
Palawan (Sopsop and Buot, 2009), Mindoro (Villanueva and Buot, 2015), and Mt.
Banahaw-San Cristobal Protected Landscape, Quezon Province (Santiago and Buot, 2015),
more plant species were categorized as threatened in these localities, as factors such as
endemicity and human activities were considered.

Another factor contributing to the changes in species conservation priorities across
different scales is the differences in the perspectives on biodiversity of the stakeholders
(Kaimowitz and Sheil, 2007). Most of the global authorities (i.e. IUCN) value biodiversity
based on rarity and endemicity, whereas local communities tend to focus more on
economic and cultural values of biodiversity. The disparity of these two perspectives can
also be seen in Figure 6.3, wherein variables related to threat assessment (TSN and TSG)

and species distribution tend to orient towards the same direction (quadrant III), while

131

economic (EU) and cultural (CU) uses were projected in another direction (quadrant II)
opposite to quadrant III.

In Table 6.3, it was observed that some species listed as medium priority
(Cratoxylum sumatranum, Litsea garciae, Barringtonia acutangula subsp. acutangula,
Syzygium gigantifolium, and Xanthophyllum bracteatum) were not actually categorized as
threatened species by IUCN and DENR. These species, however, were able to have a score
falling under medium priority due to their uses and harvesting risks.

Therefore, it is imperative to include and consider the views of the locals, especially
the indigenous people in conservation priority setting in the local level (Dalle and Potvin,
2004; Oliveira et al., 2007). In this study, the first three criteria in the computation of the
index (Harvesting Risk, Economic Use, and Cultural Use) were based from the information
obtained from the local people (Table 6.2). The degree of use in the plant biodiversity by
the Alangan people was measured at least in terms of economic uses, which were basically
provisioning ecosystem services. The cultural uses were also considered in this analysis.
The conservation priority index used a point-scoring procedure, whereas the IUCN used
rule-based methods (Mace et al., 2006). The criteria used in the DENR National List of
Threatened Species, was adapted from the IUCN Categories and Criteria (Fernando et al.,
2008). The initial list of national threatened plant species (DENR DAO 2007-01) was
updated after ten years (DAO 2017-11). This list takes its effect in conservation by being
incorporated to the national policies through the Wildlife Resources and Conservation Act
(Republic Act 9147). In the same way, the plant species list generated from this

conservation priority index can be incorporated in the policies at the local level, at least in

132

the barangay level. Furthermore, this can be replicated and be applied in conservation

priority setting of plant species in other localities in the Philippines.

Conclusion and Recommendations

This study devised an evaluation index to set priorities for conservation in the
species level, using a point scoring procedure. While the index in itself is not perfect, it
was able to identify some species that needs to be conserved based on its distribution its
uses to the Alangan people. Among the 72 studied wild plant species from the forest zone,
17 were categorized as medium priority, while 55 are under low priority. These medium
priority species were found to be useful to the Alangan people, and these were also listed
as threatened in the national ang global level.

While this study was able to assess the plant species and identify the ones that need
to be prioritized, the effectivity of this methodology still depends on the implementation of
the management options by the local community. The results of this study can be useful in
the formation of policies in the local level. The information about these useful plants need
to be updated through further research on plant biodiversity in Halcon Range and on the
Alangan culture. This is essential to have a more comprehensive and holistic approach to
conservation priority setting.

For future studies, other possible criteria can be added for the index or for any

conservation priority setting methodology, such as looking into the frequency of harvest of

133

plants. This will be based not only on the local people’s knowledge on uses, but also on
their actual use of the plant. Moreover, their perception on other ecosystem services
(regulating and supporting) can also be accounted for, as the current study is currently
focused on provisioning and cultural ecosystem services only. The local people can also
be more actively involved in decision making by asking them to rank plants according to

importance.

Literature Cited

ALBUQUERQUE, U.P., SOLDATI, G.T., SIEBER, S.S., MEDEIROS, P.M., SA, J.C.,
AND DE SOUZA, L.C. 2011. Rapid ethnobotanical diagnosis of the Fulni-6
Indigenous lands: Floristic survey and local conservation priorities of medicinal
plants. Environment, Development, and Sustainability, 13, 277-292.

BREHM, J.M., MAXTED N., MARTINS-LOUCAO, M.A., AND FORD-LLOYD, B.V.
2010. New approaches for establishing conservation priorities for socio-
economically important plant species. Biodiversity Conservation, 19, 2715-2740.

BRITO, D., AMBAL, R.G., BROOKS, T., DE SILVA, N., FOSTER, M., HAO, W.,
HILTON-TAYLOR, C., PAGLIA, A., RODRIGUEZ, J.P. AND RODRIGUEZ,
J.V. 2010. How similar are national red lists and the IUCN Red List? Biological
Conservation, 143(5), 1154-1158.

CONSERVATION INTERNATIONAL PHILIPPINES, DEPARTMENT OF
ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES-PROTECTED AREAS AND
WILDLIFE BUREAU, AND HARIBON FOUNDATION FOR THE
CONSERVATION OF NATURE. 2006. Priority Sites for Conservation in the
Philippines: Key Biodiversity Areas. Quezon City, Philippines: Conservation
International Philippines. Retrieved 20 May 2015
from _http://www.conservation.org/global/philippines/publications/Pages/Priority-
Sites-for-Conservation-Key-Biodiversity-Areas.aspx

134

DALLE, S.P. AND POTVIN, C. 2004. Conservation of useful plants: an evaluation of
local priorities from two indigenous communities in Eastern Panama. Economic
Botany, 58(1), 31-57.

DE LEEUW, J. AND MAIR, P. 2009. Homogeneity Analysis in R: The package
homals. Journal of Statistical Software, 31, 1-19.

DENR DEPARTMENT ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER (DAO) NO. 2017-11. Updated
national list of threatened Philippine plants and their categories. Retieved 18
August 2017 from http://server2.denr.gov.ph/uploads/rmdd/dao-2017-11.pdf

DHAR, U., RAWAL, R.S., AND UPRETI, J. 2000. Setting priorities for conservation of
medicinal plants — a case study in the Indian Himalaya. Biological Conservation,
95, 57-65.

DZEREFOS, C.M. AND WITKOWSKI, E.T.F. 2001. Density and potential utilization of
medicinal grassland plants from Abe Bailey Nature Reserve, South Africa.
Biodiversity and Conservation, 10, 1875-1896.

GADGIL, M., BERKES, F. AND FOLKE, C. 1993. Indigenous knowledge for
biodiversity conservation. Ambio, 22(2-3), 151-156.

GIVEN, D.R. AND NORTON, D.A. 1993. A multivariate approach to assessing threat
and for priority setting in threatened species conservation. Biological Conservation,
64, 57-66.

GONZALES, J.C.T., DANS, A.T.L., AFUANG, L.E. with contributions from
PORTILLO, B.S., PEDREGOSA, M., LEDESMA, M.M., HERNAEZ, B.,
BULALACAO, W.B., YNGENTE, V.B., DANS, F.G. AND ALVIOLA, P.A.
2000. Mindoro: Island-wide survey of fauna and flora and field inventory of
selected sites for priority conservation. Muntinlupa City: Mindoro Biodiversity
Conservation Foundation, Inc.

INTERNATIONAL UNION FOR THE CONSERVATION OF NATURE. 2017. The
IUCN Red List of threatened Species. Retrieved 1 May 2017 from
http://www. iucnredlist.org

KAIMOWITZ, D. AND SHEIL, D. 2007. Conserving what and for whom? Why
conservation should help meet basic human needs in the tropics. Biotropica, 39(5),
567-574.

KALA, C.P., FAROOQUEE, N.A., AND DHAR, U. 2004. Prioritization of medicinal
plants on the basis of available knowledge, existing practices and use value status
in Uttaranchal, India. Biodiversity and Conservation, 13, 453-469.

LINTING, M. AND VAN DER KOOIJ, A. 2012. Nonlinear principal components analysis
with CATPCA: a tutorial. Journal of Personality Assessment, 94(1), 12-25.

135

LINTING, M., MEULMAN, J.J., GROENEN, P.J. AND VAN DER KOOJJ, A.J. 2007.
Nonlinear principal components analysis: introduction and
application. Psychological methods, 12(3), 336.

LOZANO, F.D., SAIZ, J.S. M. AND OLLERO, H.S. 2003. Rarity and threat relationships
in the conservation planning of the Iberian flora. Biodiversity and Conservation,
12, 1861-1882.

LUCENA, RF.P., LUCENA, C.M., ARAUJO, E.L., ALVES, A.G.C., AND
ALBUQUERQUE, U.P. 2013. Conservation priorities of useful plants from
different techniques of collection and analysis of ethnobotanical data. Annals of the
Brazilian Academy of Sciences, 85(1), 169-186.

MACE, G.M., POSSINGHAM, H. P. AND LEADER-WILLIAMS, N. 2006. Prioritizing
choices in conservation. In MacDonald, D.W. and Willis K.J. (Eds.) Key Topics in
Conservation Biology. John Wiley and Sons.

MANDIA, E.H. 2004. The Alangan Mangyan of Mt. Halcon, Oriental Mindoro: Their
Ethnobotany. Philippine Quarterly of Culture and Society, 32, 96-117.

MARTINEZ, G.J., PLANCHUELO, A.M., FUENTES, E. AND OJEDA, M. 2006. A
numeric index to establish conservation priorities for medicinal plants in the
Paravachasa Valley, Cordoba, Argentina. Biodiversity and Conservation, 15, 2457-
2475.

MICHAILIDIS, G. AND DE LEEUW, J. 1998. The Gifi system of descriptive
multivariate analysis. Statistical Science, 13(4), 307-336.

MITTERMEIER, R.A., MYERS, N. FONESCA, G.A.B. AND OLIVIERI, S. 1998.
Biodiversity Hotspots and Major Tropical Wildreness Areas: Approaches to Setting
Conservation Priorities. Conservation Biology, 12(3), 516-520.

MYERS, N., MITTERMEIER, R.A., MITTERMEIER, C.G., FONESCA, G.A.B. AND
KENT, J. 2000. Biodiversity hotspots for conservation priorities. Nature, 403(24)
853-858.

OLIVEIRA, R.L.C., LINS NETO, E.M.F., ARAUJO, E.L., AND ALBUQUERQUE, U.P.
2007. Conservation priorities and population structure of woody medicinal plants
in an area of Caatinga vegetation (Pernambuco State, NE Brazil). Environmental
Monitoring Assessment, 132, 189-206.

PARTEL, M., KALAMEES, R., REIER, U., TUVI, E.L., ROOSALUSTE, E., VELLAK,
A. AND ZOBEL, M. 2005. Grouping and prioritization of vascular plant species
for conservation: combining natural rarity and management need. Biological
Conservation, 123(3), 271-278.

136

QUIAOIT, J.S. 1997. The changing patterns in the man-land relationship of the Alangan
Mangyan of Oriental Mindoro. Master’s Thesis. Xavier University, Cagayan de
Oro.

PRETTY, J., ADAMS, B., BERKES, F., ATHAYDE, S. F., DUDLEY, N., HUNN, E.,
MAFFI, L., RAPPORT, D., ROBBINS, P., STERLING, E., STOLTON, S.,
TSING, A., VINTINNER, E. AND PILGRIM, S. 2009. The intersections of
biological diversity and cultural diversity: Towards integration. Conservation and
Society, 7(2), 100-112.

REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9147. 2001. Retrieved 27 November 2017 from
http://www.officialgazette.gov.ph/2001/07/30/republic-act-no-9417/

SANTIAGO, J.0. AND BUOT, I.E.Jr. 2015. Conservation status of selected plants of
Mount Banahaw-San Cristobal Landscape, Quezon Province, Philippines.
IAMURE International Journal of Ecology and Conservation, 16, 64-79.

SCHULT, V. 2001. Deforestation and Mangyan in Mindoro. Philippine Studies: Historical
and Ethnographic Viewpoints, 49(2), 151-175.

SOPSOP, L.B. AND BUOT, ILE.Jr. 2013. The forest types in Aborlan Guba System,
Palawan Island, Philippines. IAMURE International Journal of Ecology and
Conservation, 7, 88-104.

VILLANUEVA, E.L.C. AND BUOT, I.E.Jr. 2015. Threatened Plant Species of Mindoro,
Philippines. IAMURE Journal of Ecology and Conservation, 14, 168-190.

CHAPTER VII

GENERAL DISCUSSION

Similar to other indigenous people, the Alangan use various plants, both wild and
cultivated in their daily lives. Most species they use provide their basic needs such as food,
medicine, and house construction (Table 4.2). Though they utilize more cultivated than
wild plants, it is undeniable that they still interact with forest as they remain to obtain plant
resources there (Mandia, 2004). Moreover, their plant use patterns indicating changes in
their subsistence strategies also create changes in the landscape of Mt. Ilong. These plants
have economic and socio-cultural values to them. Therefore, there is a need to look into
their frequency and condition in the field.

The study on vegetation distribution of Mt. Ilong showed the variations of land use
types across an elevation gradient (Figure 5.4). Aside from anthropogenic influence from
the Alangan community residing in the foothold of the mountain, the species distribution
is resulted by an interplay of species and environmental factors (Richter et al., 2008), such
as soil, temperature, and elevation (Figure 5.7). The environmental variables act as filter
(ter Braak and Verdonschot, 1995) in separating species distribution into zones (Figure
5.4) across an altitudinal gradient (Aiba and Kitayama, 1999).

Since it has been established that the indigenous people are deeply integrated with

their environment (Gadgil et al.,1993), information on the knowledge of plant use by the

138

Alangan and the status of vegetation in Mt. Ilong were utilized to set conservation priorities
of their useful plant species (Table 6.2). More than the status of the vegetation distribution
in a locality, it is also necessary to consider local people’s perspective on biodiversity, as
they were the firsthand users of biodiversity. In this way, the local people can be involved
in conservation planning and management of their plant biodiversity and their forest as a

whole.

Literature Cited

AIBA, S. AND KITAYAMA, K. 1999. Structure, composition and species diversity in an
altitude-substrate matrix of rain forest tree communities on Mount Kinabalu,
Borneo. Plant Ecology, 140, 139-157.

GADGIL, M., BERKES, F. AND FOLKE, C. 1993. Indigenous knowledge for
biodiversity conservation. Ambio, 22(2-3), 151-156.

KAIMOWITZ, D. AND SHEIL, D. 2007. Conserving what and for whom? Why
conservation should help meet basic human needs in the tropics. Biotropica, 39(5),
567-574.

MANDIA, E.H. 2004. The Alangan Mangyan of Mt. Halcon, Oriental Mindoro: Their
Ethnobotany. Philippine Quarterly of Culture and Society, 32, 96-117.

RICHTER, M. 2008. Tropical mountain forests — distribution and general features. In
Gradstein, S.R., Homeier, J. and Gansert, D. (Eds). The Tropical Mountain Forest
— Patterns and Processes in a Biodiversity Hotspot (pp. 7-24). Germany:
Universitatsverlag Gottingen.

TER BRAAK, C. J. F. AND VERDONSCHOT, P. F. M. 1995. Canonical Correspondence
Analysis and related multivariate methods in aquatic ecology. Aquatic Sciences,
57(3), 255-289.

CHAPTER VIII

SUMMARY, CONCLUSION, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

This study established conservation priorities among useful plant species of the
Alangan Mangyan community in Mt. Ilong, Halcon Range, Mindoro Island. As swidden
cultivators, the Alangan people utilized a range of wild and cultivated plants from the
forests, swidden farms, and homegardens. Analyses on vegetation structure and dynamics
along the altitudinal gradient of Mt. Ilong show how tree species vary across increasing
elevation, as brought upon by influence of environmental variables. Using the devised
evaluation index for setting conservation priorities, 17 species were chosen to have a
medium priority for conservation.

Biodiversity conservation should be seen in the context of changing environment
and culture that is continually interacting with one another. The patterns of plant use by the
Alangan people may have been transitioning to a more permanent form of agriculture, but
their dependence and respect for the forest remain. Moreover, the zonation of tree species
corresponding land use formations across an elevation gradient in Mt. Ilong is also
indicative of how the Alangan people have shaped the landscape, at least in the agroforestry
zone.

A new approach of conservation priority setting of plant species was devised and

applied that combines different perspectives in conservation. This assessment includes

140

rarity, threat, and sociocultural significance that considers the opinion and promotes the
involvement of the primary users of forests: in this case, the Alangan people of Mindoro
Island.

This simple conservation priority index is still open for improvement, as it is still
believed that the approach in conservation priority setting depends on available data and
context of the study area. So far, the methodology as it is can be replicated and applied in
other localities in the Philippines. It can also serve as an important tool in creating
conservation policies by the local government units in the country. Therefore, it is
recommended to enact ordinances to use this index in setting conservation priority of their
plants in their forests.

For future studies, it is also recommended to test the applicability of conservation
priority index in a larger scale: for instance, at a watershed level in Halcon Range. This
might be crucial as it may encompass more than one local government unit, but this can
provide a more holistic approach in conservation priority setting. Moreover, this can also
require a larger amount of data collection required: an increase in number of sampling plots

as well as to the number of informants to be interviewed.

LITERATURE CITED

ABE, R. AND OHTANI, K. 2013. An ethnobotanical study of medicinal plants and
traditional therapies of Batan Island, Philippines. Journal of Ethnopharmacology,
145, 554-565.

AIBA, S. AND KITAYAMA, K. 1999. Structure, composition and species diversity in an
altitude-substrate matrix of rain forest tree communities on Mount Kinabalu,
Borneo. Plant Ecology, 140, 139-157.

ALBUQUERQUE, U.P., SOLDATI, G.T., SIEBER, S.S., MEDEIROS, P.M., SA, J.C.,
AND DE SOUZA, L.C. 2011. Rapid ethnobotanical diagnosis of the Fulni-6
Indigenous lands: Floristic survey and local conservation priorities of medicinal
plants. Environment, Development, and Sustainability, 13, 277-292.

AMBAL, R.G.R., DUYA, M.V., CRUZ, M.A., COROZA, O.G., VERGARA, S.G., DE
SILVA, N., MOLINYAW, N. AND TABARANZA, B. 2012. Key biodiversity
areas in the Philippines: Priorities for conservation. Journal of Threatened Taxa,
4(8), 2788-2796.

AMES, O. 1907. Orchidaceae halconenses: An enumeration of the orchids collected on or
near Mount Halcon, chiefly by Elmer D. Merrill. Philippine Journal of Science C,
2(4), 311-337.

ASHTON, P.S. 2003. Floristic composition of tree communities on wet tropical mountains
revisited. Perspectives in Plant Ecology, Evolution and Systematics, 6(1,2), 87-104.

BALANGCOD, T.D. AND BALANGCOD, A.K. 2011. Ethnomedicinal knowledge of
plants and healthcare practices among the Kalanguya tribe in Tinoc, Ifugao, Luzon,
Philippines. Indian Journal of Traditional Knowledge, 10(2), 227-238.

BANATICLA, M. C.N. AND BUOT, I. E. Jr. 2005. Altitudinal zonation of pteridophytes
on Mt. Banahaw de Lucban, Luzon Island, Philippines. Plant Ecology, 180, 135-
151.

BARTHLOTT, W., RAFIQPOOR, D., KIER, G. AND KREFT, H. 2005. Global centers
of vascular plant diversity. Nova Acta Leopoldina, 92(342), 61-83.

BELONIAS, B.H. AND AGUILAR, N.O. 2004. Altitudinal zonation of dicots on Mt.
Pangasugan, Leyte Island, Philippines. Journal of Environmental Science and
Management, 7(2), 47-66.

142

BENZ, B.F., CEVALLOS, J.E., SANTANA, F.M., ROSALES, J.A. AND GRAF, S.M.
2000. Losing knowledge about plant use in the Sierra de Manantlan Biosphere
Reserve, Mexico. Economic Botany, 54(2), 183-191.

BERKES, F. 1993. Traditional Ecological Knowledge in Perspective. In Inglis, J. T. (Ed.).
Traditional Ecological Knowledge: Concepts and Cases (pp. 1-17). Canada:
International Development Research Centre.

BERKES, F., FOLKE, C., AND GADGIL, M. 1995. Traditional ecological knowledge,
biodiversity, resilience and sustainability. In Perrings, C. A., Maller, K. G., Folke,
C., Holling, C. S. & Jansson, B. O. (Eds.). Biodiversity Conservation (pp. 281-299).
Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers

BODNER, C.C. AND GEREAU, R.E. 1988. A contribution to Bontoc ethnobotany.
Economic Botany, 42, 307-369

BOSERUP, E. 1965. The Conditions of Agricultural Growth: The Economics of Agrarian
Change under Population Pressure. Transaction Publishers.

BRAY, J.R. AND CURTIS, J.T. 1957. An ordination of the upland forest communities of
Southern Wisconsin. Ecological Monographs, 27(4), 325-349.

BREHM, J.M., MAXTED N., MARTINS-LOUGAO, M.A., AND FORD-LLOYD, B.V.
2010. New approaches for establishing conservation priorities for socio-
economically important plant species. Biodiversity Conservation, 19, 2715-2740.

BRITO, D., AMBAL, R.G., BROOKS, T., DE SILVA, N., FOSTER, M., HAO, W.,
HILTON-TAYLOR, C., PAGLIA, A., RODRIGUEZ, J.P. AND RODRIGUEZ,
J.V. 2010. How similar are national red lists and the IUCN Red List? Biological
Conservation, 143(5), 1154-1158.

BROTHERUS, V.F. 1907. Musci Halconenses. Philippine Journal of Science C, 2(4), 339-
343.

BROWN, W.H. 1919. Vegetation of Philippine mountains. Bureau of Science, Manila.

BUOT, IE.Jr. 2007. Vegetation zonation of Mt. Akiki, Cordillera Mountain Range,
Benguet Province, Philippines. Asia Life Sciences, 16(1), 53-70.

BUOT, I.E.Jr. 2008. Vertical distribution and zonation pattern of woody vegetation on the
northwestern slope of Mt. Mayon, Philippines. Asia Life Sciences, 17(2), 189-205.

BUOT, I.E.Jr. AND OKITSU, S. 1998. Vertical distribution and structure of the tree
vegetation in the montane forest of Mt. Pulog, Cordillera mountain range, the
highest mountain in Luzon Is., Philippines. Vegetation Science, 15, 19-32.

143

BUOT, LE.Jr. AND OSUMI, K. 2011. Land use pattern and woody species composition
near human disturbed landscapes on Mount Makiling, Luzon Island. American
Journal of Environmental Sciences, 7(4), 306-315.

CADIZ, G.E. AND BUOT, L.E.Jr. 2011. Physico-chemical factors affecting vascular plant
diversity of a lowland forest in Mt. Tabunan, Cebu Island, Philippines. Asia Life
Sciences Supplement, 6, 1-12.

CARINGAL, A.M. AND GUARDE, J.A.D. 2015. Nature farming and himalaynization:
Food subsistence strategies by the Mangyan Alangan Tribe of Mindoro,
Philippines. Asia Life Sciences, 24(2), 601-627.

CONCENCO, G., TOMAZI, M., CORREIA, I.V.T., SANTOS, S.A. AND GALON, L.
2013. Phytosociological surveys: Tools for weed science? Planta Daninha, 31(2),
469-482.

CONKLIN, H.C. 1955. The relation of the Hanunéo culture to the plant world. PhD
Dissertation. Yale University.

CONKLIN, H.C. 1967. Ifugao ethnobotany 1905-4965: The 1911 Beyer-Merrill report in
perspective. Economic Botany, 21(3), 243-272.

CONSERVATION INTERNATIONAL PHILIPPINES, DEPARTMENT OF
ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES-PROTECTED AREAS AND
WILDLIFE BUREAU, AND HARIBON FOUNDATION FOR’ THE
CONSERVATION OF NATURE. 2006. Priority Sites for Conservation in the
Philippines: Key Biodiversity Areas. Quezon City, Philippines: Conservation
International Philippines. Retrieved 20 May 2015
from _http://www.conservation.org/global/philippines/publications/Pages/Priority-
Sites-for-Conservation-Key-Biodiversity-Areas.aspx

CONVENTION ON BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY. 1992. Retrieved 01 July 2015 from
https://www.cbd.int/doc/legal/cbd-en.pdf

COPELAND, E.B. 1907. Pteridophyta halconenses: A list of the ferns and fern-allies
collected by Elmer D. Merrill on Mount Halcon, Mindoro. Philippine Journal of
Science C, 2(4), 119-155.

COTTAM, G. AND CURTIS, J.T. 1956. The use of distance measures in
phytosociological sampling. Ecology, 37(3), 451-460.

COTTON, C.M. 1996. Ethnobotany: Principles and Applications. England: John Wiley
and Sons, Ltd.

CULMSEE, H. AND LEUSCHNER, C. 2013. Consistent patterns of elevational change
in tree taxonomic and phylogenetic diversity across Malesian mountain
forests. Journal of Biogeography, 40(10), 14.

144

CUNHA, L.V.F. AND ALBUQUERQUE, U.P. 2006. Quantitative ethnobotany in an
Atlantic forest fragment of Northeastern Brazil — Implications to conservation.
Environmental Monitoring and Assessment, 114, 1-25.

CURTIS, J.T. AND MCINTOSH, R.P. 1951. An upland forest continuum in the prairie-
forest border region of Wisconsin. Ecology, 32(3), 476-496.

DALLE, S.P. AND POTVIN, C. 2004. Conservation of useful plants: an evaluation of
local priorities from two indigenous communities in Eastern Panama. Economic
Botany, 58(1), 31-57.

DE LEEUW, J. AND MAIR, P. 2009. Homogeneity Analysis in R: The package
homals. Journal of Statistical Software, 31, 1-19.

DELOS ANGELES, M.D. AND BUOT, IE.Jr. 2015. Diversity and distribution of
pteridophytes along the altitudinal gradient of the northeastern slope of a secondary
forest in Mt. Makiling, Philippines. IAMURE International Journal of Ecology and
Conservation, 16, 25-46.

DENR DEPARTMENT ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER (DAO) NO. 2017-11. Updated
national list of threatened Philippine plants and their categories. Retieved 18
August 2017 from http://server2.denr.gov.ph/uploads/rmdd/dao-2017-11.pdf

DHAR, U., RAWAL, R. S., AND UPRETI, J. 2000. Setting priorities for conservation of
medicinal plants — a case study in the Indian Himalaya. Biological Conservation,
95, 57-65.

DIXIT, A.M. AND SILORI, C.S. 2010. Setting conservation priorities for medicinal and
other ethnobotanical resources. Case study of Kachchh District, Gujarat (India). In
Kala, C. P. (Ed.) Medicinal Plants and Sustainable Development. India: Nova
Science Publishers, Inc.

DRESSLER, W.H., WILSON, D., CLENDENNING, J., CRAMB, R., KEENAN, R.,
MAHANTY, S., BRUNN, T.B., MERTZ, O., AND LASCO, R.D. 2017. The
impact of swidden decline on livelihoods and ecosystem services in Southeast Asia:
A review of the evidence from 1990 to 2015. Ambio, 46, 291-310.

DUTSON, G.C.L., EVANS, T.D., BROOKS, T.M., ASANE, D.C., TIMMINS, R.J. AND
TOLEDO, A. 1992. Conservation status of birds on Mindoro, Philippines. Bird
Conservation International, 2, 303-325.

DZEREFOS, C.M. AND WITKOWSKI, E.T.F. 2001. Density and potential utilization of
medicinal grassland plants from Abe Bailey Nature Reserve, South Africa.
Biodiversity and Conservation, 10, 1875-1896.

145

ENGELS, J.M.M., DEMPEWOLF, H., AND HENSON-APOLLONIO, V. 2011. Ethical
considerations in agro-biodiversity research, collecting, and use. Journal of
Agricultural and Environmental Ethics, 24, 107-126.

ENRIGHT, N.J., AND JAFFRE, T. 2011. Ecology and distribution of the Malesian
podocarps. Smithsonian Contributions to Botany, 95, 57-78.

EWALD, J. 2003. A critique for phytosociology. Journal of Vegetation Science, 14(2).
291-296.

FAJARDO, W.T., CANCINO, L.T., DUDANG, E.B., DE VERA, I.A., PAMBID, R.M.
AND JUNIO, A.D. 2017. Ethnobotanical study of traditional medicinal plants used
by indigenous Sambal-Bolinao of Pangasinan, Philippines. Pangasinan State
University Journal of Natural and Applied Sciences, 1(1), 45-55.

FERNANDO, E.S., CO, L.L., LAGUNZAD, D.A., GRUEZO, W.S.M., BARCELONA,
J.F., MADULID, D.A., LAPIS, A.B., TEXON, G.I, MANILA, A.C., AND
ZAMORA, P.M. 2008. Threatened plants of the Philippines: a preliminary
assessment. Asia Life Sciences Supplement, 3,1-52.

FOX, R.B. 1952. The Pinatubo Negritoes: Their useful plants and material culture.
Philippine Journal of Science, 81 (3-4), 173-414.

GADGIL, M., BERKES, F. AND FOLKE, C. 1993. Indigenous knowledge for
biodiversity conservation. Ambio, 22(2-3), 151-156.

GASCON, C.N. 1998. Sustainability indicators of the Hanunuo Mangyan Agroforestry
Systems, Sitio Dangkalan, Bulalacao, Oriental Mindoro, Philippines. PhD
Dissertation. University of the Philippines Los Bafios.

GERIQUE, A. 2006. An introduction to ethnoecology and ethnobotany: Theory and
methods. Integrative assessment and planning methods for sustainable agroforestry
in humid and semiarid regions. Advanced Scientific Training. Loja, Ecuador.
Retrieved 5 May 2014 from http://www.researchgate.net/profile/Andres_Gerique/
publication/239591352_An_Introduction_to_ethnoecology_and_ethnobotany._ Th
eory_and_Methods_Integrative_assessment_and_planning_methods_for_sustaina
ble_agroforestry_in_humid_and_semiarid_regions/links/0f3 1753c6699fe2f5b000
000.pdf

GIVEN, D.R. AND NORTON, D.A. 1993. A multivariate approach to assessing threat
and for priority setting in threatened species conservation. Biological Conservation,
64, 57-66.

GOMEZ-BAGGETHUN, E. AND REYES-GARCIA, V. 2013. Reinterpreting change in
traditional ecological knowledge. Human Ecology, 41, 643-647.

146

GONZALES, J.C.T., DANS, A.T.L., AFUANG, L.E. with contributions from
PORTILLO, B.S., PEDREGOSA, M., LEDESMA, M.M., HERNAEZ, B.,
BULALACAO, W.B., YNGENTE, V.B., DANS, F.G. AND ALVIOLA, P.A.
2000. Mindoro: Island-wide survey of fauna and flora and field inventory of
selected sites for priority conservation. Muntinlupa City: Mindoro Biodiversity
Conservation Foundation, Inc.

GONZALEZ, J.A., GARCIA-BARRIUSO, M., RAMIREZ-RODRIGUEZ, R.,
BERNARDOS, S., AND AMICH, F. 2013. Ethnobotanical resources management
in the Arribes del Duero Natural Park (Central Western Iberian Peninsula):
Relationships between plant use and plant diversity, ecological analysis, and
conservation. Human Ecology, 41, 615-630.

GORENFLO, L.J.. ROMAINE, S., MITTERMEIER, R. A., AND WALKER-
PAINEMILLA, K. 2012. Co-occurrence of linguistic and biological diversity in
biodiversity hotspots and high biodiversity wilderness areas. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 109(21), 8032-8037.

GRUBB, P.J. 1977. Control of forest growth and distribution on wet tropical mountains:
with special reference to mineral nutrition. Annual Review of Ecology and
Systematics, 8(1), 83-107.

HAMMER, @., HARPER, D.A.T., AND RYAN, P.D. 2001. PAST: Paleontological
Statistics Software Package for Education and Data Analysis. Palaeontologia
Electronica, 4(1): 9pp.

HEMP, A. 2006. Continuum or zonation? Altitudinal gradients in the forest vegetation of
Mt. Kilimanjaro. Plant Ecology, 184, 27-42.

HOOGERBRUGGE, I AND FRESCO, L.O. 1993. Homegarden Systems: Agricultural
Characteristics and Challenges. International Institute for Environment and
Development Gatekeeper Series No. 39. Wageningen: Wangeningen Agricultural
University.

HOFT, M., BARIK, S.K., AND LYKKE, A.M. 1999. Quantitative Ethnobotany:
Applications of multivariate and statistical analyses in ethnobotany. People and
Plants Working Paper 6. UNESCO, Paris.

INTERNATIONAL UNION FOR THE CONSERVATION OF NATURE. 2017. The
IUCN Red List of threatened Species. Retrieved 1 May 2017 from
http://www. iucnredlist.org

KAIMOWITZ, D. AND SHEIL, D. 2007. Conserving what and for whom? Why
conservation should help meet basic human needs in the tropics. Biotropica, 39(5),
567-574.

147

KALA, C.P., FAROOQUEE, N.A., AND DHAR, U. 2004. Prioritization of medicinal
plants on the basis of available knowledge, existing practices and use value status
in Uttaranchal, India. Biodiversity and Conservation, 13, 453-469.

KHAN, S.M., PAGE, S.E., AHMAD, M. AND HARPER, D.M. 2013. Sustainable
utilization and conservation of plant biodiversity in montane ecosystems: the
western Himalayas as a case study. Annals of Botany, met125.

KHAN, S.M. HARPER, D., PAGE, S., AND AHMAD, H. 2011. Species and community
diversity of vascular flora along environmental gradient in Naran Valley: A
multivariate approach through indicator species analysis. Pakistan Journal of
Botany, 43(5), 2337-2346.

KITAYAMA, K. 1992. An altitudinal transect study of the vegetation on Mount Kinabalu,
Borneo. Vegetatio, 102(2), 149-171.

LASCO, R.D. AND PULHIN, J.M. 2001. Secondary forests in the Philippines: Formation
and transformation in the 20" century. Journal of Tropical Forest Science, 13(4),
652-670.

LINTING, M. AND VAN DER KOOJJ, A. 2012. Nonlinear principal components analysis
with CATPCA: a tutorial. Journal of Personality Assessment, 94(1), 12-25.

LINTING, M., MEULMAN, J.J., GROENEN, P.J. AND VAN DER KOOJJ, A.J. 2007.
Nonlinear principal components analysis: introduction and
application. Psychological methods, 12(3), 336.

LOZANO, F.D., SAIZ, J.S.M. AND OLLERO, H.S. 2003. Rarity and threat relationships
in the conservation planning of the Iberian flora. Biodiversity and Conservation,
12, 1861-1882.

LUCENA, R.F.P., ARAUJO, E.L. AND ALBUQUERQUE, U.P. 2007. Does the local
availability of woody Caatinga plants (Northeastern Brazil) explain their use
value? Economic Botany, 61(4), 347-361.

LUCENA, R.F.P., LUCENA, C.M., ARAUJO, E.L., ALVES, A.G.C., AND
ALBUQUERQUE, U.P. 2013. Conservation priorities of useful plants from
different techniques of collection and analysis of ethnobotanical data. Annals of the
Brazilian Academy of Sciences, 85(1), 169-186.

LUOGA, E.J.. WITKOWSKI, E.T.F. AND BALKWILL. 2000. Differential utilization
and ethnobotany of trees in Kitulanghalo Forest and surrounding communal lands,
Eastern Tanzania. Economic Botany, 54, 328-343.

MACE, G.M., POSSINGHAM, H. P. AND LEADER-WILLIAMS, N. 2006. Prioritizing
choices in conservation. In MacDonald, D.W. and Willis K.J. (Eds.) Key Topics in
Conservation Biology. John Wiley and Sons.

148

MAFFI, L. 2007. Cultural Diversity and Sustainability. In Pretty, J., Ball, A. S., Benton,
T., Guivant, J. S., Lee, D. R., Orr, D., Pfeffer, M. J., & Ward, H (Eds). The Sage
Handbook of Environment and Society (pp. 267-277). London: Sage Publications.

MANDIA, E.H. 1998. The vegetation on the Northeastern summit of Mt. Halcon, Mindoro
Island, Philippines. PhD Dissertation. University of the Philippines Los Bafios.

MANDIA, E.H. 2004. The Alangan Mangyan of Mt. Halcon, Oriental Mindoro: Their
ethnobotany. Philippine Quarterly of Culture and Society, 32, 96-117.

MARTINEZ, G.J., PLANCHUELO, A.M., FUENTES, E. AND OJEDA, M. 2006. A
numeric index to establish conservation priorities for medicinal plants in the
Paravachasa Valley, Cordoba, Argentina. Biodiversity and Conservation, 15, 2457-
2475.

MATTHEWS, P.J., AGOO, E.M.G., TANDANG, D.N. AND MADULID, D.A. 2012.
Ethnobotany and ecology of wild taro (Colocasia esculenta) in the Philippines:
Implications for domestication and dispersal. Senri Ethnological Studies, 78, 307-
340.

MERRILL, E.D. 1907a. The flora of Mt. Halcon. Philippine Journal of Science, 2(4), 251-
309.

MERRILL, E.D. 1907b. The flora of Mt. Halcon. Philippine Journal of Science, 2(4), 251-
309.

MICHAILIDIS, G. AND DE LEEUW, J. 1998. The Gifi system of descriptive
multivariate analysis. Statistical Science, 13(4), 307-336.

MILLENNIUM ECOSYSTEM ASSESSMENT. 2005. Ecosystems and Human Well-
being: Synthesis. Island Press, Washington, DC.

MINDORO BIODIVERSITY CONSERVATION FOUNDATION, INC. 2012. Mount
Halcon Conservation and Management Plan. Retrieved 26 November 2016 from
http://mbcfi.org.ph/media/Technical_Reports/1_%20Mt_Halcon_Conservation_M
anagement_Plan.pdf

MITTERMEIER, R.A., MYERS, N. FONESCA, G.A.B. AND OLIVIERI, S. 1998.
Biodiversity hotspots and major tropical wildreness areas: Approaches to setting
conservation priorities. Conservation Biology, 12(3), 516-520.

MORIOKA, H. AND SISON, R.V. 1987. Birds of the highlands of Mt. Halcon, Mindoro,
Philippines. Japanese Journal of Ornithology, 35, 109-124

MUELLER-DOMBOIS, D. AND ELLENBERG, H. 1974. Aims and Methods of
Vegetation Ecology. USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

149

MYERS, N. 1988. Threatened biotas: “Hot Spots” in tropical forests. The
Environmentalist, 8(3). 187-208.

MYERS, N., MITTERMEIER, R.A., MITTERMEIER, C.G., FONESCA, G.A.B. AND
KENT, J. 2000. Biodiversity hotspots for conservation priorities. Nature, 403(24)
853-858.

N’DANIKOU, S., ACHIGAN-DAKO, E.G. AND WONG, J.L.G. 2011. Eliciting local
values of wild edible plants in Southern Bénin to identify priority species for
conservation. Economic Botany, 65(4), 381-395.

NGUYEN, T.V., MITLOHNER, R., AND BICH, N.V. 2015. Environmental factors
affecting the abundance and presence of tree species in a tropical lowland limestone
and non-limestone forest in Ben En National Park, Vietnam. Journal of Forest and
Environmental Science, 31(3), 177-191.

OHSAWA, M. 1984. Differentiation of vegetation zones and species strategies in the
subalpine region of Mt. Fuji. Vegetatio, 57, 15-82.

OKSANEN, J., KINDT, R., LEGENDRE, P., O’HARA, B., STEVENS, M.H.H.,
OKSANEN, M.J., AND DO, T.V. 2015. SUGGESTS, M.A.S.S. 2007. The vegan
package. Community ecology package, 10, 631-637.

OLIVEIRA, R.L.C., LINS NETO, E.M.F., ARAUJO, E.L., AND ALBUQUERQUE, U.P.
2007. Conservation priorities and population structure of woody medicinal plants
in an area of Caatinga vegetation (Pernambuco State, NE Brazil). Environmental
Monitoring Assessment, 132, 189-206.

OLOWA, L. AND DEMAYO, C.G. 2015. Ethnobotanical uses of medicinal plants among
the Muslim Maranaos in Iligan City, Philippines. Advances in Environmental
Biology, 9(27)), 204-215.

ONG, H.G. AND KIM, Y.D. 2014. Quantitative ethnobotanical study of the medicinal
plants used by the Ati Negro indigenous group in Guimaras Island, Philippines.
Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 157, 228-242.

PARDALES, J.R.Jr. 1997. Ethnobotanical survey of edible aroids in the Philippines I:
Farmers, beliefs, experiences. Philippine Journal of Crop Science, 22(1), 1-7.

PARTEL, M., KALAMEES, R., REIER, U., TUVI, E.L., ROOSALUSTE, E., VELLAK,
A. AND ZOBEL, M. 2005. Grouping and prioritization of vascular plant species
for conservation: combining natural rarity and management need. Biological
Conservation, 123(3), 271-278.

PEI, S. 2013. Ethnobotany and the sustainable use of biodiversity. Plant Diversity and
Resources, 35(4), 401-406.

150

PEI, S., ZHANG, G. AND HUAI, H. 2009. Application of traditional knowledge in forest
management: Ethnobotanical indicators of sustainable forest use. Forest Ecology
and Management, 257, 2017-2021.

PENAFIEL, S.R. 1995. The biological and hydrological values of the mossy forests in the
central Cordillera Mountains, Philippines. In Hamilton, L.S., Juvik, JO, and
Scatena, F. N (Eds.). Tropical montane cloud forests (pp. 266-273). New York, NY:
Springer.

PHILIPPINE STATISTICS AUTHORITY. 2010. 2010 Census of Population and
Housing. Retrieved 1 April 2017 from _http://psa.gov.ph/sites/
default/files/attachments/hsd/ pressrelease/MIMAROPA.pdf

PHILIPPINE STATISTICS AUTHORITY. 2015. 2015 Census of Population and
Housing. Retrieved 1 April 2017 from _ https://www.psa.gov.ph/
sites/default/files/attachments/ hsd/pressrelease/RO4B.xlsx

PHILLIPS, O. AND GENTRY, A.H. 1993a. The useful plants of Tambopata, Peru I.
Statistical hypotheses tests with a new quantitative technique. Economic Botany,
47(1), 15-32.

PHILLIPS, O. AND GENTRY, A.H. 1993b. The useful plants of Tambopata, Peru II.
Additional hypothesis testing in quantitative ethnobotany. Economic Botany,
47(1), 33-43.

PHILLIPS, O.L. 1996. Some quantitative methods for analyzing ethnobotanical
knowledge. In Alexiades, M. N. (Ed.) Selected guidelines for ethnobotanical
research: A field manual (pp. 171-197).

PIELOU, E.C. 1984. The interpretation of ecological data: A primer on classification and
ordination. USA: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.

PRANCE, G.T., BALEE, W., BOOM, B. M., AND CARNEIRO, R.L. 1987. Quantitative
ethnobotany and the case for conservation in Amazonia. Conservation Biology, 1,
296-310.

PRETTY, J., ADAMS, B., BERKES, F., ATHAYDE, S. F., DUDLEY, N., HUNN, E.,
MAFFI, L., RAPPORT, D., ROBBINS, P., STERLING, E., STOLTON, S.,
TSING, A., VINTINNER, E. AND PILGRIM, S. 2009. The intersections of
biological diversity and cultural diversity: Towards integration. Conservation and
Society, 7(2), 100-112.

QUIAOIT, J.S. 1997. The changing patterns in the man-land relationship of the Alangan
Mangyan of Oriental Mindoro. Master’s Thesis. Xavier University, Cagayan de
Oro.

151

RAGRAGIO, E.M., ZAYAS, C.N. AND OBICO, J.J.A. 2013. Useful plants of selected
Ayta communities from Porac, Pampanga, twenty years after the eruption of Mt.
Pinatubo. Philippine Journal of Science, 142, 169-181.

RASUL, G. AND THAPA, G.B. 2003. Shifting cultivation in the mountains of South and
Southeast Asia: Regional patterns and factors influencing the change. Land
Degradation and Development, 14(5), 495-508.

RATERTA, R., DE GUZMAN, G.Q. AND ALEJANDRO, GJD. 2014. Assessment,
inventory and ethnobotanical survey of medicinal plants in Batan and Sabtang
Island (Batanes Group of Islands, Philippines). International Journal of Pure and
Applied Bioscience, 2(4), 147-154.

REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7586. 1992. Retrieved 13 July 2015 from
http://www. officialgazette. gov.ph/1992/06/01/republic-act-no-7586/

REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8371. 1997. Retrieved 13 July 2015 from
http://www. officialgazette. gov.ph/1997/10/29/republic-act-no-8371/

REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9147. 2001. Retrieved 27 November 2017 from
http://www. officialgazette.gov.ph/2001/07/30/republic-act-no-9417/

RICHTER, M. 2008. Tropical mountain forests — distribution and general features. In
Gradstein, S.R., Homeier, J. and Gansert, D. (Eds). The Tropical Mountain Forest
— Patterns and Processes in a Biodiversity Hotspot (pp. 7-24). Germany:
Universitatsverlag Gottingen.

SANTIAGO, J.0. AND BUOT, I.E.Jr. 2015. Conservation status of selected plants of
Mount Banahaw-San Cristobal Landscape, Quezon Province, Philippines.
IAMURE International Journal of Ecology and Conservation, 16, 64-79.

SARMIENTO, G. 1986. Ecologically crucial features of climate in high tropical
mountains. En: Vuilleumier, F., Monasterio, M. (Eds): High Altitude Tropical
Biogeography, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 11-45.

SCHULT, V. 2001. Deforestation and Mangyan in Mindoro. Philippine Studies: Historical
and Ethnographic Viewpoints, 49(2), 151-175.

SOEMARWOTO, O. 1986. Homegardens: a traditional agroforestry system with a
promising future. In Steppler, H. A. and Nair, P. K. R. (Eds.). Agroforestry: A
decade of development. (pp. 157-170). Nairobi: International Council for Research
in Agroforestry.

SOPSOP, L.B. AND BUOT, LE.Jr. 2013. The forest types in Aborlan Guba System,
Palawan Island, Philippines. IAMURE International Journal of Ecology and
Conservation, 7, 88-104.

152

STEPP, J.R., CERVONE, S., CASTANEDA, H., LASSETER, A., G. STOCKS, AND
GICHON, Y. 2004. Development of a GIS for global biocultural diversity. Policy
Matters, 13, 267-270.

TANNER, E.V.J., VITOUSEK, P.A.. AND CUEVAS, E. 1998. Experimental
investigation of nutrient limitation of forest growth on wet tropical
mountains. Ecology, 79(1), 10-22.

TER BRAAK, C.J.F. 1986. Canonical correspondence analysis: A new eigenvector
technique for multivariate direct gradient analysis. Ecology, 67(5), 1167-1179.

TER BRAAK, C.J.F. 1995. Ordination. In Jongman, R. H. G., Ter Braak, C. J. F. and van
Tongeren (Eds.). Data analysis in Community and Landscape Ecology. (pp. 91-
173). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

TER BRAAK, C. J. F. AND VERDONSCHOT, P. F. M. 1995. Canonical Correspondence
Analysis and related multivariate methods in aquatic ecology. Aquatic Sciences,
57(3), 255-289.

TORRE-CUADROS, M.D.LA. AND ISLEBE, G.A. 2003. Traditional ecological
knowledge and use of vegetation in Southeastern Mexico: a case study from
Solferino, Quintana Roo. Biodiversity and Conservation, 12, 2455-2476.

VAN, Y.T., AND COCHARD, R. 2017. Tree species diversity and utilities in a contracting
lowland hillside rainforest fragment in Central Vietnam. Forest Ecosystems, 4(1),
9.

VAN STEENIS, C.G.G.J. 1964. Floristic altitudinal zones in Malesia. Botanical Journal
of the Linnean Society, 89, 289-292.

VAN TONGEREN, E.C. 1995. Cluster Analysis. In Jongman, R. H. G., ter Braak, C. J.
F. and van Tongeren (Eds.). Data analysis in Community and Landscape Ecology.
(pp. 174-212). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

VILLANUEVA, E.L.C. AND BUOT, I.E.Jr. 2015. Threatened plant species of Mindoro,
Philippines. IAMURE Journal of Ecology and Conservation, 14, 168-190.

WIERSUM, K.F. 1997. Indigenous exploitation and management of tropical forest
resources: an evolutionary continuum in forest-people interactions. Agriculture,
Ecosystems and Environment, 63, 1-16.

WORLD COMMISSION ON ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT. 1987. Our
Common Future. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

YEN, D.E. AND GUTIERREZ, H.G. 1974. The ethnobotany of the Tasaday: The useful
plants. Philippine Journal of Science, 103(2), 75-140.

