CHARACTERIZATION OF ROSELEAF RASPBERRY (Rubus rosifolius Sm.) IN ITS NATIVE HABITAT AND ITS ACCLIMATION UNDER LOW ELEVATION

SHALAN JOSEPH ENRIQUEZ KITMA

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Horticulture

December 2014

INTRODUCTION

Roseleaf raspberry (Rubus rosifolius Sm.) is one of several bramble species native
to the Philippines and is locally known as ‘sampinit’ or ‘sapinit’ depending on the area. It
has long been growing in the wild particularly in forests and agricultural areas (De
Guzman, 2009). Recently, locals of Dolores, in the province of Quezon, Philippines, have
discovered the possibility of cultivating roseleaf raspberry as a fruit crop (DA-BAR,
2012; Daffon & Daffon, 2011). Interest in the plant has also grown especially after
analyses showed its fruits to contain phytochemicals with anti-cancer and other medicinal
properties (Mojica, 2010). However, production of the fruits is currently very limited.
Aside from the lack of available information on how the crop is established, the plants
only bear fruit when grown at medium elevation (DA-BAR, 2012). Certain combinations
of agrometeorological conditions of growing areas at varying elevations may be affecting
the crop and causing the failure to fruit, but their specific influence is currently uncertain
due to the lack of familiarity with the plant. Based on studies done on a relative of
roseleaf raspberry, R. idaeus (Alice & Campbell, 1999; Graham & Woodhead, 2011), it is
possible that the relatively high temperatures characteristic of low elevation areas inhibit
pollen development leading to sterility (Prasad, Staggenborg, & Ristic, 2008; Wahid,
Gelani, Ashraf, & Foolad, 2007) and/or cause the carbohydrate content of plants to drop
too low to satisfy the crop’s requirement to support the fruit development process
(Carew, Mahmood, Darby, Hadley, & Battey, 2001, 2003; Sonsteby & Heide, 2009).

Another factor that can be considered is how the crop distributes its carbohydrate

reserves to its different organs (Fernandez & Pritts, 1994, 1996; Oliveira, Oliveira, &
Monteiro, 2004; Oliveira, Silva, Ferreira, Oliveira, & Monteiro, 2007). This study
hypothesizes that providing optimal amount of shading supplemented with high levels of
nitrogen can help mitigate the impact of high temperature stress and raise the
carbohydrate content of R. rosifolius plants to levels that favor flowering and fruiting in

low-elevation areas (Boussadia et al., 2010; Buskiené & Uselis, 2008).

Objectives

The study was conducted to enable the production of roseleaf raspberry fruits in
areas with temperatures relatively higher than its natural habitat.
Specifically, the study was conducted to:

1. Determine the environmental requirements for successful acclimation.

2. Characterize the phenological development and reproductive biology of R.
rosifolius plants grown in low and medium elevations in relation to existing
climatic conditions in both areas.

3. Determine the optimum amount of shading and nitrogen level required by R.

rosifolius plants grown in low elevation.

REVIEW OF LITERATURE

pine Raspberry - ‘Sam

Rubus rosifolius Smith (syn R. rosaefolius) or roseleaf raspberry is a red-fruit
raspberry that is native to Southern and Eastern Asia and is distributed in Asia, Hawaii,
Australia and the Caribbean (Adams, 1972; Bowen-Forbes, Mulabagal, Liu, & Nair,
2009; Rydberg, 1913). In the Philippines, locals call it ‘sampinit’ (Dolores, Quezon) or
‘sapinit’ (San Pablo, Laguna) depending on the area. It has been reported to be widely
distributed in open secondary forests from Luzon to Mindanao at low (0 - 610masl) to
medium altitudes (611 — 2134masl) (Levine & Stray-Gundersen, 1997), and particularly
thrive in Mt. Banahaw and nearby towns such as Real, Infanta, and General Nakar (De
Guzman, 2009; Mojica, 2010). The ‘sampinit’ is not to be confused, however, with other
Rubus species found in various parts of the Philippines such as the ‘pinit” of Benguet
province (1,500 to 2,500 mas!) which is the local name of several different wild raspberry

species found in the area (Figure 1).

Figure 1. Ripe fruits of some of the raspberry species of the Philippines: A - ‘sampinit’, a
cultivated crop in Kinabuhayan, Dolores Quezon (from the Department of
Agriculture-Bureau of Agricultural Research); B, C, D and E - ‘pinit’, the local
name for a number of wild Rubus species thriving in Atok, Benguet (from
Gueco & Villavicencio); F - a wild berry thriving near Igbaclag Cave in
Aningalan, San Remigio, Antique (from Altoveros & Borromeo); and, G -
another wild berry thriving in Mt. Apo, Mindanao (from Janice F. Laquinta).

The roseleaf raspberry plant is a spiny, branchy shrub that grows up to a height of
1.3 meters and a stem diameter of 3 centimeters. As with all Rubus plants, it produces
renewal shoots from the ground called canes. Its leaves are pinnate or featherlike
consisting of three to seven leaflets. It has complete, hermaphrodite, white-colored, radial
flowers with a very short hypanthium, many stamens, and an apocarpous gynoccium of
many carpels on a cone-like receptacle. These flowers largely depend on insects,

particularly Hymenopterans and Lepidopterans, for pollination. Each carpel develops into

a small drupelet, with the mesocarp becoming fleshy and the endocarp becoming hard
and forming a tiny pit that encloses a single seed. An aggregate fruit is produced
composed of individual drupelets, held together by almost invisible hairs. The shape of
the fruit matches the cultivated strawberry but measures only up to 3 centimeters in
length and 1.8 centimeters in diameter at the base. It is orange-red in color when ripe and
has a sweet sour taste (De Guzman, 2009; Gongalves-Souza, Omena, Souza, & Romero,
2008; Graham & Woodhead, 2011).

Though these plants have been growing in various parts of the country for a long
time, locals merely considered them as thomy weeds. In Mt. Banahaw, where roseleaf
raspberry thrives, the berries from these weeds are a local attraction, drawing the
attention of pilgrims due to their bright color and good eating quality. It was not until
2009 that the locals in Dolores, Quezon discovered the potential of roseleaf raspberry as a
cultivated crop (Daffon & Daffon, 2011). Since then, they have been organically growing
roseleaf raspberry plants in coordination with the Quezon Agricultural Experimental
Station (QAES) of the Regional Department of Agriculture. With funding aid from the
Department of Agriculture - Bureau of Agricultural Research (DA-BAR), processed and
unprocessed products of roseleaf raspberry (Figure 2) are now a source of livelihood of
communities not only in Dolores, Quezon but in other nearby towns as well (DA-BAR,

2012; Daffon & Daffon, 2011; De Guzman, 2009; Mojica, 2010).

Figure 2.

Fresh raspberry fruits sold in San Pablo City, Laguna (top) and processed
raspberry products developed by DA-BAR (middle and bottom). (Sources:
http://kidpawan. blogspot.com/201 1/08/sampinit-philippine-wild-
raspberries.html and DA-BAR)

Roseleaf raspberry in the Philippine Market — Potentials for Wide-scale Production

Results of phytochemical analysis of roseleaf raspberry fruits conducted by the
National Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology (BIOTECH) of the University
of the Philippines Los Bafios (UPLB) and the Department of Science and Technology’s
(DOST) Industrial Technology Development Institute showed that they contained ‘anti-
cancer’ phytochemicals including leucoanthocyanins, anthraquinones, saponins,
deoxysugars, free fatty acids, hydrolysable tannins, unsaturated steroids, and
benzopyrone nucleus (DA-BAR, 2012; Daffon & Daffon, 2011; Mojica, 2010). This
finding is consistent with studies on R. rosifolius and other raspberry species previously
conducted by Bowen-Forbes et al. (2009) and Bowen-Forbes, Zhang, & Nair (2010).

Leucoanthocyanin is a colorless precursor of anthocyanins, the principal
components of the red, blue, and purple pigments of the majority of flower petals, fruits
and vegetables (Reddy, Reddy, Scheffler, Wienand, & Reddy, 2007; Tsao, 2010). This
naturally occurring flavonoid is a potent phytochemical that can be used by the body to
counteract the negative effects of carcinogens (Reddy et al., 2007; Tripoli, Guardia,
Giammanco, Majo, & Giammanco, 2007).

Anthraquinones are aromatic organic compounds known to possess promising
‘anti-cancer’ properties (Huang, Lu, Shen, Chung, & Ong, 2007) and even abilities to
prevent Alzheimer’s disease development (Bulic et al., 2009; Convertino, Pellarin, Catto,

Carotti, & Caflisch, 2009; Pickhardt et al., 2005).

Saponins are naturally occurring steroids that have been found to have several
biological effects that are of medicinal and/or industrial usefulness. These include
membrane-permeating, immune-stimulating, hypocholesterolaemic and anti-carcinogenic
properties, the ability to significantly affect growth, feed intake and reproduction in
animals, to kill protozoans and molluscs, to be antioxidants, to impair the digestion of
protein and the uptake of vitamins and minerals in the gut, to cause hypoglycemia, and to
act as antifungal and antiviral agents (Francis, Kerem, Makkar, & Becker, 2002).

Hydrolysable tannins are antioxidants known to exhibit antimicrobial and
antiviral activity. Among the viruses it is known to inhibit are herpes simplex virus | and
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (Buzzini et al., 2008; Feng et al., 2008; Koleckar
et al., 2008; Li, Liu, Jiang, & Wu, 2004).

Aside from the growing interest in roseleaf raspberry as a crop of potentially great
value to the pharmaceutical industry, a number of investors, including candy
manufacturers seeking raw materials for flavoring, were also reported to have expressed
interest in putting money into roseleaf raspberry, but QAES is carefully working first on
the needed research before signing more memoranda of agreement (DA-BAR, 2012).

According to QAES researchers, when in season, fresh roseleaf raspberry fruits
are sold in markets near Mt. Banahaw (e.g. San Pablo City, Laguna) but only in small
quantities since they are only harvested from the wild (Mojica, 2010). Since 2009, QAES
has been conducting research on how to improve the productivity of roseleaf raspberry.
Project activities initially focused on the development of the package of technology for

its production since no locally available literature on its culture and management exists.

The QAES project team is evaluating the crop's appropriate planting distance, fertilizer
requirements, susceptibility to pests and diseases, and other cultural management
practices. So far, data on percent mortality, field survival, growth habit, days to
flowering, fruit set, yield, pest and disease incidence had been gathered to determine
which planting material at a particular fertilizer level is most suitable. Once the results of
the trials are established by the project, the QAES will publish recommendations on

roseleaf raspberry plant’s culture and management. Moreover, proponents of the project

also mentioned that after the tests and trials are finished, the initial area will be expanded
to serve as production farm where the beneficiaries can source their berries for processing
or for sale as fresh produce (DA-BAR, 2012).

Though the production technologies developed by QAES were said to have
increased yield and even extended the harvesting and processing periods, there is still a
need to find avenues to expand production to adequately respond to future increases in
demand for roseleaf raspberry fruits.

Off-season production and/or expansion of production into nontraditional growing
regions could potentially increase the supply of raspberry fruits to make them more
available and also more affordable. Further, this may help in preserving forests as it will
discourage further intrusion into protected forest areas to gather roseleaf raspberry fruits.
Currently, there are only two areas where roseleaf raspberry is cultivated and harvested,
as reported by the QAES — in the municipalities of Dolores and Lucban, both in Quezon
province. Potential areas of expansion include parts of Mt. Banahaw and a few nearby

towns in the provinces of Quezon and Laguna (DA-BAR, 2012).

10

‘An attempt by the Department of Agriculture (DA) to expand raspberry
production in Lagalag, Tiaong, province of Quezon was unsuccessful. Raspberries
planted in the said area were reported to reach flowering stage, but were unable to bear
fruit. It was reported that one of the probable reasons for the failure to fruit was the
relatively warm climate in the area compared to where these plants were obtained (Teves,
2011). To validate this, it is important to understand the processes that take place within
the plant and how they can be affected by the variations in environmental conditions in

areas where they successfully bear fruit and where they do not.

Understanding the Crop — Carbohydrate Partitioning
as a Critical Factor for Flowering and Fruit Set

AR. rosifolius plant produces four or five branches or canes during a given year
and spreads rapidly by seeds and by horizontal roots. Each cane passes through, first, a
vegetative stage and then a fruiting stage, the sequence being of only a few months”
duration (Engard, 1945). Based on the observation of roselcaf raspberry growers, the
period from planting to the start of flowering is from four to six months. De Guzman
(2009) also mentioned that this kind of wild raspberry prefers areas where the soil is
fertile and soil moisture is abundant. Similarly, growers observed that potted roseleaf
raspberry plants in Tiaong, Quezon, and in Calauan and Los Bajios, Laguna quickly
exhibited tip buming when not watered regularly. Roseleaf raspberry growers in
Kinabuhayan, Dolores, Quezon have also observed that the plants can bear flowers and

fruits roughly throughout the year but the peak fruiting season is during the months of

a

March and April. Fruits can also be harvested in February and May but to a much lesser
extent. Flowering becomes less frequent and fruiting becomes sporadic when not in
season. R. rosifolius plants were also reported by Engard (1945) to produce flowers and
fruits throughout the year but more abundantly during the spring (March to May) and
summer (June to August) months. Production of flowers by each cane was reported to be
in basipetal succession. Likewise, the death of the canes is also basipetal (Figure 3).

Given that there have been very limited studies done on roseleaf raspberry,
looking at studies done on R. idaeus L., a red raspberry species grown in temperate
countries belonging to the same subgenus as roseleaf raspberry (subgen. /daeobatus)
(Alice & Campbell, 1999; Graham & Woodhead, 2011), may provide hints on how
temperature and other environmental factors can be key factors in the flowering and fruit
set of roseleaf raspberry.

In the case of biennial cultivars of R. idaeus, exposure to low temperatures is an
absolute requirement for plants to bear flowers (Sensteby & Heide, 2012). Shortening
days and falling temperatures in late summer cause shoot elongation to cease and
dormancy to set. The combined effects of low temperatures and short days (around 15°C
and 9-hr days depending on the variety) also lead to the initiation of flower buds which
usually starts at the same time as the canes begin to acquire dormancy. This state of
dormancy refers to the temporary arrest of meristem activity in the bud. This gradual
process extends over several weeks and once a stage of complete dormancy is reached it
is not readily reversible. (Carew et al., 2003; Graham & Woodhead, 2011; Jennings,

1988; Mazzitelli et al., 2007; Sensteby & Heide, 2008; Taiz & Zeiger, 2006).

Figure 3. Photograph of a R. rosaefolius Smith plant, showing succession of canes
(A to G). Cane G is vegetative. All others have fruited and canes A to E
are dead. Horizontal root R leads to new stem (left) about 70cm from
parent plant (Engard, 1945).

The time of flower initiation, however, depends on cultivar and location. This
presumably reflects the fact that factors such as temperature, light and water availability,

which obviously vary across sites, affect cane development.

13

Dormancy breaking involves meeting the crop’s chilling requirement (6 weeks at
3.3°C with no light) which could vary between cultivars. This is necessary for flower
buds to resume growth in spring (Carew et al., 2003; Graham & Woodhead, 2011;
Jennings, 1988; Mazzitelli et al., 2007; Sonsteby & Heide, 2008; Taiz & Zeiger, 2006).

Though chilling winter temperatures do not normally exist in the Philippines
under natural conditions, dormancy breaking is not a problem among R. rosifolius plants
as they are able to flower and bear fruit, although only in areas of a certain elevation (e.g.
Kinabuhayan, Dolores, Quezon - 774masl; Pinagdanlayan , Dolores, Quezon - 519masl;
and, Tagaytay City, Cavite - 567masl).

Roseleaf raspberry growers in Dolores, Quezon have observed that the plants are
able to bear fruits at altitudes of around 457.2m (1500ft) asl and above. Engard (1945)
also reported that R. rosifolius in the tropical state of Hawaii, USA are especially
abundant at altitudes greater than 300 masl. It is, however, possible that shortening days
and falling temperatures experienced during the months of December to January
(Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration, n.d.)
have a similar effect on roseleaf raspberry. This may be a temporary cessation of
vegetative growth during the onset of the first flower buds (Oliveira, Oliveira, &
Monteiro, 2004) such that the plants are able to conserve their carbohydrate reserves in
preparation for the peak fruit bearing months occurring in March and April. This could
involve a reduced rate of cane growth, leaf production and activity of vegetative

propagules (e.g. root suckers).

14

Roseleaf raspberry plants were observed to have been able to bear flowers in
relatively warm conditions (25.5 — 28.3°C depending on the month) (PAG-ASA, n.d.)
and low elevation areas (e.g. Tiaong, Quezon - 62masl; and Calauan, Laguna - 68masl).
The problem, however, is that the flowers produced by these plants eventually abort such
that no fruits are formed, and that the flowers were said to have been fewer and smaller
compared with those in areas of relatively higher elevation where these plants grow in the
wild such as in Kinabuhayan and Pinagdanlayan, Dolores, Quezon. There was, however,
an incidence wherein a raspberry plant in an orchard in Calavan, Laguna was observed to
bear a fruit, though somewhat deformed (Figure 4). These observations suggest that

roseleaf raspberry does not absolutely require vernalization per se to bear flowers.

Figure 4, Low elevation flower and fruit. A roseleaf raspberry plant in Tiaong, Quezon
with open flower and flower-bud (eft) and an incidence of fruit set observed
on a roseleaf raspberry plant in Calauan, Laguna (right). Photos courtesy of
Dr. Roberto E. Coronel.

15

As air temperature drops by 5.5°C for every kilometer increase in clevation
(Kémer, 2007), there is a possibility that temperature plays a crucial role in the flowering
and fruit set of raspberry plants. Carew et al. (2001) showed that, in addition to a general
dormancy releasing effect, chilling temperatures also have a distinct vernalization-like
effect on the flowering behavior of annual fruiting R. idaeus cultivars. Their results
showed that non-chilled plants were able to bear flowers after having a certain number of
leaves while plants produced from adequately chilled roots bore flowers even with a
fewer number of leaves present. Vernalization, though important, was also shown to be
not an absolute requirement in annual bearing red raspberry cultivars. Another interesting
point shown was that the number of leaves may have an important role in the flowering
behavior, thus suggesting an influence of the photosynthetic assimilates present in the
plant upon flowering.

Another study by Sonsteby & Heide (2009) showed that Rubus idaeus L. cv.
‘Polka’ (an annual bearing cultivar) plants grown in highly controlled environments with
temperatures from 6°C to as high as 30°C were able to flower freely across this entire
temperature range. In fact, the result of their experiments showed that raspberry plants
had fewer days to anthesis, more flowers and less dormant buds as growth temperatures
rose with long day exposure (Figures 5, 6 and 7).

Temperatures beyond 27°C, however, showed the reverse - an effect of
excessively high temperatures on the photosynthetic activity of plants as discussed in a
later section. Their findings corresponded with that of Carew et al. (2003) wherein

‘Autumn Bliss’, another annual bearing raspberry cultivar, was also observed to flower

oom ID ow om

Temperate °C)

Figure 5. Effects of temperature and daylength on plant height at anthesis (Panel A), the final
number of nodes (Panel B), and the number of days to anthesis (Panel C) in R. idacus
plants of an annual bearing variety. Columns to the left in each Panel represent the
results of plants grown at 6°C for 7 weeks, then transferred to 24°C. Values are the
means (+ SE) of three replicates, each with four plants (Sensteby & Heide, 2009).

freely at growth temperatures up to approximately 27°C with a broad temperature
optimum in the mid-20°C range. The reduced flowering observed at low temperature was
attributed to the effect of a reduction in the number of lateral buds that developed into
flower-bearing shoots exposed to low temperatures, resulting in typical tip flowering.
Aside from being consistent with the earlier mentioned role of leaves in supplying the
plant with sufficient amounts of assimilates for flowering, these may also explain the
non-occurrence of the problem of buds with deep endodormancy among roscleaf

raspberry plants.

Exptl esp

4
;
i

on 12 IS mo oo
Temperate
Figure 6. Effects of temperature and daylength on the total number of flowers per plant
(Panel A), and the number of dormant buds per plant (Panel B) in R. idaeus plants
of an annual bearing variety. Columns to the left in cach Panel represent the results
of plants grown at 6°C for 7 weeks, then transferred to 24°C. Values are the means
( SE) of three replicates, each with four plants (Sonsteby & Heide, 2009).

Figure 7.

R. idaeus plants of an annual bearing variety after 7 weeks of cultivation
under short day (A) or long day conditions (B) and a range of temperatures, as
indicated. Inserted are close-ups of the shoot tips of plants grown at 24°C
under short day (C) and long day (D) conditions. Note the termination of
growth by a terminal flower (D) (Sensteby & Heide, 2009).

19

The supply of carbohydrates to plant apices has been proposed to play a role in
the formation of reproductive structures in plants (Taiz & Zeiger, 2006). In most fruit
trees, plant carbohydrate status is associated with flower bud formation (Pescie, Lovisolo,
Magistris, Strik, & Lépez, 2011). In the model presented by Protacio (2000) on the
flowering of mango, he mentioned that adequate reserves of carbohydrates must be on
hand to support flowering and fruit set. In blueberries, the carbohydrate status of plants
have also been speculated to stimulate floral bud initiation (Pescie et al., 2011). Even in
annual crops such as cauliflower and broccoli, an increase in the carbohydrate content in
the apex of plants has been found to be related to floral induction that is induced by
chilling (Fernandez, Bafién, Franco, Gonzalez, & Martinez, 1997).

In most perennial plants, flowers and fruit are preferentially supplied with
photosynthates followed by the cambial tissue and then the roots. As such, rapid root
growth is not synchronous with fruiting. In raspberry, however, the start of starch
accumulation and the period of root growth acceleration occurs during the flowering and
fruiting period (Femandez & Pritts, 1994, 1996). A study by Oliveira et al. (2007)
showed that annual-fruiting R. idaeus has two stages of plant development in which
different carbohydrate assimilation patterns occur. The first stage begins at the start of
cane development to the onset of flowering (vegetative phase). Here, the meristematic
growing points are the primary sinks with starch being mobilized from the root system. In
the second stage, from the onset of flowering onward (fruiting phase), two new processes
compete for assimilates: fruiting and root carbohydrate storage. Results of an earlier

study by Oliveira et al. (2004) suggested that raspberry is a source-limited plant and that

20

the fruit might be a weaker sink compared to the root system. They mentioned also the
possibility that during its first years, raspberry plants favor vegetative growth - which
includes propagation via root suckers - over fruiting, and that it takes several years before
more resources are shifted to seed production (Oliveira et al., 2004; Whitney, 1982). In
addition, Prasad et al. (2008) mentioned that under mild drought stress, the pattern of
resource allocation in plants generally favors root growth rather than shoot growth and
that if drought stress occurs during early vegetative growth stages, there is a shift of
Partitioning toward roots rather than shoots. It is very likely that this competition posed
by roots during the period of flower and fruit development plays a major role in the
failure of roseleaf raspberry plants to bear fruits in low-elevation areas.

Farrar & Jones (2000) discussed in their review the hypothesis that carbon
acquisition by the roots of plants is controlled by a range of variables distributed between
root and shoot. Among which is the pressure flow of carbon sources as driven by the
gradients of turgor pressure between source and sink tissues. It may be possible that for
the competition for assimilates during the fruiting phase of raspberry plants to favor the
development of flowers and fruits certain factors that can lower the demand of roots for
photosynthates and at the same time promote sink activity among shoot meristematic
tissues should be present. A likely candidate for this case is low temperature.

Exposure of root sink tissues to low temperatures can reduce the export of
assimilates from source leaves (Farrar & Jones, 2000; Minchin, Farrar, & Thorpe, 1994;
Plum, Farrar, & Stirling, 1996). This allows assimilates to be more accessible to nearby

shoot meristems. In addition, for cold-adapted plants such as raspberries, chilling injuries

21

caused by exposure to temperatures as low as 10 to 15°C are avoided through a variety of
mechanisms. One of which is the accumulation of sugars. Sugars and some of the cold-
induced proteins are suspected to have cryoprotective effects; they stabilize proteins and
membranes during dehydration induced by low temperature, Sucrose predominates
among the soluble sugars associated with freezing tolerance that function in a colligative
fashion, but in some species raffinose, fructans, sorbitol, or mannitol serves the same
function (Taiz & Zeiger, 2006). In cold hardy R. idaeus species, falling temperatures in
autumn cause an increased accumulation of sucrose and other soluble carbohydrates in
buds and canes along with a simultaneous decrease in starch (Palonen, 1999). Palonen et
al. (2000) demonstrated that the accumulation of soluble carbohydrates, especially
sucrose, was necessary for the cold acclimation of raspberry plants. They also mentioned
the correlation of cold hardiness of various fruit crops with the accumulation of soluble
carbohydrates. In the case of roseleaf raspberry plants grown in Dolores, Quezon, it is
possible that this accumulation occurs during the relatively cold months of December and
January such that peak fruiting happens during March and April.

Still, however, starch storage by the roots is a necessary process to support the
development of shoots for the next production season (Alvarado, Darnell, & Williamson,

2005; Fernandez & Pritts, 1996).

22

The Problem of Warm Climates — Heat Stress and Other Related
Abiotic Stresses Affecting Flowering and Fruit Set

In the earlier section, it was shown that annual fruiting raspberry (R. idaeus)
plants grow best at temperatures within the mid 20°C range and that growing
temperatures exceeding 27°C may have a negative effect on the plant’s growth and
development (Carew et al., 2003; Sonsteby & Heide, 2009). It was also discussed how
carbohydrate levels in the raspberry plant are important in flower and fruit production
(Oliveira et al., 2004, 2007). This section discusses how high temperatures — and other
closely-related abiotic stresses — can affect the carbohydrate content of raspberry plants.

Heat stress is often defined as the rise in temperature beyond a threshold level for
a period of time sufficient to cause irreversible damage to plant growth and development.
It is a complex function of intensity (temperature in degrees), duration of exposure, and
rate of increase in temperature. A heat stress threshold temperature refers to a value of
daily mean temperature at which a detectable reduction in growth begins. Under such
conditions plants tend to divert resources to cope with the heat stress and thus limited
photosynthates would be available for reproductive development (Wahid, Gelani, Ashraf,
& Foolad, 2007). For raspberries, it has been variously reported that 27°C (Carew et al.,
2003; Sensteby & Heide, 2009) or 43.7°C (Molina-Bravo et al., 2011) could be the point
at which photosynthetic activities in Rubus plants are irreversibly damaged.

The early seedling stages, flowering and early seed-filling are considerably the
plant developmental stages most sensitive to both heat and drought stress (Prasad et al.,

2008). Photosynthesis, on the other hand, is considered as the physiological process most

23

sensitive to high temperatures. Cool season crops usually have a lower threshold level
than crops grown in warm climates. Heat stress injuries eventually lead to starvation,
inhibition of growth, reduced ion flux and the production of toxic compounds and
reactive oxygen species (ROS). The presence of abiotic stresses such as drought and heat
can decrease the availability of nitrogen as well as plant nitrogen uptake, leaf nitrogen,
and activities of nitrogen assimilatory enzymes namely, nitrate reductase and glutamine
synthetase. These two enzymes are involved in assimilating intracellular ammonium into
organic compounds. Nitrate reductase also plays an important role in regulating nitrogen
metabolism. Changes in the activities of these enzymes could be a result of changes in
amino acid composition as altered by drought, heat, or the combination of drought and
heat. On the other hand, proteolytic enzyme activity which is commonly associated with
senescence can increase under heat stress, particularly in mature leaves.

Stomatal conductance and net photosynthesis are inhibited by moderate heat
stress in many plant species due to decreases in the activation state of the enzyme
Ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (Rubisco) (Wahid et al., 2007). As a
Cs plant species, the photosynthetic activity of R. rosifolius is highly dependent on the
activity of Rubisco which is responsible for catalyzing the carboxylation reaction
between carbon dioxide (CO2) and ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate (RuBP), the first stage of
the Calvin cycle. However, Rubisco may also act as an oxygenase such that the reaction
it catalyzes results in the process known as photorespiration. This process results in the
loss of fixed carbon as it works in a diametrically opposite direction with photosynthesis.

Though carboxylation reactions in air can outrun oxygenation by a ratio of three to one,

24

environmental variables such as high temperature and drought can result in an increase in
the oxygenase reaction. This in tum decreases CO; assimilation in plants (Raines, 2011;
Taiz & Zeiger, 2006).

The carboxylation capacity of RuBisCO is a major factor in the photosynthetic
response of plants to varying degrees of light exposure. The rate of photosynthesis
increases as more light gets absorbed by leaves but only up to a particular degree. At a
certain point, leaves become saturated and the photosynthetic response starts to plateau

(Figure 8). Leaves of most plants can be saturated at photon fluxes between 500 and 1000

2

pmol m® s“!. Raspberries are known to get saturated at irradiance levels >600 pmol m™
2.5"! (Percival et al., 1996). However, under full sunlight, photon flux is about 2000 mol

m? st.

25

Light
limited CO, limited

20$— —*e

Light compensation point
(COp uptake = CO} evolution)

Dark respiration rate

Photosynthetic COz assimilation (mol m 2s })

0 200 «400 «= 600-= «800-1000
Absorbed light (smo! m-25-!)

Figure 8. Response of photosynthesis to light in a C; plant. The light compensation
point is reached when photosynthetic CO? assimilation equals the amount of
CO? evolved by respiration. Increasing light above the light compensation
point proportionally increases photosynthesis indicating that photosynthesis is
limited by the rate of electron transport, which in turn is limited by the amount
of available light. Further increases in photosynthesis are eventually limited
by the carboxylation capacity of Rubisco. This part of the curve is referred to
as CO; limited (Taiz & Zeiger, 2006).


26

As excessive heat can be damaging to plants, exposure to light intensities greater
than what the plant can handle can lead to a complex set of molecular processes which
inhibit photosynthetic activity known as photoinhibition. Though reversible in its early
stages, photoinhibition can cause damages especially to the photosystem II (PSII)
reaction center complex. To keep photosynthetic activities going, new proteins are
synthesized to replace the ones damaged. If prolonged, this condition can result in stunted
growth and poor development of plants as most carbohydrate reserves are spent
mitigating the impact of a stressful environment (Taiz & Zeiger, 2006). Farmers in
Kinabuhayan, Dolores, Quezon observed that roseleaf raspberry plants growing under
direct full sunlight were relatively shorter with leaves that were a paler shade of green as
compared with plants under partial shading. High irradiance stress can also be associated
with the observation in a few areas in Tagaytay City, Cavite where roseleaf raspberry
plants grown under full sunlight form flowers but fail to bear fruits. Kémer (2007)
explains that under clear-sky conditions, solar radiation increases with altitude because of
increased transmissivity with altitude. However, the dose of radiation reaching the soil
surface can be reduced by the presence of clouds and fog, both of which often increase
with altitude.

Though its biological role is currently unknown, there have been studies that
showed evidence of photorespiration’s role in protecting C; plants from photoinhibition
and excessive photooxidation. Wingler et al. (2000) explained that during
photorespiration, carbon dioxide (CO2) and ammonia (NH3) are produced and energy in

the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is consumed, thus making it a wasteful

27

process. However, because of this inefficiency, photorespiration could serve as an energy
sink preventing the overreduction of the photosynthetic electron transport chain and
photoinhibition, especially under stress conditions that lead to reduced rates of
photosynthetic CO. assimilation. They further explained that photorespiration provides
metabolites for other metabolic processes, e.g. glycine for the synthesis of glutathione,
which is also involved in stress protection. On the other hand, Kozaki & Takeba (1996)
were able to demonstrate that plants having an improved capacity for photorespiration
had a higher tolerance to high light intensities capable of damaging the photosynthetic
apparatus of the plant. Still however, the fact that photorespiration can reduce the plant’s
photosynthetic ability makes it a liability for improving flower and fruit development.

As the amount of light received by the plant can greatly affect photosynthetic
activity of leaves, plants have certain adaptations to thrive in either sunny or shady
conditions. Plants that are adapted to very sunny environments are often characterized by
thicker leaves that are positioned at steep angles, with smaller leaf area, longer palisade
cells, higher cutin, lipid and starch contents, higher dry weights per leaf and leaf area
unit, higher chlorophyll and carotenoid contents, higher stomata density, greater number
of chloroplasts, higher chlorophyll a/b ratios, a higher level of soluble carbohydrates,
higher respiration rates, and greater efficiency in photosynthetic quantum conversion than
shade leaves (Lichtenthaler et al., 1981; Taiz & Zeiger, 2006; Valladares & Pearcy,
1997).

Expression of heat shock proteins (HSPs) is known to be an important adaptive

strategy in this regard. This unique set of proteins is produced by plants in response to a

28

sudden rise in temperature (5-10°C). HSPs act as molecular chaperones and serve to
attain a proper folding of misfolded, aggregated proteins and to prevent misfolding of
proteins as a consequence of heat stress. This facilitates proper cell functioning at
elevated, stressful temperatures. The tolerance conferred by HSPs results in improved
physiological phenomena such as photosynthesis, assimilate partitioning, water and
nutrient use efficiency, and membrane stability. Another key adaptive mechanism against
extreme temperatures and other abiotic stresses is the accumulation of certain organic
compounds of low molecular mass, generally referred to as compatible osmolytes (or
compatible solutes). Plant species shown to have a high capacity for accumulation of
these compounds have been shown to have an increased heat tolerance (Taiz & Zeiger,
2006; Wahid et al., 2007).

Another effect of heat stress in many plant species is induced sterility when heat
is imposed immediately before or during anthesis. Prasad et al. (2008) mentioned that a
lowered seed-set under heat stress can be caused either by poor anther dehiscence, hence
low numbers of germinating pollen grains on the stigma or by decreased pollen viability
or ovule function. Though both microsporogenesis (pollen development) and
megasporogenesis (stigma development) are injured under heat stress, pollen is known to
be relatively more sensitive to heat stress conditions. As vegetative plant parts can
acclimate to stress either by production of osmolytes and heat shock protein or by
regulation of growth, reproductive organs, particularly pollen and stigma, do not have the

potential to acclimate because of their inability to produce heat shock proteins or other

29

types of osmolytes that can either provide protection or increase acclimation potential of
these organs.

One of the mechanisms by which C; plants maintain temperatures below
damaging levels is through evaporative cooling. Heat stress is often associated with high
vapor pressure deficit, which increases the loss of water from the leaves. Plants will
transpire more to keep the canopy cool; this cooling is only effective in the presence of
water, When not irrigated, leaf temperature of these plants can readily rise 4 to 5°C above
ambient air temperature in bright sunlight near midday, when soil water deficit causes
partial stomatal closure or when high relative humidity reduces the potential for

evaporative cooling. (Prasad et al., 2008; Shah et al., 2011; Taiz & Zeiger, 2006).

Producing Raspberry Fruits in Low Elevation Areas - Shade Provision,
Nitrogen Supplementation and Hormone Manipulation as Possible
Interventions for Improving Flowering and Fruit Set

From the previous sections, it was discussed how certain factors such as
carbohydrate source limitation due to abiotic stresses and the competition of plant organs
for assimilates may cause the failure of roseleaf raspberry plants to bear fruit in low
elevation areas. Based on these discussions, it may be possible that for flowering and fruit
set of roseleaf raspberry to be improved, treatments favoring carbohydrate generation by
the enhancement of photosynthetic activity before the expected period of flower

production and those that can increase the sink strength of developing flowers and fruits

30

together with a sufficient supply of water and nutrients to support the growth and
development of tissues and abiotic stress alleviation.

Two of the main sources of heat from the environment are the sun and heated air
(Knochel, 1974). Heat is transferred by electromagnetic waves from the sun (radiation) or
by convection and conduction through objects hotter than the plant body. This heat can
be lessened by reducing the amount of radiation the plants receive by controlling the
degree of exposure to sunlight. This has been done in shading experiments to reduce the
impact of solar radiation on fruit and field crops (Fischer, 1985; Gindaba & Wand, 2005;
Iglesias & Alegre, 2006). This mechanism has also been considered in breeding heat
tolerant rice varieties. Rice plants with panicles surrounded by many leaves can withstand
high temperature stress, as shading by the leaves prevents evaporation from the anther
and increases transpirational cooling (Shah et al., 2011).

‘Nitrogen and potassium are the most important nutrients for raspberries, as its
demands for these two are greatest among all other nutrients. Nitrogen has been known to
stimulate vegetative growth while potassium has been related to plant yield, increase in
resistance to drought and the improvement of winter hardiness (Buskiené & Uselis,
2008). Protacio (2000) discussed the importance of high nitrogen content in the leaves of
fruit crops to flowering. Exogenous foliar application of nitrogen in the form of KNO;
was suggested to activate quiescent buds for floral initiation. Nitrate has also been noted
to have a dormancy breaking effect particularly in flower buds (Yeshitela, Robbertse, &
Stassen, 2005). This effect has been linked to the increased amounts of polyamines in the

leaves of mango trees. These are compounds with growth regulator properties essential

31

for cell division and are postulated to be involved in the flower initiation and
development process of plants as well.

In relation to carbohydrate partitioning, Boussadia et al. (2010) mentioned that
deficiencies in nitrogen induce sink limitation within the whole plant due to decreased
growth which leads, in turn, to feedback down-regulation of photosynthesis. They also
mentioned that when plants sense a scarcity in mineral nutrients, they often allocate a
higher proportion of their biomass to the root system. In addition, nitrogen deficiency has
been found to be associated with pistil abortion in olive plants, highlighting the need for
nitrogen during flowering.

In raspberries, nitrogen supplementation has been found to increase net
photosynthesis and in tum, increase dry matter production whether applied as nitrate
(NO3)) or ammonium (NH,") (Claussen & Lenz, 1999). Ariz et al. (2010) have shown
that supplementation with high NH," could lessen the need for photoprotection in pea
plants grown under high irradiation. The plants were found to have been able to
acclimatize to high light intensities when supplied with NH4* as evidenced by indicators
such as thickening of leaves and high chlorophyll a/b ratio (Ariz et al., 2010). At the
molecular or cellular level, Prasad et al. (2008) explains that the photosynthetic capacity
of plants is closely associated with leaf nitrogen. In plants, carbon and nitrogen
assimilation are coupled in plant metabolism, and the limitation of photosynthesis and
growth by the interaction of stress factors such as drought and heat might be associated

with an alteration of nitrogen levels and its availability.

32

Gibberellic acid (GA) has been known to improve fruit set in various crop species
such as cranberry, blueberry, strawberry, tomato, grape, mandarin, loquat, apple and pear
(Casanova, Casanova, Moret, & Agusti, 2009; Crane, 1969; Fos, Nuez, & Garcia-
Martinez, 2000; Hayashi, Naito, Bukovac, & Sell, 1968; Mesejo, Reig, Martinez-Fuentes,
& Agusti, 2010; Talon, Zacarias, & Primo-Millo, 1992). On the other hand, increased
levels of GA in the shoot tip has been reported by Vasilakakis et al. (1979) to be
associated with flower induction in annual fruiting R. idaeus. Furthermore, their
experiments have shown that GA activity is higher when plants are induced to flower via
cold treatment and are more mature (20-node stage vs. 10-node stage). A study by
Palonen & Mouhu (2009) supported this by showing that application of prohexadione-
calcium, a gibberellin biosynthesis inhibitor, significantly reduced the number of flowers
in red raspberries. GAs have long been implicated in the control of flowering time and
vernalization based on the fact that GA treatments can induce flowering and overcome
the vernalization requirement in cold-requiring species (Lang, 1957; Rappaport &
Bonner, 1960). Similarities in the effect of vernalizing temperatures and gibberellin
application was also shown by Fernandez, Bafién, Franco, Gonzalez, & Martinez (1997)
on the curd formation of cauliflower. Their experiments showed that both factors
increased the availability of carbohydrates to the apex, favoring the early development of
the curd. They suggested that the effect of temperature was to restrain the activity of
other sinks (e.g. new leaves) close to the apex, allowing carbohydrates to accumulate in
the apex. Gibberellin application, on the other hand, can hasten the sink activity in the

organs where it is applied. They explained that the mechanism of gibberellins is to

33

restrain or stop the initiation of new leaves by accumulating carbohydrates in existing
leaves and in the stem.

Exogenous applications of gibberellins on fruit crops, on the other hand, have also
been proven to significantly increase the sink demand which in turn caused an increase in
sink strength resulting to higher uptake of soluble sugars, high fructose and glucose
concentrations within the fruit and larger fruits. This was shown to be closely related to
the increased activities of cell wall-bound invertase, neutral invertase and NAD-
dependent sorbitol dehydrogenase in the fruit during rapid fruit growth (Casanova et al.,
2009; Zhang, Tanabe, Tamura, Itai, & Yoshida, 2007).

Iqbal et al. (2011), in their discussion on the role of GA3 on photosynthesis,
mentioned that plants treated with GA have been shown to have more soluble
carbohydrates than non-treated ones, They explained that GA; enhances source and sink
potential through increasing photosynthetic enzymes, increasing leaf area for higher
interception of photosynthetically active radiation and enhancing nutrient use efficiency,
particularly the use of nitrogen. Further, they also mentioned that GA; activates sucrose
phosphate synthase (SPS) resulting in sucrose formation. The sucrose is then loaded into
the phloem and is acted upon by invertase before being unloaded into the sink. This
whole process of phloem loading and unloading (assimilate partitioning) is said to be

under the control of GA (Figure 9).

Figure 9.

Sieve eement

Ow

SPs

Gibbe-ctin. }-—> Cel expansion

<

Sucrose batraceths os - Giecose.
rwverlase ‘ecove

Sink

34

WS si
= Sink gene

IC
Bhotosyn gere]

Catt eye gere,

ea

Phloem loading in sieve element and apoplastic phloem unloading mediated
by regulation of extracellular invertase. Sucrose is loaded into the sieve
element by proton sucrose co-transport and the apoplastic unloading occurs by
the action of extracellular invertase on sucrose to form hexose. Hexose is
transported through hexose transportor. TP, Transportor; SPS, Suctose
phosphate synthase; Comp cell, Companion cell; Photosyn., Photosynthetic;
+, Positive effect; -, Negative effect. (Iqbal et al., 2011).


MATERIALS AND METHODS,

Time and Place of Study

The study was conducted in a 8m x 12m open area at the orchard of the College
of Agriculture - Crop Science Cluster, University of the Philippines Los Bafios, Laguna
(elevation: 31masl, latitude: N14°09°42.0”; longitude: E121°14’58.8") and at Bangkong
Kahoy Valley, Kinabuhayan, municipality of Dolores, Quezon province (elevation:
774masl; latitude: N14°03"12.5”; longitude: E121°27°11.1") (Figure 10). The duration of
the study was originally set from September 2013 to February 2014 so as to end during
the peak fruiting season of roseleaf raspberry. However, observations were extended until

April 2014 due to the late fruiting exhibited by the test plants at the Los Bajios site.

Figure 10. Map showing location of and distance between the two experiment sites, UP
Los Bafios and Bangkong Kahoy, Dolores, Quezon.


36

Plant Establishment and Cultural Management

Suckers of roseleaf raspberry plants grown in Bangkong Kahoy, Kinabuhayan,
Dolores, Quezon were used as test plants. As it was not possible to determine the exact
age of the suckers, a height:age ratio estimate of experienced farmers was used to select
plants that were capable of flowering. According to them, plants as short as 1.5 ft (45 cm)
are sure to bear fruits when the season comes. All suckers obtained for the experiment
were around this height, and were estimated to be 4-5 months old. Only suckers without
lateral branches and with 7-9 leaves were obtained.

The suckers selected were transplanted to 4.5” x 6” seedling bags using the soil
from which the plants were obtained as potting medium. The newly transplanted plants
were allowed to grow in Bangkong Kahoy for about a month to allow them to recover
from shock before subjecting them to the different treatments (Figure 11).

At the end of the recovery period, differences in leaf and branch numbers, as well
as heights among the plants were observed and noted. To minimize possible contribution
to experimental error due to the initial state of the experimental plants, local control was
done by identifying the characteristics which varied among the plants and then randomly
distributing the experimental plants to the different treatment levels. Regardless of the
treatment, irrigation was done every other day during the recovery period and then three
times a week from the start of treatment implementation until termination in low

elevation while irrigation was left to the farmer’s practice in medium elevation.

37

Experimental Treatments and Design

The study plants were subjected to three experimental variables: elevation

(medium and low); urea application (high, low and none); and, shade provision (high,

low and none). The experiment was laid out in a three-factor completely randomized

design. The factors were elevation, shade and urea concentration. The experimental units

were completely randomized between the low and medium elevation. All in all, there

were ten treatment levels in the experiment (Table 1).

Table 1. Experimental variables and treatments for determining the optimum levels of
nitrogen supplementation and shade provision for roseleaf raspberry fruit

production.
Elevation Shade Nitrogen ‘Abbreviation
supplementation
Control ‘Medium Open area in Og urea/IL dH20 M
elevation Bangkong
(774 masl) Kahoy
Treatments Lowelevation Double shade 10g urea/IL dH20 (1%) L-ss-1
@imasl) net (80%) 5g urea/IL dH20 (0.5%) L-ss-0.5
Og urea/IL dH20 (0%) L-ss-0
Single shade 10g urea/IL dH20 (1%)
net (40%) 5g urea/IL dH20 (0.5%)
Og urea/IL dH20 (0%)
No shade 10g urea/IL dH20 (1%)

5g urea/IL dH20 (0.5%)
Og urea/IL dH20 (0%)


38

Imposition of Treatments

Elevation

Plants that were grown at medium elevation were set up in an open area near
hedges of the roseleaf raspberries in a farm in Bangkong Kahoy, Kinabuhayan, Dolores
Quezon. This treatment level served as the positive control. The rest of the plants were
grown at low elevation. Upon transferring from medium to low elevation, the plants were
first maintained under full shade for 1 week so as to acclimatize to the change in
temperature before the imposition of the treatments (Figure 11).

Shading

A net (17 by 19 mesh) was used to provide plants with shade. Light meter
measurements showed that a single layer can reduce irradiance by 40% (43). There were
three shade levels: with no shade, low shade level, and high shade level. The low shade
level of 40% shading was attained by a single layer of shade net spread as roofing over
the plants, The high shade level (80%) was achieved with a double layer of the net.

Plants were set up in an open area where no additional shading from trees and
other tall structures could affect the plants for most of the day. For both high and low
shade levels, the nets were spread about a foot above the plants. The nets screened off

direct sunlight from the plants from around 8:00AM until around 4:30PM (Figure 11).

39

Figure 11. Field set up in medium elevation after transplanting (top left), during
experiment observation (top right), in low elevation area right after
transporting from medium elevation (bottom left) and after treatment
implementation (bottom right).

Urea application

Recognizing its advantages in terms of rapid and efficient response to plant needs,
lower product volume requirement, and independence of soil conditions, foliar
application of nitrogen supplement was done.

A high penetration rate is one of the prerequisites for efficient foliar nutrition.
Thus urea (NH2CONH2) was used for the treatment due to its intrinsic characteristics

such as small molecular size, non-ionic nature and high solubility, allowing it to be taken

40

up rapidly through the leaf cuticle (Yildirim, Guvenc, Turan, & Karatas, 2007). Urea
solutions with concentrations of 1.0% (10g urea/IL dH20), 0.5% (5g urea/IL dH20) and
0% (0g urea/1L dH20) were made with distilled water containing 0.2% Tween 20 as
surfactant were applied as foliar spray at the start of the experiment and at the time of

appearance of the first flower buds.

Data Gathered

Environmental conditions

Data on atmospheric temperature, humidity, light amount, daylength and total
rainfall were measured once a week from both experiment sites (Bangkong Kahoy and
UPLB). A Cole-Parmer” thermo-hygrometer (model: 8711) was used to monitor
atmospheric temperatures and relative humidity at four periods: peak high (12:00NN),
peak low (4:00AM) and in between each peak (8:00AM and 8:00PM). Light amount was
measured in terms of photosynthetic photon flux using a LI-COR brand light meter
(model: LI-250A) with a quantum sensor (model: LI-190) positioned at the top of the
plant canopy at three periods: morning (8:00AM) noon (12:00NN) and afternoon (4:00).
The total rainfall reading was obtained at 8:00AM daily.

Windspeed was not originally among the parameters to be measured but during
typhoon Yolanda (Haiyan), the wind speed observed at the two sites was found to be very
different. Using a handheld anemometer, windspeed was measured weekly starting

December 2013.

41

Phenological development

From each treatment level and the control, ten (10) plants were observed of their
phenological behavior (10 plants x 10 treatment levels = 100 plants). Each plant served as
a replicate. The phenological growth stages (Appendix 1) was monitored on a weekly
basis using the Biologische Bundesanstalt, Bundessortenamt and Chemical industry
(BBCH) scale for raspberries (Schmid, Héhn, Graf, & Hépli, 2001).

Plant growth

In addition to the occurrence of phenological stages, plant growth parameters
from 8 surviving plants per treatment level and the control were measured weekly. For
the number of flowers and fruits, 19 plants per treatment level were considered.

Plant height. The height was measured from the bottom of the plant bag to the tip
of the terminal bud.

Stem diameter. Stem diameter was obtained at about 3 mm below the lowest node
of the main stem.

Number of lateral branches per plant.

Leaf number per plant. Only fully expanded leaves were counted.

Number of flowers per plant. A separate count was done for flower buds and
opened flowers. Flowers with faded petals were considered in the counting as long as
necrosis has not set in.

‘Number of fruits per plant. A separate count was done for unripe and ripe fruits.

42

Nitrogen status

Measuring the chlorophyll content of the leaves of plants is one of the possible
ways to estimate the nitrogen status of the crop (Bullock & Anderson, 1998; Follett,
Follett, & Halvorson, 1992; Gholizadeh, Amin, Anuar, & Aimrun, 2009). A portable
chlorophyll meter (Konica Minolta SPAD-502 Plus) was used to measure leaf greenness
or relative chlorophyll content of the leaves. Chlorophyll readings were taken at a weekly
interval from the youngest fully expanded leaf of ten (10) plants from each treatment
level and from the control.

Leaf area

The leaf area of five fully expanded leaves from three (3) plants from each
treatment level was measured at the start of the experiment, during the first open flower
stage and at late fruiting stage using the following formula:

Leaf area (cm?) = 0.56 + 0.717 LW.

where L and W is the length and width, respectively, of the central leaflet of the
youngest fully open leaf (Fascella, Darwich, & Rouphael, 2013; Rouphael et al., 2010).

Plant carbohydrate content

Three (3) whole plant samples were obtained at the start of the experiment and
another three samples from each treatment level and the control at the first open flower
stage and at late fruiting stage (3 plants x 10 treatment levels x 3 sampling periods = 90
plant samples). These samples were brought to a tissue analysis laboratory based in IRRI

for monitoring of the starch contents of the roots, stems, leaves and flowers of the plants.

43

Starch assay was determined by iodine potassium-iodide reaction with 0.7M perchloric
acid (Oliveira, et al. 2007).

Dry weight

Three (3) whole plant samples were obtained at the start of the experiment and
another three samples from each treatment level and the control at the first open flower
stage and at late fruiting stage (3 plants x 10 treatment levels x 3 sampling times = 90
plant samples). Plant samples were oven-dried at 70°C for 2 days (Palonen & Mouhu,
2009).

Floral biology and pollen germinability

Flowerbuds of plants at both elevations were tagged at BBCH stage 59 for
observing floral biology. The tagged flowerbuds were observed twice (morning and
afternoon) daily from bud opening until the stigma and stamens dried up.

The flowerbuds at medium elevation were used for observing pollen grain
germination as well. Anthers were taken from randomly selected flowers at four different
stages: half-open stage (petals cupped, anthers compact), early open stage (petals fully
open, filaments elongating and separating from the center), mid open stage (50% anthers
turning brown) and late open stage (90% anthers turning brown). These were collected in
Petri dish plates containing a medium consisting of 10% sucrose, 0.01% boric acid and
1.2% agar (Sharafi, 2010). A Dino-Lite Digital Microscope was used to measure and
photograph the pollen germination percentage & pollen tube length in four (4)
randomized selected spots at two (2) hours after inoculation. A spot is an area on the agar

surface that can be viewed within the limits of the microscope at 210x magnification. A

44

pollen grain was considered germinated when its pollen tube's length was more than the

grain diameter.

Data Analysis

Analysis of variance and comparison of treatment means were done to determine
the treatment combination/s that yielded significantly different results.

To determine if there are any significant differences between the responses in the
low and medium elevations, spherecity tests, tests of means, orthogonal contrasts and
pairwise mean comparisons were done. Analysis was carried out using the Statistical

Analyses System (SAS) software.

RESULTS

Description of the Environmental Conditions in Low and Medium Elevation

Temperature

Medium elevation temperatures were consistently lower than low elevation
temperatures from October 2013 to February 2014. The largest observed temperature
difference of 9.3°C between the two elevations was observed in the second week of
February. The month of January was observed to be the coolest during the observation
period. Compared to the five-month averages (20.8°C at medium elevation and 26.1°C at
low elevation), average weekly temperatures in both elevations were 2°C lower in
January (18.2°C at medium elevation and 24.0°C at low elevation). January night time
average temperature, on the other hand, was 15.8°C and 21.5°C at medium and low

elevation, respectively (Figure 12).

Rainfall

Rainfall was consistently higher at medium elevation compared to that at low
elevation, In both sites, the highest total weekly rainfall was observed in the first week of
November. This was the week that typhoon Yolanda (Haiyan) hit the Philippines. In the
weeks that followed, the amount of rainfall slowly decreased with each week in both
sites, From the first week of January onwards, there was little or no rain at low elevation

(Figure 12).

46

—— Medium elevation Medium elevation (day) - ~~ Medium elevation (night)
——Lowelevation Low elevation (day) === Low elevation (night)

350
300 |
250
200
150

Ralnfall (mm)

100

50

——Medium elevation ———Low elevation

Figure 12, Weekly average temperatures (top) and total weekly rainfall at medium and low
elevations (bottom).

47

Relative humidity

Relative humidity was higher at medium elevation for most of the weekly
observations, especially with daytime observations in the first week of November, third
week of December, and third week of February. Wide variations in night versus day
observations were particularly observed during the fourth week of December up to the
first week of January, and the first, second and last weeks of February. The 5-month
average relative humidity was 83.6% at medium elevation, and 74.6% at low elevation.
This may most probably be associated with the low temperature readings observed at
medium elevation as cool air has the potential to hold less water than warm air. Given the
formula for relative humidity (R.H. = [amount of moisture/maximum amount that could
be contained] x 100%), high RH readings will result from cool air than warm air given
the same moisture level (Lawrence, 2005). Other possible factors for the higher average
relative humidity at medium elevation are the amount of rainfall and fog presence.
Several highs and lows were observed in both sites especially for daytime observations.
A noticeable drop in humidity, particularly with daytime observations, was observed at
both sites on the second week of January (Figure 13). This may most likely be associated
with the drop of temperature in January which would have decreased the maximum

potential of air at low elevation to hold water vapor.

48

1000
30.0
80.0
700

60.0
50.0
400
300

Relative Humidity (%)

200
100
00
od

oS OP Rae ee * PS oP o® 9 Pes Rie
Fes Ve S ve ne WO MS ee

——=Medium elevation Medium elevation (day) - -- Medium elevation (night)

——Low elevation Low elevation (day) ~~~ Low elevation (night)

Figure 13. Average weekly relative humidity.

Wind speed

Wind speed was significantly stronger at medium elevation particularly on the
third week of December, the second and third weeks of January, and the third week of
February. The location of the site at medium elevation between two mountains also
influenced wind speed. As winds passed through the more constricted space between the
mountains, the Venturi or Bernoulli effect caused wind velocities to increase sharply
(Whiteman, 2000). In both sites, the strongest winds were observed in the middle of

January (Figure 14).

49

25

20

15

10

Windspeed (kph)

——Medium elevation ——~Low elevation

Figure 14, Average wind speed at low and medium elevations.

Trradiance levels

The observed patterns of irradiance were not actually comparable at low and
medium elevation areas as weekly readings were obtained on different days. Even then,
pairwise comparison of mean irradiance levels received at the canopy level of plants at
medium elevation and low elevation (without shading) showed no significant differences
except in the second week of November wherein irradiance levels were higher at medium
elevation, and in the second week of February wherein they were higher at low elevation.
The significant variations during these weeks were attributed to differences in the degree
of cloudiness at the two areas. For instance, irradiance level at medium elevation was

higher than the observations obtained at low elevation in mid-January. January was one

50

of the most cloud-covered months (4.55 oktas) based on the data provided by the UPLB
Agrometeorology station.

‘At low elevation, the observed irradiance levels received by plants subjected to
different shade levels were consistent with the expectation that light amount will be lower
under shaded conditions. However, pairwise comparisons across shade treatments
showed that only the high shade (80%) level significantly reduced the amount of
irradiance throughout the duration of the experiment especially in the last week of
December and February (Figure 15). Table 2 shows the 5-month irradiance level average

of the three shade levels and the irradiance level at medium elevation.

Table 2. Average irradiance from October 2013 to February 2014.

Treatment level Light amount (mol m
Medium elevation (positive control) 606.11
Low elevation, high shade (80%) 245.76
Low elevation, low shade (40%) 420.98

Low elevation, full sunlight 707.78


Light Amount (umol m” sec)

Ye, %, Ya, “tg Mg, Mee ey

See P § PPA SDS > 8 oe of oo
LOL ELE PES GCE SE EL ES

——Medium Elevation ©——Low Elevation, 80% Shade © ——~Low Elevation, 40% Shade  ———-Low Elevation, Full Sunlight

Figure 15. Average irradiance per week.


52

Morphological Descriptions of Phenological Development and Reproductive Biology
in Relation to Existing Climatic Conditions

Phenological development of roseleaf raspberry

Figure 16 gives a schematic presentation of the stages of the phenological
development of roseleaf raspberry plants over the duration of the study. Vegetative

growth was based on the formation of new leaves and branches.

‘Medium elevation
Low elevation*
‘Medium

Low elevation

Legend:
S| September —_ [ill Period of active leaf and branch production
© | October Occurrence of flower buds
N | November Occurrence of open flowers
© | December Fruit occurrence (unripe only)
1 | January Fruit occurrence (ripe and unripe)
F | February Occurrence of main stem senescence
™ | March Occurrence of suckers
‘| April '» Plants at low elevation had delayed fruit

‘occurrence due to flower abortion

Figure 16. Summary of the phenological development of roseleaf raspberry plants at
medium and low elevations.

53

At the start of the experiment, most plants cither had no branches or had just a few
that were newly emerged (Figure 17). Most of the plants had erect main stems but some
had a horizontal orientation. Branch formation often occurred at the lower nodes but for
plants with main stems oriented horizontally, lateral branches formed even at the middle
and upper nodes. Many of the plants transported to low elevation were damaged at their
tips and leaves mainly because of thoms getting caught in the foliage of neighboring
plants or other objects.

Axillary branches were forming at the nodes even before treatment implementation.
More branches and leaves formed a few days after treatment implementation giving the
plants a fuller appearance. Depending on the amount of rainfall, it was noted that new
leaves appeared from the branches every 1-2 weeks until flower buds formed at the

terminals (Figure 18).

Figure 17. Main stem orientation. Plants used for the experiment were initially erect and
had almost no branches (A). After the recovery period, some plants oriented
themselves horizontally (B).

Week 14

Figure 18. Branch development of medium (left) and low elevation (right) plants from
the first-unfolded-leaf stage of branch development (top) to the 14" week
(bottom) of branch observation. These branches needed to grow at least six
leaves before flower buds (arrow) formed at their terminals.

55

Number of days from branch initiation (BBCH stage 40) to flower formation
(BBCH stage 51) varied across plants, Many early-emerged branches needed to grow at
least six (6) leaves (BBCH stage 46) before a flower bud appeared at their terminals
while some branches, especially those that emerged during the period of profuse

flowering, were able to produce flower buds with as few as three (3) leaves (Figure 19).

Floral biology

Development of flower buds at both elevations was observed to proceed in a
similar manner. A newly emerged flower bud (BBCH stage 51) looked like a very tiny
bulb at the tip of the stem with a liberal amount of trichomes sticking out of its green
covering (sepals). Its peduncle then elongated and the bud enlarged within a week. The
white petals became visible through slits in the covering after about three days. The
sepals soon broke open, exposing the petals (BBCH stage 59). Once the petals were
exposed, it took less than a day before the flower fully opened. It took about two and a
half weeks for a newly emerged bud to develop into a fully open flower (BBCH stage 60)
(Figure 20).

Regardless of elevation, an open flower lasted for three days before it transformed
into either a new fruit or dried up (Figures 21 and 22). Newly opened flowers showed
compact immature anthers which were bent over immature styles, similar to the
observation of McGregor (1976). Anthers were first to mature though not synchronous.

The filaments elongated and bent outward as they matured, exposing the stigmas at the

56

center (Figures 23 and 24). Most of the flowers had cream-colored stigmas while some
appeared pinkish (Figure 25).

Anther dehiscence proceeded from the periphery towards the center. This was
observed as soon as the petals opened and anthers were exposed. Anthers appeared
powdery during pollen shed, though this was difficult to see when the flowers were wet
by rain or dew (Figure 26).

Figure 19, Late-emerged branches of medium (A) and low (B) elevation plants showing
flower bud formation (arrow) with as few as three leaves.

Figure 20. Development from flower bud emergence to a fully open flower. A - First
visible stage (~2mm bud diameter). B - Peduncle becomes elongated after 3-7
days. C - Bud continues to enlarge from around day 8-11. D ~ Slits begin
appearing on days 12-14 (arrow). E — Sepals may break open (arrow) on days
15-18, F — Petals open within a day after sepal opening.


Figure 21. Progression of flower development from bud opening to stamen and style senescence. Sepals (A) and petals (B&C) open on
Day 1. Filament elongation and anther maturity at the periphery may start during the first day (D). This proceeds
centripetally up to the second day (D-G), Nectar feeders (arrow) begin visiting flowers on the second day (E). Most anthers
have senesced by the end of day 2 (F&G), Stigmas may start to appear enlarged by the end of day 2 or at the start of day 3
(G). Petals begin to droop and eventually fall on day 3 (H-J). Fleshy portion at receptacle base becomes more visible (H)
and may appear wet with nectar (arrow). Stigma (I) and filaments (J) dry up by the end of day 3.

59

Figure 22. Floral biology of roseleaf raspberry as observed in both medium and low
elevation.

Figure 23. Parts of an opened roseleaf raspberry flower.

Figure 24. Male and female parts of a roseleaf raspberry flower photographed at 50x
magnification.

Figure 25, Pink coloration (arrow) observed on the stigma of several flowers.

61

DEHISCENT
ANTHERS:

DEHISCEN

ANTHER

Figure 26. Mature anthers appeared powdery (A) as they ruptured and released
pollen grains (B), 210x magnification.

62

Pollen observations

Pollen grains and pollen tubes had a near-transparent appearance such that images
of germinated pollen needed contrast and brightness adjustments for both germinated
pollen grains and tubes to be clearly seen (Figure 27). Pollen grains were also easily
washed off when anthers were wet with rain or dew and were lost before the anthers were
transferred to the agar media. For this reason, germination data from wet anthers were not
considered in the experiment.

At the half-open stage, most anthers have not yet ruptured and the few pollen grains
observed failed to germinate as they were not yet mature. Anthers obtained during the
late open stage, on the other hand, had already lost most of their pollen. Mid open stage
anthers had the highest average number of pollen grains (37.25) and also the highest
germination percentage (88.6%) (Figure 28).

As pollen grains were being shed, the styles grew and the stigmas began to swell.
By the time the stigmas were receptive, most of the pollen have already shed and the

anthers already senesced.

63

Figure 27. Pollen grains at 2 hours after inoculation on agar media from anthers of
medium elevation flowers at varying stages (A - half open; B - early open; C
- mid open, and; D - late open stage). 210x magnification.

° 88.6%

2 40

ees 71.9%

& 30

B25

3 20

ge 27.6%

ial 12.5%

25

0! = soca

half open stage early open stage —smid open stage late open stage

lgerminated  ungerminated

Figure 28, Total number of germinated and ungerminated pollen grains and percent
germination (written above the bars) from flowers of varying stages at medium
elevation.

64

The margin around the receptacles of some flowers was observed to be particularly
moist at different times. McGregor (1976) described the fleshy portion inside the ring of
stamens to be the part of the flower that secretes nectar which attracts a number of
insects. It was noted that pollen feeders such as flea beetles and spiders often visited the
flowers. As anther dehiscence and stigma receptivity of roseleaf raspberry flowers barely
overlapped, these arthropods played a crucial role in the development of roseleaf
raspberry fruits (Figure 29).

As anthers were first to mature, they were the first to senesce as well. Browning
followed right after dehiscence starting from the periphery towards the center. As this
progressed, the petals began to droop and eventually fell. The stigmas and styles were the
last to dry up, leaving a green receptacle. There were, however, some flowers at both
medium and low elevation that were observed to have abnormally small receptacles when
the petals opened. Carpels of these flowers were apparently non-functional as they failed
to produce fruitlets despite having been visited by pollinators (Figure 29).

Successfully fertilized ovaries surrounding the receptacle grew into drupelets. If
all or most ovaries are fertilized, the drupelets would aggregate to form a fruit, each
drupelet holding a single seed (Figures 32 and 33). Ripening duration took around five
weeks before the fruits became ready for harvesting (Figure 30). Ripe fruits readily fell
off the receptacle. Incomplete fertilization of ovaries led to defective fruits. Usually,
these did not fall off easily even when ripe. If none gets fertilized, the entire flower just
dries up. Many fruits that formed at low elevation were of poor quality because of

incomplete setting and other defects (Figures 30 and 37). Also, low elevation plants

65

under full sun, many fruits were formed from flowers that developed under the shade of
the leaves of the same plant or of neighboring plants (Figure 31), often with horizontally

growing basal branches.

Figure 29. Roseleaf raspberry flower visitors and receptacle defect. Bees (A), ants (A
and B), flea beetles (C) and spiders (D) were among the visitors that fed on
roseleaf raspberry flowers' nectar and/or pollen and served as natural agents
of pollination. There were some flowers at both medium and low elevation

with abnormally small receptacles (C, arrow). These flowers did not form

fruits despite being visited by pollinators.

i
i
:

Figure 30. Fruit development duration was around 5 weeks. Ripe fruits normally fell off
easily (bottom left) but defective (incomplete set) fruits (bottom right) remained
attached to the receptacle.


67

Figure 31. Fruits of low elevation plants under full sunlight formed from flowers shaded by
leaves of neighboring plants (A), of the same plant (B) and of both (C).

68

REMNANTS OF
STIGMA AND STYLE

DRUPELETS

NTS OF

REMNANTS OF
STIGMA AND STYLE

SEPAL

DRUPELET

REMNANTS OF

RECEPTACLE < TAMENS:

Figure 32. Parts of an unripe (A) and a ripe (B) fruit. Fertilized ovaries enlarge
into drupelets. These drupelets aggregate to form the fruit. As the
fruit ripens, the receptacle becomes hollow.

Figure 33. A drupelet excised from a ripe roseleaf raspberry fruit
photographed at 60x magnification.

70

Senescence of main stems was observed among low clevation plants starting in
November. This was also exhibited by medium elevation plants starting in the second
half of December (Table 3), Main stem senescence proceeded soon after the apical tip
was done producing flowers and/or fruits. This also occurred when the tip was damaged.
As main stem senescence progressed basipetally, the basal branches were left holding up
green leaves. These basal branches would then grow and become new plants (Figure 34)
It was also observed that the mother plant may also produce new suckers arising from the
roots for self-perpetuation. Occurrence of suckers was not recorded in the experiment but
the first suckers appeared in November and then continued to appear in different plants

across the treatment levels until the end of the experiment (Figure 35).

Table 3. Occurrence of main stem senescence at mid observation period and on the last
day of observation.

Treatment level ‘Number of plants exhibiting main stem senescence (N=11)
Mid observation period Last day of observation
M 2 10
Lss1 5 6
Lss0.5 4 10
Lss0 5 7
Ls! 6 10
130.5 7 1
Ls0 7 10
Lal 7 10
Ln0.5 5 u
Lnd 5
*Legend:
Elevation Shade level Urea level
M - medium ss - 80% 1-1%
L-low s- 40% 0.5 -0.5%

n= no shade / 0-0%
full sunlight

7m

Figure 34. Progression of main stem senescence. Senescence begins at the tip (A) and
proceeds basipetally (B-F) until only the lowest lateral branches are left (G).


72

Figure 35. A whole roseleaf raspberry plant showing a senesced main stem,
replacement canes, profuse roots and formed suckers.

B
Plant Growth and Development Parameters in Determining Successful

Acclimation

Fruit Occurrence

The first fruit among all experimental plants was seen in the first week of
December from a plant grown under full sunlight at low elevation with 0.5% urea foliar
spray (Ln0.5). Though it continued to develop into a ripe fruit, only a few drupelets were
formed on the receptacle. A few more of these isolated occurrences of defective fruiting
were observed on a few plants at low elevation. Most failed to reach the ripe stage.

First fruits of plants at medium elevation were seen in the second week of
December. The average number of fruits that successfully ripened per plant continued to
increase until it peaked at 0.63 ripe fruits per plant in March. Moreover, the highest
number of 2.16 unripe fruits per plant was achieved in the second week of February.

As the number of fruits at medium elevation started to decline (most probably due
to exhausted carbohydrate reserves), fruits began appearing among the plants growing at
low elevation. For this reason, the observation period at low elevation was extended until
the third week of April when the number of fruits at low elevation began to decline.
Except for the two isolated cases of early fruit occurrence, ripe fruits were observed at
low elevation only during this extension period of observation.

The average number of unripe fruits per week was higher at medium elevation than
at low elevation for twelve (12) consecutive weeks and the average number of ripe fruits

per week was higher at medium elevation for 10 consecutive weeks (Figure 36).

14
Moreover, better-quality fruits — e.g., more complete setting, synchronized maturity of
drupelets and fewer damaged drupelets (Figures 37) — distinguished fruits produced at
medium elevation from those produced at low elevation. Out of the total of 68 ripe fruits
produced by experimental plants at medium elevation, only three (3) were defective. At
low elevation, however, plants (without treatment) produced a total of five ripe fruits for
the entire duration of the experiment and only | ripe fruit was not defective.

Interaction between shading and urea levels were found to influence the number of
fruits in certain weeks of observation. Comparison of fruit occurrence showed that low
elevation plants grown under 80% shade with foliar application of 1.0% urea spray had
the highest average number of fruits per week. They reached their peak of fruiting at 2.63
unripe and 1.42 ripe fruits per plant in the third week of March and the second week of
April, respectively. In the second week of March, low elevation plants with shading had
average numbers of unripe fruits that were comparable to those at medium elevation

(Figures 36 and 37).

°

°

Number of unripe fruits per plant

pS SS oD oP ~ F P r F © FS & YD PP »
é PLE EP SEES S PPP POLLS gO 8

Sp Pe gp oe er oo oY we Yo oP >
of Sf ove? PPE PILES oF
OM <M Lssl t= Lss0.5 ee LssO l= Ls1 ate Ls0.5 he LsO —Lnl ee Ln0.5 —Ln0

Figure 36. Average number of unripe (top) and ripe (bottom) fruits per plant per week. Observation period for plants at low elevation
was extended until the third week of April.

Figure 37. Fruit defects. The first ripe fruits formed at low elevation appeared in
December (A) and February (B). Incomplete fruit setting was commonly
observed among fruits produced at low elevation (A, B and C). Drupelet
damage (D) was also frequently observed. In some fruits, drupelet maturity
was not synchronized (C).

16

1

Assessment of total fruit production showed that none of the treatments enabled

low elevation plants to match the total number of normal fruits produced by medium
elevation plants. There were no significant differences in total fruit production of low
elevation plants across urea treatments. The degree of shading, however, caused
significant variation. Plants with 80% shade had the highest total number of normal
fruits. It was noted that low elevation plants under 80% shade did not only produce more
fruits; they also had a higher normal fruit percentage compared to those without shade
and those under 40% shade (Figure 36). The total number of normal fruits of the plants
under 40% shade were not different from those without shade (Figure 38). However, the

interaction between urea and shade levels did not affect the total number of normal fruits.

95.6%

60 56.3%

66.7%

40 42.9%
61.1% 21.4% 41.2%

Number of ripe fruits
iS

11.1%

333% a5
10 z
; = Ee oes
isi

mM Ls Lss0.5_—Lss0 605 Ls0 Ln1— n0.S— Ln

normal fruits defective fruits

Figure 38. Total number of normal and defective ripe fruits from start of observation to.
termination and percent normal fruits (written above the bars). M = medium
elevation; L = low elevation; ss = 80% shade; s = 40% shade; n — no shade; 1 = 1%
urea; 0.5 = 0.5% urea; 0 = 0% urea.


8

Flower Occurrence

Flower buds were first observed in the third week on plants at both low and
medium elevations. Some of these buds were already at their late stage as open flowers
appeared on low elevation plants (without shade) the following week

Plants at medium elevation were not observed to have open flowers until the middle
of November as they were affected by typhoon Yolanda (Haiyan). They continued to
produce flowers afterwards until they reached their peak in the second week of January
(2.26 flower buds and 0.63 open flowers per plant). Average number of buds of medium
elevation plants then became higher than that of untreated low elevation plants in eleven
consecutive weeks from the last week of November to first week of February. The
number of open flowers, on the other hand, was higher from the first week of January to
first week of February.

Number of buds and open flowers at low elevation began to decline after the third
week of November so that plants without shade and nitrogen treatments had no open
flowers from the fourth week of December until the first week of February. However, a
resurgence of flowers was observed among low elevation plants afterwards. Average
number of flowers per week even surpassed that of the medium elevation plants from the
second half of February (number of buds) and the first week of March (number of open

flowers) (Figure 39).

wo

5S

‘Number of flower buds per plant

°

gh oP AP WP ON Ph OD LP De Pe oP ho? 2? oP
PS SESE SSF eee PPS FPS PSPS ee

1s

‘Number of open flowers per plant

oe = . 3 -_ a - ==
LP So PD DDD SS Sw gd OO gr oP oD PP So
POPPE PEEEP PEEP PEEL IEEE GFE
¥

OHM SB Lss1 te Lss0.5 Se Lss0 = Ls1 tr Ls0.5 —e-LsO = Lnd = Ln0.5 Ln

Figure 39. Average number of flower buds (top) and open flowers (bottom) per plant per week. Observation period for plants at low
elevation was extended until the third week of April. M = medium elevation; L = low elevation; ss = 80% shade; s = 40%
shade; n —no shade; 1 = 1% urea; 0.5 = 0.5% urea; 0 = 0% urea.

80
Considering the treatments on low elevation plants, those grown under shade were
observed to produce a greater number of flowers especially those under 80% shading
during the second week of November and the third week of February. Plants sprayed with
1% urea were also observed to have a significantly high number of flower buds and/or
open flowers in the fourth week of December and in the first and second weeks of March.
The effect of the interaction between shading and urea levels on the number of flowers
was notable in the third week of February and the first week of March. Low elevation
plants grown under the Lss1 treatment level (80% shade plus 1.0% urea spray) had the
highest recorded average number of flowers (5.53 buds and 1.90 open flowers per plant).
However, there were many instances, especially among low elevation plants, when
flower buds failed to develop into open flowers. These buds often turned yellow before

eventually turning brown after a few days (Figure 40).

81

Figure 40. Aborted buds and flowers. Flowers produced by low elevation plants on the
first three months of observation failed to form fruits due to abortion. These
buds (top) and flowers (bottom) would first turn yellow (left) before
eventually rotting or drying up (right).

82
Nitrogen Status

Medium elevation test plants appeared to be rapidly utilizing nitrogen for their
development especially in the first half of the observation period from the first week of
November to the second week of December and in the second and third weeks of
January. They showed lower leaf greenness values during these weeks compared with
test plants at low elevation without treatment. However, leaves of roseleaf raspberry
plants planted in hedges at medium elevation were observed to be greener than the leaves
of the test plants. Their leaves were found to have greenness values very close to those of
low elevation test plants.

Greenness of low elevation plants increased from October to November
suggesting that the plants were adjusting to the treatments during that period. Greenness
then decreased until mid-December but increased slightly towards the middle of January.
After that it gently decreased until the end of observation period (Figure 41)

Looking at the effects of shade and nitrogen treatment on low elevation plants,
plants under 40% and 80% shade levels were found to have higher greenness values in 5
and 7 of the observation weeks, respectively, compared with those of plants under full

sun. Differences across urea treatments, however, were not significant.

83

°

Fo oP © DP DN Dd YP 0 no 9
of oP gF af PP oh Fr og? of? oS
LAG EP LS PILLS IIPS S FESS

—e—M{test plants) ae st ee Lss5 Se kss0

est en bss S10

eins tno ‘M(hedge plants)

etn

Figure 41. Weekly observations on greenness of leaves. M = medium elevation; L = low
elevation; ss = 80% shade; s = 40% shade; n — no shade; 1 = 1% urea; 0.5 = 0.5%
urea; 0 = 0% urea.

84

Carbohydrate Content

Plants sampled were analyzed for their starch contents. At the first-open-flower
stage and at late fruiting stage, medium elevation plants showed higher concentrations of
starch in the leaves compared with that of plants at low elevation without treatments.
Their stem starch content was also higher at the first-open-flower stage. Its roots, on the
other hand, also had higher starch content levels but at late fruiting stage. Root to shoot
ratio, however, was lowest with medium elevation plants at the first-open-flower stage.
Differences in starch levels across treatments at late fruiting stage were not significantly

different.

Among plants in low elevation, those with 80% shading and sprayed with 1%
urea showed values closest to those of medium elevation plants. The plants without
shading and urea treatments, on the other hand, showed the opposite. Leaf starch
concentrations of plants under 80% shade at the first-open-flower stage had comparable
levels with the medium elevation plants. Starch content of stems at the first-open-flower
stage was directly proportional with the degree of shading and urea treatments but root to

shoot ratio at the first-open-flower stage was found to be indirectly proportional.

Results of the starch assays are reflected in Table 4 and Figure 42

85

Table 4. Starch concentration of leaves, stems and roots at the first-open-flower stage.
Means of the same letter are not significantly different at 5% level of

significance.
Treatments* Starch (mg glucose/gram FW)
Leaves Stems Roots
First-open-flower Stage
M 220,20 (£6.62) a 190.14 (£12.43) a 149.27 (44.66) a
Ls! 212.91 (44.47) a 158.29 (45.09) ab 146.85 (£3.01) a
Lss0.5 206.26 (£3.74) a 152.27 (46.79) be 153.46 (£7.77) a
Lss0 204.81 (£13.75) a 145.61 (42.86) be 149.95 (43.81) a
LsI 193.53 (46.16) ab | 144,14 (411.88) be 155.86 (£11.69) a
190.5 164.03 (£10.21) be | 12854(4214) be 144,59 (41.66) a
Ls0 161.32 (48.28) be | 129.07(45.16) be 144.95 (£5.66) a
Lal 149.25 (£10.57) c 128.95 (£4.78) be 156.36 (49.14) a
155.77 (45.80) 117.40 (47.48) 154.63 (410.66) a
143.61 (43.86 117.30 (43.63 162.54 (#21.73)__a

*Legend:
Elevation Shade level Urea level
M — medium 38-80% 1-1%
L-low s~40% 0.5-0.5%

n—no shade / 0-0%
full sunlight

e
is
a

‘ “105 sot to tno

e Mist 10.5 int nos

Figure 42, Root:shoot ratio of starch concentration at 1*-open-flower stage. M = medium
elevation; L = low elevation; ss = 80% shade; s = 40% shade; n — no shade; 1
= 1% urea; 0.5 = 0.5% urea; 0 = 0% urea. Error bars represent standard error.

87

Dry Weights of Leaves, Stems and Roots

Average dry weights of plants at medium elevation were not different from plants
without treatments at low elevation,

Shade and nitrogen treatments were found to improve plant dry weights. During
the plants’ first-open-flower stage, no significant differences were observed across
treatments for leaf and root dry weight but stem dry weight was found to be different
across treatments. Plants under 80% shade had heavier stems compared with other
treatment levels. Plants sprayed with 1% urea also had heavier stems compared with
those without urea.

Differences were even more evident at late fruiting stage as all treatment factors
and the interaction between shading and urea treatments caused significant variations in
leaf, stem and root dry weights. For all plant parts, dry weights of plants under 40%
shade had the highest values while plants under full sun had the lowest. Plants sprayed
with 1% urea had the highest leaf dry weight but their stem dry weights were the lowest
among low elevation plants. Stem and root dry weights, on the other hand, were highest
among low elevation plants with 0% urea treatments (Table 5).

Root-shoot ratio based on average dry weights was lowest with plants at medium

elevation and with the Lss! treatment level (Figure 43).

88

Table 5. Average dry weight of leaves, stems and roots at the first-open-flower and late

fruiting stages. Means of the same letter are not significantly different at 5%

level of significance.

Treatments* Dry weight (g)
Leaves Stems Roots
First-open-flower Stage
M 0.55 a | 121 b ab| 1.29 b
Ls! 1.90 a | 192 aa} 2.29 a
Lss0.5 1.16 a | 187 a ab] 3.15 a
Lss0 1.53 a | 1.67 ab] 392 a
Lsl 1.94 a | 193 ab a] 3.80 ab
10.5 137 a | 142 ab ab] 1.54 ab
Ls0 0.79 a | 118 ab b | 2.03 ab
Lal 1.04 a | 133 b a | 2.25 ab
Ln0.5 139 a | 148 b ab| 2.59 ab
Lno 2.38 a_| 097 bb | 285 ab
Late fruiting Stage
M 0.74 dd{ 12d da | 127 dd
LssI 1.28 b al 161 b c | 208 b ¢
Lss0.5 1.59 b c| 187 b b| 379 bb
Lss0 1.25 bb] 170 b aj 403 »b a
Lsl 1.80 a al 161 ac | 367 ac
Ls0.5 0.93 ac] 160 a b| 302 ab
Ls0 1.50 ab] 225 a al 417 aa
Lal 0.75 ce a] 16 c c | 406 c c
Ln0.5 1.00 cc] 160 c¢ b | 303 ¢ b
Ln0 0.82 ce bL 175 cc a | 246 ca
*Legend:
= Grouping based on differences across shade levels
- Grouping based on differences across urea levels
Elevation Shade level Urea level
M - medium ss — 80% 1-1%
L-low s- 40% 0.5-0.5%

n= no shade / 0-0%
full sunlight

89

2.00
1.80
1.60
1.40

1.20
: 1.00
0.80
3 0.60
0.40
0.20
0.00
int

M ssl Lss0.5  Lss0 st
1st Open Flower Stage _ m Late Fruiting Stage
Figure 43. Root-to-shoot ratio of dry weight at first-open-flower and at late-fruiting stage. M =

medium elevation; L = low elevation; ss = 80% shade; s = 40% shade; n — no shade;
1 = 1% urea; 0.5 = 0.5% urea; 0 = 0% urea. Error bars represent standard error.

90

Leaf Area

Average leaf area of medium elevation plants was not significantly different from
that of low elevation plants without treatment, either at the first-open-flower stage or at
late fruiting stage.

Significant differences in leaf area were observed across shade level treatments.
During the plants’ first-open-flower stage, shade-treated (both 40% and 80%) low
elevation plants had larger leaf areas than those grown under full sun and those grown at
medium elevation. However, plants under 80% shade had larger leaf areas than those
under 40%. At late fruiting stage, only the plants grown under 80% shade had
significantly larger leaf areas compared with other treatment levels. This is consistent
with previous studies showing that foliage of plants tend to be thinner and wider with
greater shading (Roy, Caldwell, & Pearce, 1994). Urea treatments, on the other hand,
seemed to impede leaf area expansion as plants with 0% urea had the widest leaf area
average during the first-open-flower stage. No significant variations were found at late

fruiting stage (Table 6).

91

Table 6. Average leaf area at the first-open-flower and late fruiting stages. Means of the
same letter are not significantly different at 5% level of significance.

Treatments* Leaf area (en)
jower Stage Late fruiting Stage

M eb 41 bb
Lssl ab 6.13 aoa
Lss0.5 ab 6.00 a ab
Lss0 aa 5.62 a ab
Lsl bb 4.95 boa
Ls0.5 bb 4.75 b&b
Ls0 ba 4.63 bab
Lal eb 4.85 boa
Ln0.5 cb 4.07 b ab
Ln0 ca 3.65 bab

~ Grouping based on differences across shade levels
~ Grouping based on differences across urea levels

Elevation Shade level Urea level
M- medium ss— 80% 1-1%
L-low s-40% 0.5- 0.5%

n=—no shade / 0-0%

full sunlight

92

Branch and Leaf Production

The results of orthogonal contrasts showed that plants at medium elevation
produced fewer leaves than low elevation plants during the second to the fourth weeks of
December, and on the last week of observation. However, post hoc analyses showed that
the number of leaves of plants at medium elevation was not different from that of low
elevation plants without treatment for the entire observation period except in the third
week of February wherein medium elevation plants had fewer leaves compared with low
elevation plants with 0% urea. Compared with plants with shading and urea treatments,
however, their leaves were found to be significantly fewer.

Based on pairwise mean comparisons, plants under 40% shade had more leaves
from the first week of November up to the first week of January compared with plants
without shade. Plants sprayed with 0.5% urea, on the other hand, had more leaves
compared with plants with 0% urea during the first week of November up to the third
week of December. Branch number was not significantly different across treatments.

The sudden increase in number of branches observed towards the end of October
among plants grown at low elevation was attributed to the high incidence of main stem
tip damage which led to the loss of apical dominance. This also affected the number of
leaves produced and the number of terminals from which flowers and fruits could be
bore. Increase in number of leaves followed a week after. Branches and leaves were
most abundant in December (2" week for branches, 3" week for leaves) and then

gradually declined due mainly to the occurrence of main stem senescence (Figure 44).

8s ‘apeys %O8

| Swoneaaya umIpaus = W “y2om Jod juejd Jod (woy0q) servo] pue (doy) soyouesq Jo Joquinu eBe1oAy “pp omBiy

$'0 “vam %] = | ‘opeys ou — u ‘opeys %Op

= 0 ‘eam %¢'9

“vam %O

= 88 SuoneAz|a Mo]

DS SU WI OS SE TSE OIE SSIS ISIE Woe

ee Fe &
ee 8 eee

v

&

4

&

s

Sf

See &
ee fs

oe & &

&
fod

cy

ra
oe e & ee ee of

co

&

s
<


94

Plant Height and Main Stem Diameter

No dramatic increases in both plant height and main stem diameter were
observed. Also, no significant differences in these parameters were also observed across
treatments.

Variable growth during the recovery period after potting and transport caused
variations in the average starting height across treatments. Damaged tips during transport
and the occurrence of main stem necrosis also affected the growth of plants. Main stem
senescence which was prevalent among low elevation plants subdued growth. This
started with tip rotting and then browning progressed basipetally. Once tips started
rotting, almost no increase in height was observed, except when a lateral branch started
growing beyond the damaged tip.

The basis for obtaining stem diameter measurements was the first node of the
plant. This node was perceived as the lowest point within the main stem from where a
leaf or branch had emerged. However, as the weeks progressed, new branches emerged
from below the earlier perceived first node. This made locating the original point of

measurement difficult.

95

Other Observations

Potential Insect Pests

Several insects were seen visiting roseleaf raspberry plants at both medium and
low elevations (Appendix 2). Some were identified as agents of pollination as mentioned
in an earlier section. The other insects, on the other hand, were found to be causing harm
as they could be treating roseleaf raspberry plants as alternative hosts. These have the
potential to become pests in large scale plantations of roseleaf raspberry.

A number of Lepidopterans including leaf folders and cutworms were seen in
their larval and adult stages (Figure 45). They were the most commonly observed insects
in both low and medium elevations and are potential major pests. Leaf folders caused
direct damage to both leaves and flowers, often targeting young leaves. This can directly
affect flower and fruit production as flowers of roscleaf raspberry are borne at the shoot
terminals. Once these are damaged, new branches will have to be formed in order to
produce flowers.

The shiny brown flea beetle was the second most frequently seen insect in both
sites. They are suspected to be responsible for most of the small circular holes found in
roseleaf raspberry leaves. Though they are minor agents of pollination as pollen is also
part of their diet, they are also potential major pests.

Katydid nymphs were often seen feeding on roseleaf raspberry leaves, and a few

mealybugs were observed to cause direct damage to flowers.

96

Colonies of scale insects were also found along the base of main stems of a
number of roseleaf raspberry plants at low elevation. Many adult scale insects appeared
to have been parasitized though the actual parasitoid was not observed. Small brown
spots often seen on leaves were also associated with the piercing-sucking feeding habit of
Hemipteran insect visitors.

Ants are known to feed on honeydew exuded by sap-sucking insects such as
mealybugs and scale insects. They could transport these harmful insects from plant to
plant and thus facilitate the spread of disease or other damages. It is also possible for ants
to cause direct harm to plants when they disturb root systems by building their nest

beneath the plant (Figure 46).

Figure 45. Lepidopteran visitors of roseleaf raspberry plants: A -
bagworm moth; B— Arctiid; C - inch worm; D - clear-winged
moth; E - tussock moth; F - leaf folder, and; G - common
cutworm.


Figure 46. Harmful insect visitors of roseleaf raspberry: A — mealybug; B -
flea beetle; C - a camouflaged katydid, and; D - scale insects.

97

Potential Disease

Young leaves of a number of plants grown at low elevation exhibited a very
noticeable browning of the veins. The browning often spread to the veins of neighboring
leaves until the stem tips themselves tumed brown (Figure 47). It may be possible that
the leaves were infected by a pathogen that thrives in vascular tissues of young plant
parts. If allowed to spread, this potential disease can be devastating.

Figure 47. Young roseleaf raspberry leaves possibly
infected by a vascular pathogen.

99

Leaf Burning from Urea Sprays

Burned leaf margins were often observed among plants that were given 1% urea a
day after spraying (Figure 48A). This may have been caused by the accumulation of salts
from droplets formed along the margins which evaporated rapidly. This is especially

likely to happen on hot days when the rate of evaporation is high (Taiz & Zeiger, 2006).

Leaf Reddening

At the start of the experiment, after the recovery period and treatment
implementation, some leaves of plants at both elevations that were under full sun were
observed to tum reddish and appeared scorched. These discolored leaves eventually fell
off and were replaced by new ones. After a few weeks, the occurrence of leaf reddening
was no longer as common. Gresshoff (1993) mentioned that leaf scorches arise when a
plant is unable to meet its needs under harsh warm conditions. This occurs especially
among newly transferred plants whose injured root systems cannot supply enough water
to offset the water lost by leaves through transpiration (Figure 48B). Another possible
cause of leaf reddening is phosphorus deficiency (Taiz & Zeiger, 2006). This observation

is consistent with the result of the soil analysis shown below.

Figure 48, A - Burned leaf margins of plants sprayed with 1% urea
solution. B - Leaf reddening observed on some leaves of
plants grown under full sun at the start of the experiment.

100

101

Soil analysis

The test plants at low elevation, including the negative controls (no shading, no
urea foliar spray) exhibited profuse flowering in February 2013 but roseleaf raspberry
plants personally owned by a number of residents located not far from the experimental
site did not produce a single flower. Differences in soil characteristics are among the
possible explanations for the observation.

RC Farm nursery is one of the local growers of roseleaf raspberry at the low
elevation site. Comparison of results of soil nutrient content analysis between the potting
medium used for the test plants (Bangkong Kahoy Valley garden soil) and the
commercial medium used by the RC Farm nursery showed noticeable differences in

levels of organic matter (OM), phosphorus (Bray-P), calcium (Ca) and manganese (Mn)

(Figure 49).
55
st
41
23.81 25)
18.62
2
10 1240
68 769 67 2
50 4.12 0.35298 2° 1.63331 Pe | aq
peal [ites al —_
pH OM(X) BrayP Kk Ca Mg_Fe(ppm) Zn (ppm) Cu (ppm) Mn (ppm)
(ppm) (me/100g (me/100g (me/100g
soil) soil) soil)

= Bangkong Kahoy Valley = RC Farm

Figure 49. Soil nutrient content analysis of the potting medium used for the test plants
(Bangkong Kahoy Valley garden soil) and for commercially grown roseleaf
raspberry plants used by a nursery (RC Farm) near the experiment site at low
elevation.

102

Table 7. Summary of the most effective shading and urea treatments for different parameters of plant growth and development in
comparison with the performance of medium elevation plants.

Fruit Flower Starch Dry weight Leaf No. of Plant Stem
Treatment ccurrence occurrence “SUS analysis “Leaf Stem Root area Leaves Branches height diameter
Shading 80% 80% 80% 80% 40% 80% 40% 80% 40% ns ns ns
Not
significant
by itself
Urea but 1% ns 1% 1% 1% 0% 0% 05% ns ns ons
influences
the effect
of shading
Better
tm No No Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes ns ns ns
medium
elevation?

*ns — not significantly different

DISCUSSION

Phenological Development and Reproductive Biology Highlights

Results of morphological observations have shown that at both low and medium
elevations, 45cm-tall roseleaf raspberry plants can start producing flower buds after about
a month, a newly emerged bud will open in about two and a half weeks, an open flower
Jasts for three days, and a pollinated flower takes about 5 weeks for it to ripen into a
harvestable fruit.

It was also found that there is poor overlap of anther dehiscence and stigma
receptivity within a flower. This means that for pollination to be successful, flowers rely
heavily on the transfer of pollen from neighboring flowers, hence the need for factors
facilitating inter-flower pollination. Self-pollination is still possible, however, as flowers
of the same plant may occur in a staggered manner. In such a case, one of the critical
factors is the presence of pollinators and pollen viability.

Experimental plants grown at medium elevation, together with nearby raspberry
hedges grown at the raspberry farm, had regular bee visitors, especially because a few
stingless bee colonies were being cultured near the roseleaf raspberry plants. Though
wasps and other pollinators were also seen visiting the flowers at low elevation, they did
not appear to visit as frequently or in as large numbers as those observed at medium
elevation. However, the quantity of flowers present at a given time may also be a factor

affecting the frequency of pollinator visits and the number of visitors. More pollinators

104

can be attracted to the presence of more nectar-secreting flowers. Staggered flower
occurrence is also necessary in order to have a sufficient overlap of anther dehiscence and
stigma receptivity among neighboring flowers (Mitchell, 1994; Ohashi & Yahara, 1998;
‘Wyatt, 1982). This was observed to be the case at medium elevation and also in the low
elevation area during February and March. Medium elevation plants being situated very
near roseleaf raspberry hedges was an even greater advantage as pollen load at the area
was very high. This may have been a major factor in the occurrence of better quality
fruits at medium elevation.

Many fruits that formed at low elevation were of poor quality because of
incomplete setting. As pollinators were seen visiting flowers regardless of shading, other
factors may have caused the variation in fruit quality. Pollen grains may have been
successfully transferred to the receptive stigmas of neighboring flowers but prolonged

exposure to full sunlight may have caused the pollen to malfunction.

Determining the environmental requirements for successful acclimation

Results of climatic observations have shown that medium elevation conditions
featured low day and night temperatures, high amounts of rainfall and relative humidity
and strong winds.

‘Average temperature at medium elevation was observed to be at 20.8°C. This falls

within the upper limit of the optimum whole-plant air temperature for net photosynthesis

105

and net growth in R. idaeus raspberries which is 15-20°C (Fernandez & Pritts, 1994;
Percival et al., 1996).

‘Whether roseleaf raspberry plants require low temperatures to specifically commit
the apical meristem to produce flowers (vernalization), is another concern involving
temperature (Taiz & Zeiger, 2006). Flower production of plants without shading or urea
treatments strongly suggests that the prevailing temperatures at low elevation, especially
in January, were enough satisfy the plants’ flowering requirements. If this was indeed the
case, then it is logical to expect other roseleaf raspberry plants near the experiment site to
have also flowered profusely. However, none of the roseleaf raspberry plants grown by a
few locals residing near UPLB produced a single flower during this period. There is a
likely possibility that the vernalization requirement was attained prior to the transport of
plants to low elevation. As the vernalization effect has been suggested to be chemical in
nature, this would have been carried by the plants’ apical meristems even after the plants
were transported to low elevation (Chesworth et al., 1998). If the responsible factor for
floral evocation was the temperature experienced by plants at medium elevation prior to
the start of the experiment, then the positive influence of the temperature drop in January
on the flowering of low elevation plants was through a different mechanism.

Roseleaf raspberry plants produce flowers from shoot apical meristems at their
terminals. When these meristems ate active, the organs they produce are either leaves or
flowers. Data on average leaf number have shown that values obtained from low
elevation plants began to plateau towards the end of December. This suggests the

formation of flower bud initials at the terminals during that period (Heide & Sonsteby,

106

2011). This also brings up the possibility that the temperature drop in January caused bud
break to occur.

Low elevation temperature was around 5°C higher at 26.1°C. However, day time
temperatures during the first three months of observation averaged 29.4°C. Carew et al.
(2003) and Sansteby & Heide (2009) have identified 27°C as the critical temperature
threshold for R. idaeus plants. With temperatures above it, photosynthetic machineries
can be irreversibly damaged. As plants compensate for the damages caused by high
temperature stress (in addition to wind stress experienced during transport), they spend
their carbon sources synthesizing new machineries and doing other repairs, thus
heightening the competition for carbohydrate reserves. This tight competition may have
caused the abortion of developing flower buds of low elevation plants during this period
(Guilioni et al., 1997; Marcelis et al., 2004). The temperature drop in January may have
helped alleviate the stress as recorded average temperatures during this month ranged

from 22.4 26.

. It may also have improved the plants’ flowering as it fell within the
optimum temperature for flower production (Sonsteby & Heide, 2009). This may explain
the higher peak number of flowers and fruits in some low elevation treatment levels
compared with the medium elevation plants.

As roseleaf raspberry plants were earlier reported to prefer areas with abundant
soil moisture (De Guzman, 2009), the low rainfall amount and relative humidity at low
elevation was a disadvantage but this was compensated by the irrigation schedule at both
sites. Increases in the number of both branches and leaves were shown to be fastest

during the first week of November when recorded rainfall was highest. Moisture

107

availability greatly affects cell growth as water uptake and turgor pressure build up are
the first steps in cell expansion.

The high wind speed observed at medium elevation may have been advantageous
for pollen dispersal (Wyatt, 1982) but it was more of a disadvantage to plant
growth. Onoda and Anten (2011) mentioned that reduced growth is the most common
response to mechanical stimuli (e.g. shaking of the plant and brushing of leaves and
branches) which are often associated with strong winds. This may explain the low dry
weight values observed for medium elevation plants. Wind not only entails mechanical
effects; it also reduces leaf boundary layers which increases transpiration rates, enhancing
water stress. This stress is the most likely cause of the low leaf greenness and leaf
reddening observed among the test plants at medium elevation. Medium elevation test
plants having lower leaf greenness despite having lower temperatures and higher rainfall
is considerably an inconsistency as photosynthesis is expected to be more efficient given
these conditions (Salvucci & Crafts-Brandner, 2004; Taiz & Zeiger, 2006).

One of the ways by which plants are able to reduce the amount of stress received
from strong winds is by forming dense populations that form canopies. Canopies may be
homogeneous and formed by one type of plant at the same stage of growth. Winds can
blow strong on top of the canopy but gets weakened when they penetrate the canopy.
Lower leaves are thus spared from excessive transpiration (de Langre, 2008). This
explains why roseleaf raspberry plants grown in hedges at medium elevation had higher

leaf greenness values than the test plants.

108

Irradiance was observed to have comparable levels in both elevations (606.11 and
707.78 pmol m?:s"' for medium and low elevation, respectively). As light saturation
point of R. idaeus raspberry leaves is >600 pmol m™-s" (Percival et al., 1996). This
suggests that raspberry leaves under full sun at medium elevation were able to maximize,
more or less, their capacity to absorb light for photosynthetic activity while leaves of
plants at low elevation, on the other hand, were experiencing photoinhibition under full

sun. Shading was shown to reduce irradiance to non-saturating levels.

Optimum Amount of Shading and Urea Treatments for Successful Acclimation

An indicator of successful acclimation is when plants are able to carry out thcir
activities normally in a new environment as if they were in their natural habitat.
Indicators used in this study are various plant characters which ultimately affect the
plants’ ability to yield fruits. This study is one of the first documented cases showing that
roseleaf raspberry plants are indeed able to bear fruits at low elevation.

Results showed that under the agroecological conditions at low elevation, roseleaf
raspberry plants produced a significantly high number of flowers and fruits with low
incidence of fruit defects when grown under 80% shade and provided with 1% urea foliar
spray as nutrient supplementation. Though the fruits produced were not as abundant as
those in medium elevation, they performed much better than the plants without shade and

urea.

109

Based on the observations on the different parameters on the growth and
development of roseleaf raspberry plants, treatments were able to improve a number of
vegetative characters of low elevation plants. Shading treatments were able to bring down
the amount of irradiance received by plants to acceptable levels such that leaves are not
saturated and photoinhibition is prevented. As the energy received from the sun is
trimmed down, heat accumulation in leaves is also minimized. Leaf temperatures also
influence the relative rates of photorespiration as high increased temperatures more
efficiently removes CO, from solution than it does O2 (Taiz & Zeiger, 2006). The
treatments also promoted water use efficiency as shaded leaves transpire less than leaves
under high light (Pons et al., 2001). Roy et al. (1994) mentioned that plants respond to
shading by adding their photosynthetic apparatus, hence greener leaves. They also
mentioned that biosynthesis of photosynthetic proteins, which is necessary for repairing
damages by photoinhibition, requires nitrogen and that much of the plant nitrogen capital
is located in the leaves, Nitrogen supplementation from urea treatments also increased the
maximum photosynthetic rate of plants (Givnish, 1988). All these helped the plants adjust
to low elevation conditions. However, based on the observations on dry weight and
flower occurrence in comparison with medium elevation plants, it seemed that the plants
at low elevation directed the accumulation of dry matter to the formation of vegetative
plant parts and not on flowers.

The occurrence of lower temperatures at medium elevation reduced the export of
assimilates to roots from source leaves through what Farrar & Jones (2000) called co-

limitation of whole-plant carbon flux by photosynthesis (CO; increases growth because

110

photosynthesis is CO2-limited) and sink growth (temperature increases growth because
metabolism within sinks, and in particular cell division, is highly temperature-sensitive
whereas photosynthesis is not). This led to the favoring of the formation of flower and
fruits from shoots. The production of flowers led to strong competition faced by
developing leaves and branches from flowers as new sink organs vying for assimilates
(Fernandez & Pritts, 1994; Zamski & Schaffer, 1996). Also, leaf production of a branch
stops once its terminals form flowers.

This only shows that it is necessary for low temperatures to occur for plants at
low elevation to flower profusely. If flower inductive conditions received by the test
plants were not from the treatment implementation, then this means the improvements on
flowering by the treatments were merely an added effect on the occurrence of flowers on
terminals which were already programmed to bear flowers and, that they were not a
substitute for the environmental conditions that induced the plants to flower. Further
studies must thus be done to test the acclimation of plants at low elevation over longer
periods, as well as studies to test effectiveness of the treatments on plants obtained from a
source at low elevation.

Providing shade to roseleaf raspberry plants helped flowers to achieve a
successful fruit set as comparison across the treatment levels showed that the quantity of
fruits were higher when grown under shade. Results also showed that quality of fruits
produced under shade were higher as setting of drupelets was more complete than those
without shade. It is very likely that shade treatments were able to shield pollen from

prolonged sun exposure, hence, preserving their viability which led to successful fruit set.

Mm

Though this claim is supported by the observation that many of the fruits of low elevation
plants grown under full sun were formed from flowers that benefitted from mutual
shading of adjacent plants, future experiments on pollen germination at low elevation

need to be done to confirm the effectiveness of the given treatments.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

The thorny weed, roseleaf raspberry (Rubus rosifolius Sm.), which has long been
a nuisance to farmers in the highlands of Quezon province, Philippines, has been found to
have market potential for fresh fruit, jam, juice, wine and tea. Analysis of its fruits’
phytochemical contents also revealed promising medicinal properties. However, attempts
to produce fruits at low elevation have failed while empirical studies have yet to confirm
speculations on improving flowering and fruit set in lower altitudes through acclimation

to high temperatures.

The study was conducted to provide preliminary data on the possibility of
producing roseleaf raspberry fruits at low elevation in the hope of making the fruits more
available in the market. This study sought to answer how roseleaf raspberry plants will
respond to the climatic conditions at both medium and low elevation areas and whether
shading and nitrogen supplementation are enough to help plants acclimate to high
temperature conditions at low elevation so that they can perform as good as or better than

when grown in their native habitat.

Here, potted roseleaf raspberry plants obtained from Bangkong Kahoy,
Kinabuhayan, Dolores, Quezon (774 masl, 20.8°C average temperature) were monitored
of their flowering and fruiting behaviors at UP Los Bafios Orchard (31 masl, 26.1°C
average temperature). Plants were grown under different levels of light exposure (0, 40%

and 80% shade) and sprayed with foliar solutions of urea (0, 5 and 10g urea/IL dH20).

113

Morphological observations have shown that at both low and medium elevations,
45cm-tall roseleaf raspberry plants can start producing flower buds after about a month
and the period from bud appearance to harvestable fruit is about 8 wecks long. Poor
overlap of anther dehiscence and stigma receptivity was a critical feature of individual
roseleaf raspberry flowers highlighting the importance of profuse and staggered
occurrences of open flowers to fruit set. Plants at both elevations were found to be under
a certain amount of stress. High wind velocities were found to be affecting the vegetative
growth of medium elevation plants while relatively high temperatures affected the flower
and fruit production of plants at low elevation. Plants were able to produce flowers and
fruits though peak occurrence was delayed by 6-7 weeks compared to the control plants
retained in their native setting. Growing plants under 80% shade and sprayed with 10g/L
urea solution was found to support plants in acclimating to conditions at low elevation as
they had the highest open flower (1.9 flowers/plant) and ripe fruit (1.42 fruits/plant)
occurrence among low elevation plants. A drop in average temperature (-2°C) and
irradiance level (-49.74mol m~? sec™") in January were identified to have positively
influenced flowering while factors linked to pollination were perceived to have favored
fruit production. One of the possible reasons why successful fruit set was observed in this
study but not in previous attempts is that the test plants were obtained from a medium
elevation source in a state wherein they were already competent to flower. An alternative
treatment that can cause low elevation plants to flower profusely is yet to be identified.
Future studies aimed at enabling fruit production at low elevation may be focusing on the
promotion of flowering at low elevation. Further investigation on pollen activity should

also be done to establish a protocol for fruit production in low elevation areas.

LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY AND RECOMMENDATIONS:

In general, the study was able to demonstrate the possibility of producing roseleaf
raspberry fruits at low elevation areas, particularly in areas with conditions similar to the
site in Los Bafios, Laguna, although fruiting in the initial months following their

relocation and acclimatization was delayed fruits were generally fewer and of lower

quality.

To improve fruiting performance under low elevation similar to the study site it is
recommended that roseleaf raspberry plants transplanted from their medium elevation
habitat be provided with 80% shading with nitrogen supplementation through foliar spray
application of 1% urea, after a period of recovery. This finding can serve as input into the
development of protocols for production of roseleaf raspberry under low elevation

conditions.

The study was one of the first to document the characters of the roseleaf raspberry
plant in the Philippines and attempted the production of fruits at low elevation within a
period of six and a half months from October 2013 to April 2014. Thus, the study faced a

number of limitations, as follows:

© The test plants used were dug-up suckers from the existing plantation at the
medium elevation area in Bangkong Kahoy Valley, thus making uniformity of
root systems difficult to monitor. Uniformity was thus based on the above-ground

portion of the suckers. Conduct of a similar research in the future may thus be

1s
improved by preparing the test plants from pre-monitored suckers to ensure
uniformity of plant stage. This implies the need for a longer study period to
include the stage of preparation and acclimation of a more physiologically
uniform set of test seedlings.
The presence of impurities in root samples used in carbohydrate content analysis
hampered the extraction procedure. Buffer chemical adjustments had to be made
to compensate for the presence of impurities.
Plant response to long days was not observed as the duration of the observation
period was only five months, The study however showed that roseleaf raspberry
plants may flower profusely during short days. There is still a possibility that they
are day neutral plants. Extending the period of phenological observations is also
necessary as the occurrence of a typhoon during the conduct of the experiment
could have altered the phenology and phase changes of the plant. Thus, it is
recommended that a longer observation period, possibly extending over a 12-
month period at the minimum, is necessary to adequately assess plant responses to
changing photoperiods and other environmental conditions that vary at different
times of the year. Longer observation periods will be needed to evaluate the
stability of plant responses to treatments and its environment,
Pollen viability among flowers of low elevation crops was not obtained and thus
germination rates of pollen were not compared across treatments. Even then,
preliminary tests that were done showed that the best flower stage to gather pollen

is at the mid-open stage. The tests also helped identify the type of media and the

116
concentration of media components that favor the responsiveness of pollen grains
of roseleaf raspberry. It was found that pollen grains of roseleaf raspberry were
most responsive in media consisting of 10% sucrose, 0.01% boric acid and 1.2%
agar. This will be useful to guide for future research efforts that will assess pollen

germination rates.

Other aspects observed during the course of the study that are worth investigating
for future research on production of roseleaf raspberry under low elevation conditions are

the following:

© Propagation of roseleaf raspberry plants by seeds

* Identification of diseases and causal agents

‘* Development of mechanized harvesting technology for case of harvesting

© Postharvest quality assessment of roseleaf raspberry fruits produced at low
elevation such as total soluble solids content, titratable acidity, length of
shelf life and sensory evaluations to better evaluate the quality of fruits
produced at low elevation

© Postharvest handling, including package development for fruit transport to

avoid bruises and deformities of the soft fruit

LITERATURE CITED

ADAMS, C. D. 1972. Flowering Plants of Jamaica, Glasgow, Scotland: Robert
MacLehose and Company Ltd.

ALICE, LAWRENCE A. and CHRISTOPHER S. CAMPBELL. 1999. Phylogeny of
Rubus (Rosaceae) Based on Nuclear Ribosomal DNA Intemal Transcribed Spacer
Region Sequences, American Journal of Botany 86 (1): 81-97.

ALVARADO, HORACIO E. REBECCA L. DARNELL and JEFFREY G.
WILLIAMSON. 2005. Carbon Mobilization and Yield Components in Raspberry.
Horticultural Science 40 (4): 1059.

ARIZ, IDOIA, RAQUEL ESTEBAN, JOSE IGNACIO GARCIA-PLAZAOLA, JOSE
MARIA BECERRIL, PEDRO MARIA APARICIO-TEJO and JOSE FERNANDO
MORAN. 2010. High Irradiance Induces Photoprotective Mechanisms and a
Positive Effect on NH4+ Stress in Pisum sativum L. Journal of Plant Physiology
167: 1038-45, doi:10.1016/ jpiph.2010.02.014.

BALDOCK, JA and PN NELSON. 2000. Soil Organic Matter. In Handbook of Soil
Science, edited by Malcolm E. Sumner, B25-84. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press.
http://www. crepress.com/product/isbn/978084933 1 367;jsessionid=umBoCS-
ZVRewsfSbupm2Qg**.

BOUSSADIA, O, K STEPPE, H ZGALLAI, S. BEN EL HADJ, M BRAHAM, R
LEMEUR, and M.C. VAN LABEKE. 2010, Effects of Nitrogen Deficiency on Leaf
Photosynthesis, Carbohydrate Status and Biomass Production in Two Olive
Cultivars ‘Meski’ and ‘Koroneiki.’ Scientia Horticulturae 123 (3): 336-42
doi: 10.1016/j.scienta.2009.09.023.

BOWEN-FORBES, CAMILLE S., VANISREE MULABAGAL, YUNBAO LIU and
MURALEEDHARAN G. NAIR. 2009. Ursolic Acid Analogues: Non-Phenolic
Functional Food Components in Jamaican Raspberry Fruits. Food Chemistry 116
(3). Elsevier Ltd: 633-37. doi:10.1016/j.foodchem.2009.02.075.

BOWEN-FORBES, CAMILLE S., YANJUN ZHANG and MURALEEDHARAN G.
NAIR. 2010. Anthocyanin Content, Antioxidant, Anti-Inflammatory and Anticancer
Properties of Blackberry and Raspberry Fruits. Journal of Food Composition and
Analysis 23 (6): 554-60. doi:10.1016/j.jfca.2009.08.012.

BULIC, BRUNO, MARCUS PICKHARDT, BORIS SCHMIDT, EVA MARIA
MANDELKOW, HERBERT WALDMANN and ECKHARD MANDELKOW.
2009. Development of Tau Aggregation Inhibitors for Alzheimer’s Disease.

118

Angewandte Chemie (International Ed. in English) 48 (10): 1740-52.
doi:10.1002/anie.200802621.

BULLOCK, D. G. and D. S. ANDERSON. 1998. Evaluation of the Minolta SPAD-502
Chlorophyll Meter for Nitrogen Management in Com. Journal of Plant Nutrition 21
(4): 741-55. doi: 10.1080/01904 169809365439.

BUSKIENE, L. and N. USELIS. 2008. The Influence of Nitrogen and Potassium
Fertilizers on the Growth and Yield of Raspberries Cv . ‘Polana.’ Agronomy
Research 6 (1): 27-35.

BUZZINI, PIETRO, PANAGIOTIS ARAPITSAS, MARTA GORETTI, EVA
BRANDA, BENEDETTA TURCHETTI, PATRIZIA PINELLI, F JERI and
ANNALISA ROMANTI. 2008. Antimicrobial and Antiviral Activity of Hydrolysable
Tannins. Mini Reviews in Medicinal Chemistry 8 (12): 1179-87.
http://www. ingentaconnect.com/content/ben/mrmc/2008/00000008/00000012/art00
001.

CAREW, J. G., K. MAHMOOD, J. DARBY, P. HADLEY and N. H. BATTEY. 2001.
The Effects of Low Temperature on Vegetative Growth and Flowering of the
Primocane Fruiting Raspberry ‘Autumn Bliss.’ Journal of Horticultural Science &
Biotechnology 76: 264-70.

CAREW, J. G., K. MAHMOOD, J. DARBY, P. HADLEY and N. H. BATTEY. 2003.
The Effect of Temperature, Photosynthetic Photon Flux Density, and Photoperiod on
the Vegetative Growth and Flowering of ‘Autumn Bliss' Raspberry. American
Society for Horticultural Science 128 (3): 291-96.

CASANOVA, L., R. CASANOVA, A. MORET and M. AGUSTI. 2009. The Application
of Gibberellic Acid Increases Berry Size of ‘Emperatriz’ Seedless Grape. Spanish
Journal of Agricultural Research 7 (4): 919-27.

CHESWORTH, J M, T STUCHBURY and J R SCAIFE. 1998. An Introduction to
Agricultural Biochemistry. Springer Netherlands.
http://books.google.com.ph/books?id=eK ArnwdmGFQUC.

CLAUSSEN, W. and F. LENZ. 1999. Effect of Ammonium Nitrate Nutrition on Net
Photosynthesis, Growth and Activity of the Enzymes Nitrate Reductase and
Glutamine Synthetase in Blueberry, Raspberry and Strawberry. Plant and Soil 208:
95-102.

CONVERTINO, MARINO, RICCARDO PELLARIN, MARCO CATTO, ANGELO
CAROTTI and AMEDEO CAFLISCH. 2009. 9,10-Anthraquinone Hinders Beta-
Aggregation: How Does a Small Molecule Interfere with Abeta-Peptide Amyloid

119

Fibrillation? Protein Science : A Publication of the Protein Society 18 (4): 792-800.
doi:10.1002/pro.87.

CRANE, JULIAN C. 1969. The Role of Hormones in Fruit Set and Development.
Horticultural Science 4 (2): 1969-70.

DE LANGRE, EMMANUEL. 2008. Effects of Wind on Plants. Annual Review of Fluid
Mechanics 40 (1). Annual Reviews: 141-68.
doi:10.1146/annurev.fluid.40.111406.102135.

DIXON, SCOTT J and BRENT R STOCKWELL. 2014. The Role of Iron and Reactive
Oxygen Species in Cell Death. Nat Chem Biol 10 (1). Nature Publishing Group, a
division of Macmillan Publishers Limited. All Rights Reserved.: 9-17
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nchembio.1416.

ENGARD, CHARLES J. 1945. Habit of Growth of Rubus rosaefolius Smith in Hawaii.
American Journal of Botany 32 (8): 536-38. http://www jstor.org/stable/2437583..

FARRAR, J. F. and D. L. JONES. 2000. The Control of Carbon Acquisition by Roots.
New Phytologist 147. 43-53.

FASCELLA, GIANCARLO, SALEM DARWICH and YOUSSEF ROUPHAEL. 2013.
Validation of a Leaf Area Prediction Model Proposed for Rose. Chilean Journal of
Agricultural Research 73 (1): 73-76.

FENG, WU YU, RITSUKO TANAKA, YOSHIO INAGAKI, YASUNORI SAITOH,
MYINT OO CHANG, TOHTI AMET, NORIO YAMAMOTO, SHOJI YAMAOKA
and YOSHIYUKI YOSHINAKA. 2008. Pycnogenol, a Procyanidin-Rich Extract
from French Maritime Pine, Inhibits Intracellular Replication of HIV-1 as Well as
Its Binding to Host Cells. Japanese Journal of Infectious Diseases 61 (4): 279-85.

FERNANDEZ, GINA E and MARVIN P PRITTS. 1994. Growth, Carbon Acquisition,
and Source-Sink Relationships in ‘Titan’ Red Raspberry. HortScience 29 (4): 248.

FERNANDEZ, GINA E and MARVIN P PRITTS. 1996. Carbon Supply Reduction Has
a Minimal Influence on Current Year's Red Raspberry (Rubus idaeus L.) Fruit
Production. Journal of the American Society for Horticultural Science 121 (3): 473-
71.

FERNANDEZ, J. A., S. BANON, J. A. FRANCO, A. GONZALEZ and P. F.
MARTINEZ. 1997. Effects of Vernalization and Exogenous Gibberellins on Curd
Induction and Carbohydrate Levels in the Apex of Cauliflower (Brassica oleracea
var. botrytis). Scientia. ‘Horticulturae 70 = (2-3): 223-30.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0304-4238(97)00059-9.

120

FISCHER, R A. 1985. Number of Kemels in Wheat Crops and the Influence of Solar
Radiation and Temperature. Journal of Agricultural Science 105 (2). Cambridge
Univ Press: 447-61.

FOLLETT, R.H., R.F. FOLLETT and A.D. HALVORSON. 1992. Use of a Chlorophyll
Meter to Evaluate the Nitrogen Status of Dryland Winter Wheat. Communications in
Soil Science and Plant Analysis 23 (7-8): 687-97.
doi: 10.1080/00103629209368619.

FOS, M, F NUEZ and J L GARCIA-MARTINEZ. 2000. The Gene Pat-2, Which Induces
Natural Parthenocarpy, Alters the Gibberellin Content in Unpollinated Tomato
Ovaries. Plant Physiology 122 Q): 471-80.
http://www. pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fegi?artid=58884&tool=pmcentrez
&rendertype=abstract.

FRANCIS, GEORGE, ZOHAR KEREM, HARINDER P S MAKKAR and KLAUS
BECKER. 2002. The Biological Action of Saponins in Animal Systems: A Review.
The British Journal of Nutrition 88 (6): 587-605. doi:10.1079/BJN2002725.

GHOLIZADEH, A., M. S. M. AMIN, A. R. ANUAR and W. AIMRUN. 2009.
Evaluation of SPAD Chlorophyll Meter in Two Different Rice Growth Stages and
Its Temporal Variability. European Journal of Scientific Research 31 (4): 591-98.

GINDABA, JIREGNA and STEPHANIE J E WAND. 2005. Comparative Effects of
Evaporative Cooling, Kaolin Particle Film, and Shade Net on Sunbum and Fruit
Quality in Apples. Horticultural Science 40 (3). American Society for Horticultural
Science: 592-96.

GONCALVES-SOUZA, THIAGO, PAULA M OMENA, JOSE CESAR SOUZA and
GUSTAVO Q ROMERO. 2008. Trait-Mediated Effects on Flowers: Artificial
Spiders Deceive Pollinators and Decrease Plant Fitness. Ecology 89 (9). Eco Soc
America: 2407-13.

GRAHAM, J and M WOODHEAD. 2011. Rubus. In Wild Crop Relatives: Genomic and
Breeding Resources SE-9, edited by Chittaranjan Kole, 179-96. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-16057-8_9.

GRESSHOFF, PETER M. 1993. Plant Responses to the Environment. CRC press.

GUILIONI, LYDIE, JACQUES WERY and FRANCOIS TARDIEU. 1997. Heat Stress-
Induced Abortion of Buds and Flowers in Pea: Is Sensitivity Linked to Organ Age or
to Relations between Reproductive Organs? Annals of Botany 80 (2). Annals Botany
Co: 159-68.

121

HAYASHI, F., R. NAITO, M. J. BUKOVAC and H. M. SELL. 1968. Occurrence of
Gibberellin A3 in Parthenocarpic Apple Fruit. Michigan Agricultural Experiment
Station Journal 4227: 448-50.
http://www .ncbi.nim.nih.gov/pme/articles/PMC1086862/pdf/pintphys00482-
0154.pdf.

HEIDE, OLA M., and ANITA SONSTEBY. 2011. Physiology of Flowering and
Dormancy Regulation in Annual- and Biennial-Fruiting Red Raspberry (Rubus
idaeus L.) - a Review. Journal of Horticultural Science and Botechnology 86 (5):
433-42.

HUANG, QING, GUODONG LU, HAN-MING SHEN, MAXEY C M CHUNG and
CHOON NAM ONG. 2007. Anti-Cancer Properties of Anthraquinones from
Rhubarb. Medicinal Research Reviews 27 (5). Wiley Subscription Services, Inc., A
Wiley Company: 609-30. doi:10.1002/med.20094

IGLESIAS, IGNASI and SIMO ALEGRE. 2006. The Effect of Anti-Hail Nets on Fruit
Protection, Radiation, Temperature, Quality and Profitability of ‘Mondial
Gala’apples. Journal of Applied Horticulture 8 (2): 91-100.

IQBAL, NOUSHINA, RAHAT NAZAR, M. IQBAL, R. KHAN, ASIM MASOOD and
NAFEES A. KHAN. 2011. Role of Gibberellins in Regulation of Source ~ Sink
Relations under Optimal and Limiting Environmental Conditions. Current Science
100 (7): 998-1007.

JENNINGS, DL. 1988. Raspberries and Blackberries: Their Breeding, Diseases and
Growth. London: Academic Press.

KNOCHEL, JAMES P. 1974. Environmental Heat Illness: An Eclectic Review. Archives
of Internal Medicine 133 (5): 841-64,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archinte. 1974.00320170117011.

KOLECKAR, VIT, KATERINA KUBIKOVA, ZUZANA REHAKOVA, KAMIL
KUCA, DANIEL JUN, LUDEK JAHODAR and LUBOMIR OPLETAL. 2008.
Condensed and Hydrolysable Tannins as Antioxidants Influencing the Health. Mini
Reviews in — Medicinal. ~— Chemistry = 8 ~—(12):_—436-47.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.2174/138955708784223486,

KORNER, CHRISTIAN. 2007. The Use of ‘altitude’ in Ecological Research. Trends in
Ecology & Evolution 22 dy): 569-74,
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2007.09.006.

KOZAKI, AKIKO and GO TAKEBA. 1996. Photorespiration Protects C3 Plants from
Photooxidation. Nature 384 (6609): 557.

122

http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=a9h&AN=96 122329 18&sit
e=chost-live.

LANG, ANTON. 1957. The Effect of Gibberellin upon Flower Formation. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 43 (8): 709-17.

LAWRENCE, MARK G. 2005. The Relationship between Relative Humidity and the
Dewpoint Temperature in Moist Air: A Simple Conversion and Applications.
Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 86 (2): 225-33

LEVINE, BENJAMIN D and JAMES STRAY-GUNDERSEN. 1997. ‘Living High-
Training Low’: Effect of Moderate-Altitude Acclimatization with Low-Altitude
Training on Performance. Journal of Applied Physiology 83 (1). American
Physiological Society: 102-12.

LICHTENTHALER, H. K., C. BUSCHMANN, M. DOLL, H. -J. FIETZ, T. BACH, U.
KOZEL, D. MEIER and U. RAHMSDORF. 1981. Photosynthetic Activity,
Chloroplast Ultrastructure, and Leaf Characteristics of High-Light and Low-Light
Plants and Sun and Shade Leaves. Photosynthesis Research 2: 115-41.

LU, LiN, SHU-WEN LIU, SHI-BO JIANG and SHU-GUANG WU. 2004. Tannin
Inhibits HIV-1 Entry by Targeting gp41. Acta Pharmacologica Sinica 25 (2): 213—
18, http:/www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14769212.

MANYUCHI, M M, A PHIRI, P MUREDZI and S BOKA. 2013. Comparison of
Vermicompost and Vermiwash Bio-Femtilizers from Vermicomposting Waste Com
Pulp. World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology 78: 365-68,

MARCELIS, L F M, E HEUVELINK, L R BAAN HOFMAN-EIJER, J DEN BAKKER
and L B XUE. 2004. Flower and Fruit Abortion in Sweet Pepper in Relation to
Source and Sink Strength. Journal of Experimental Botany 55 (406): 2261-68.
doi:10.1093/jxb/erh245.

MAZZITELLI, LUCA, ROBERT D. HANCOCK, SOPHIE HAUPT, PAUL G.
WALKER, SIMON D. PONT, JIM MCNICOL, LINDA CARDLE, et al. 2007. Co-
Ordinated Gene Expression during Phases of Dormancy Release in Raspberry
(Rubus idaeus L.) Buds. Journal of Experimental Botany 58 (5): 1035-45.
doi:10.1093/jxb/erl266.

MCGREGOR, SAMUEL EMMETT. 1976. Insect Pollination of Cultivated Crop Plants.
Agricultural Research Service, US Department of —_ Agriculture.
http://www ars.usda. gov/SP2UserFiles/Place/53420300/OnlinePollinationHandbook
-paf.

123

MESEJO, C., C. REIG, A. MARTINEZ-FUENTES and M. AGUSTI. 2010.
Parthenocarpic Fruit Production in Loquat (Eriobotrya japonica Lindl.) by Using
Gibberellic Acid. Scientia Horticulturae 126 (1):_—37-4.
doi:10.1016/j.scienta.2010.06.009.

MINCHIN, P. E. H., J. F. FARRAR and M. R. THORPE. 1994. Partitioning of Carbon in
Split Root Systems of Barley: Effect of Temperature of the Root. Journal of
Experimental Botany 45 (8). Soc Experiment Biol: 1103-9.

MITCHELL, RANDALL J. 1994, Effects of Floral Traits, Pollinator Visitation, and Plant
Size on Ipomopsis aggregata Fruit Production. American Naturalist. JSTOR, 870-
89.

MOLINA-BRAVO, RAMON, CONSUELO ARELLANO, BRYON R. SOSINSKI and
GINA E. FERNANDEZ. 2011. A Protocol to Assess Heat Tolerance in a
Segregating Population of Raspberry Using Chlorophyll Fluorescence. Scientia
Horticulturae 130 (3): 524-30. doi:10.1016/j.scienta.201 1.07.022.

OHASHI, K and T YAHARA. 1998. Effects of Variation in Flower Number on
Pollinator Visits in Cirsium purpuratum (Asteraceae). American Journal of Botany
85 (2): 219. http://www.amjbot.org/content/85/2/219.abstract.

OLIVEIRA, PEDRO B., CRISTINA M. OLIVEIRA and ANTONIO A. MONTEIRO.
2004. Pruning Date and Cane Density Affect Primocane Development and Yield of
‘Autumn Bliss’ Red Raspberry. Horticultural Science 39 (3): 520-24,

OLIVEIRA, PEDRO B., MARIA JOSE SILVA, RICARDO B. FERREIRA, CRISTINA
M. OLIVEIRA and ANTONIO A. MONTEIRO. 2007. Dry Matter Partitioning,
Carbohydrate Composition, Protein Reserves, and Fruiting in ‘Autumn Bliss’ Red
Raspberry Vary in Response to Pruning Date and Cane Density. Horticultural
Science 42 (1). American Society for Horticultural Science: 77-82

ONODA, YUSUKE and NIELS P R ANTEN. 2011. Challenges to Understand Plant
Responses to Wind. Plant Signaling & Behavior 6 (7). Landes Bioscience: 1057-59.
http://www ncbi.nlm.nih. gov/pme/articles/PMC3257795/.

PALONEN, PAULINA. 1999. Relationship of Seasonal Changes in Carbohydrates and
Cold Hardiness in Canes and Buds of Three Red Raspberry Cultivars. Journal of the
American Society for Horticultural Science 124 (5). American Society for
Horticultural Science: 507-13.

PALONEN, PAULIINA, DEBORAH BUSZARD and DANIELLE DONNELLY. 2000.
Changes in Carbohydrates and Freezing Tolerance during Cold Acclimation of Red

124

Raspberry Cultivars Grown in Vitro and in Vivo. Physiologia Plantarum 110: 393—
401

PALONEN, PAULIINA and KATRIINA MOUHU. 2009. Vegetative Growth and
Flowering of Primocane Raspberry ‘Ariadne’ as Affected by Prohexadione —
Calcium Treatments. Horticultural Science 44 (2): 529-31.

PERCIVAL, DAVID C, J T A PROCTOR and M J TSUJITA. 1996. Whole-Plant Net
CO2 Exchange of Raspberry as Influenced by Air and Root-Zone Temperature, CO2
Concentration, Irradiation, and Humidity. Journal of the American Society for
Horticultural Science 12\ (5). American Society for Horticultural Science: 838-45.
http://journal.ashspublications.org/content/121/5/838.full.pdf.

PESCIE, MARIA, MARCELO LOVISOLO, ALBERTO DE MAGISTRIS,
BERNADINE STRIK and CESAR LOPEZ. 2011. Flower Bud Initiation in Southern
Highbush Blueberry Cv . O ’ Neal Occurs Twice per Year in Temperate to Warm-
Temperate Conditions. Journal of Applied Horticulture 13 (1): 8-12.

PICKHARDT, MARCUS, ZUZANA GAZOVA, MARTIN VON BERGEN, INNA
KHLISTUNOVA, YIPENG WANG, ANTJE HASCHER, EVA-MARIA
MANDELKOW, JACEK BIERNAT and ECKHARD MANDELKOW. 2005.
Anthraquinones Inhibit Tau Aggregation and Dissolve Alzheimer’s Paired Helical
Filaments in Vitro and in Cells, The Journal of Biological Chemistry 280 (5): 3628-
35. doi:10.1074/jbc.M410984200.

PLUM, S. A., J. F. FARRAR and C. STIRLING. 1996. Carbon Partitioning in Barley
Following Manipulation of Source and Sink. Aspects of Applied Biology, no. 45:
177-80.

PONS, THIJS L, WILCO JORDI and DAAN KUIPER. 2001. Acclimation of Plants to
Light Gradients in Leaf Canopies: Evidence for a Possible Role for Cytokinins
Transported in the Transpiration Stream. Journal of Experimental Botany 52 (360):
1563-74, doi:10.1093/jexbot/S2.360.1563.

PRASAD, P V V, S A STAGGENBORG and Z RISTIC. 2008. Impacts of Drought
And/or Heat Stress on Physiological, Developmental, Growth and Yield Processes
of Crop Plants. In Response of Crops to Limited Water: Understanding and
Modeling Water Stress Effects on Plant Growth Processes. Advances in Agricultural
Systems Modeling Series 1., 301-56. Madison, WI: American Society of
Agronomy/Crop Science Society of America/Soil Science Society of America.

PRATVIEL, GENEVIEVE. 2012. Oxidative DNA Damage Mediated by Transition
Metal Ions and Their Complexes. In Interplay between Metal Ions and Nucleic
Acids SE - 7, edited by Astrid Sigel, Helmut Sigel, and Roland K O Sigel, 10:201-

125

16. Metal Ions in Life Sciences. Springer Netherlands. doi:10.1007/978-94-007-
2172-2_7.

PROTACIO, C. M. 2000. A Model for Potassium Nitrate-Induced Flowering in Mango .
Acta Horticulturae 509 (2): 545-51.
http://www.actahort.org/books/509/509_62.htm.

RAINES, CHRISTINE A. 2011. Increasing Photosynthetic Carbon Assimilation in C3
Plants to Improve Crop Yield: Current and Future Strategies. Plant Physiology 155
(1): 36-42. doi: 10.1104/pp.110.168559.

RAPPAPORT, LAWRENCE and JAMES BONNER. 1960. Interactions of Gibberellin,
Vernalization, Photoperiod and Temperature in the Flowering of Endive. Plant
Physiology 35 (1). American Society of Plant Biologists: 98.

REDDY, AMBAVARAM M, VAKA S REDDY, BRIAN E SCHEFFLER, UDO
WIENAND and ARJULA R REDDY. 2007. Novel Transgenic Rice Overexpressing
Anthocyanidin Synthase Accumulates a Mixture of Flavonoids Leading to an
Increased Antioxidant Potential. Metabolic Engineering 9 (1): 95-111.
doi:10.1016/j.ymben.2006.09.003.

RIZVI, S J and V RIZVI. 1992. Allelopathy: Basic and Applied Aspects. Springer
Netherlands. http://books.google.com.ph/books?id=5-3AEm2erJIC.

ROUPHAEL, Y., A. H. MOUNAIMNE, A. ISMAIL, E. MENDOZA-DE GYVES, C. M.
RIVERA and G. COLLA. 2010. Modeling Individual Leaf Area of Rose (Rosa
hybrida L.) Based on Leaf Length and Width Measurement. Photosynthetica 48 (1):
9-15.

ROY, J, MM CALDWELL and R P PEARCE. 1994. Exploitation of Environmental
Heterogeneity by Plants: Ecophysiological Processes Above- and Belowground.
Physiological Ecology. Elsevier Science.
http://www. google.com.ph/books?id=59Tp1ul99f0C.

RYDBERG, P A. 1913. North American Flora 22. Rosaceae. New York Botanical
Garden.

SALVUCCI, MICHAEL E and STEVEN J CRAFTS-BRANDNER. 2004. Inhibition of
Photosynthesis by Heat Stress: The Activation State of Rubisco as a Limiting Factor
in Photosynthesis. Physiologia Plantarum 120 (2). Munksgaard International
Publishers: 179-86. doi:10.1111/j.0031-9317.2004.0173.x.

126

SCHMID, K., H. HOHN, B. GRAF and H. HOPLL. 2001. Phenological Growth Stages of
Raspberry (Rubus idaeus L.). Agrarforschung 8 (5): 215-22,
http://www agrarforschungschweiz.ch/archiv_1 len.php?id_artikel=106.

SHAH, F., J. HUANG, K. CUI, L. NIE, T. SHAH, C. CHEN and K. WANG. 2011.
Impact of High-Temperature Stress on Rice Plant and Its Traits Related to
Tolerance. Journal of Agricultural Science, 1-12,
doi:10.1017/S002185961 1000360.

SHARAFI, YAVAR. 2010, Suitable In Vitro Medium for Studying Pollen Viability in
Some of the Iranian Hawthorn Genotypes. J. Med. Plant Res 4 (19): 1967-70.

SONSTEBY, ANITA and OLA M. HEIDE. 2008. Environmental Control of Growth and
Flowering of Rubus idaeus L. Cv. Glen Ample. Scientia Horticulturae 117 (3): 249-
56, doi:10.1016/.scienta.2008.05.003.

S@NSTEBY, ANITA and OLA M. HEIDE. 2009. Effects of Photoperiod and
Temperature on Growth and Flowering in the Annual (primocane) Fruiting
Raspberry (Rubus idaeus L.) Cultivar ‘Polka.’ Journal of Horticultural Science and
Botechnology 84 (4): 439-46.

S@NSTEBY, ANITA and OLA M. HEIDE. 2012. Effects of Photoperiod and
Temperature on Growth, Flowering and Fruit Yield in Annual-Fruiting Red
Raspberry Cultivars (Rubus idaeus L.). European Journal of Horticultural Science
77 (3): 97-108.

TAIZ, LINCOLN and EDUARDO ZEIGER. 2006. Plant Physiology. Fourth. Sinauer
Associates, Inc.

TALON, M, L ZACARIAS and E PRIMO-MILLO. 1992. Gibberellins and
Parthenocarpic Ability in Developing Ovaries of Seedless Mandarins. Plant
Physiology 99 (4): 1575-81. http://www nebi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23002897.

TRIPOLI, ELISA, MAURIZIO LA GUARDIA, SANTO GIAMMANCO, DANILA DI
MAJO and MARCO GIAMMANCO. 2007. Citrus Flavonoids: Molecular Structure,
Biological Activity and Nutritional Properties: A Review. Food Chemistry 104 (2):
466-79. doi:10.1016/j.foodchem.2006.1 1.054.

TSAO, RONG. 2010. Chemistry and Biochemistry of Dietary Polyphenols. Nutrients 2
(12): 1231-46. doi:10.3390/nu2121231.

VALLADARES, F. and R. W. PEARCY. 1997, Interactions between Water Stress, Sun-
Shade Acclimation, Heat Tolerance and Photoinhibition in the Sclerophyll

127

Heteromeles Arbutifolia. Plant, Cell & Environment 20 (1). Blackwell Publishing
Ltd: 25-36. doi:10.1046/j.1365-3040.1997.d01-8.x.

VASILAKAKIS, MILTIADIS D, BRENT H MCCOWN and MALCOLM N DANA.
1979. Hormonal Changes Associated with Growth and Development of Red
Raspberries. Physiologia Plantarum 45 (1). Wiley Online Library: 17-22.

WAHID, A., S. GELANI, M. ASHRAF and M. FOOLAD. 2007. Heat Tolerance in
Plants: An Overview. Environmental and Experimental Botany 61 (3): 199-223.
doi:10.1016/j.envexpbot.2007.05.011.

WHITE, PHILIP J and MAARTIN R BROADLEY. 2003. Calcium in Plants. Annals of
Botany 92 (4): 487-511. doi:10.1093/aob/meg164,

WHITEMAN, CHARLES D. 2000. Mountain Meteorology: Fundamentals and
Applications. Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA (US).

WHITNEY, G. G. 1982. The Productivity and Carbohydrate Economy of a Developing
Stand of Rubus idaeus. Can. J. Bot. 60: 2697-2703.

WINGLER, ASTRID, PETER J LEA, W PAUL QUICK and RICHARD C LEEGOOD.
2000. Photorespiration: Metabolic Pathways and Their Role in Stress Protection.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological
Sciences 355 (1402): 1517-29. doi:10.1098/rstb.2000.0712.

WITUSZYNSKA, WERONIKA and STANISLAW KARPINSKI. 2013. Programmed
Cell Death as a Response to High Light, UV and Drought Stress in Plants. In Abiotic
Stress - Plant Responses and Applications in Agriculture, edited by Kourosh
Vahdati and Charles Leslie. InTech. doi:10.5772/45842.

WYATT, ROBERT. 1982. Inflorescence Architecture: How Flower Number,
Arrangement, and Phenology Affect Pollination and Fruit-Set. American Journal of
Botany. JSTOR, 585-94.

YESHITELA, T., P. J. ROBBERTSE and P. J.C. STASSEN. 2005. Potassium Nitrate
and Urea Sprays Affect Flowering and Yields of ‘Tommy Atkins’ (Mangifera
indica) Mango in Ethiopia. South African Journal of Plant and Soil 22 (1): 28-32.
doi:10.1080/02571862.2005.10634676.

YILDIRIM, E, | GUVENC, M TURAN and A KARATAS. 2007. Effect of Foliar Urea
Application on Quality , Growth , Mineral Uptake and Yield of Broccoli (Brassica
oleracea L., var. italica). Plant Soil Environ. 53 (3): 120-28

128

ZAMSKI, E. and A. A. SCHAFFER. 1996. Photoassimilate Distribution Plants and
Crops Source-Sink Relationships. illustrate, Books in Soils, Plants, and the
Environment. Marcel Dekker Inc. _http://books.google.com.ph/books?id=Dv-
ZvJulC2UC.

ZHANG, CAIXI, KENJI TANABE, FUMIO TAMURA, AKIHIRO ITAI and
MASASHI YOSHIDA. 2007. Roles of Gibberellins in Increasing Sink Demand in
Japanese Pear Fruit during Rapid Fruit Growth. Plant Growth Regulation 52 (2):
161-72. doi:10.1007/s10725-007-9187-x.

129

INTERNET SOURCES CITED

[DA-BAR] Department of Agriculture - Bureau of Agricultural Research. (2012).
Philippine wild raspberry Sapinit breaks through in the market with its unique
taste, phytochemical. Retrieved August 2, 2012, from Agriculture and Fisheries
Market Information System (AFMIS):
http://afmis.da.gov.ph/index.php/home/314-philippine-wild-raspberry-sapinit-
breaks-through-in-the-market-with-its-unique-taste-phytochemical-.html

[PAG-ASA] Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services
Administration. (n.d.). Climate of the Philippines. Retrieved May 15, 2013, from
http://kidlat.pagasa.dost. gov.ph/cab/statfram.htm

DAFFON, P. J., & DAFFON, P. (Directors). (2011). Mag-Agri Tayo: Sapinit (Philippine
Wild Raspberry) (Motion Picture]. Philippines. Retrieved 2012, from
http://www. youtube.com/watch?v=ZOA tbyUudMI

DE GUZMAN, C. (2009). TechCom project to conserve Philippine wild raspberry in
progress. Retrieved 2012, from BAR Online:
http://www. bar.gov.ph/news/default.asp

MOIICA, M. J. (2010, July - December). Sapinit, the Pinoy wild berry. Retrieved August
2, 2012, from BAR Research and Development —_Digest:
http://www.bar.gov.ph/bardigest/2010/juldec2010_sapinit.asp

TEVES, C. J. (2011, August 2). DA plans to expand areas planted to wild raspberries.
Retrieved August 2, ——-2012,_~— from ~—_InterAksyon.com:
http://www.interaksyon.com/article/9845/da-plans-to-expand-areas-planted-to-
wild-raspberries

130

RESOURCE PERSONS

Dr. Jessamyn D. Recuenco-Adorada of the Crop Protection Cluster, College of
Agriculture and Museum of Natural History, UPLB

Mr. Dennis Bihis and Mr. Alex Calingasan of Quezon Agricultural Experiment Station,
Lagalag, Tiaong, Quezon

Mr. Michael Biguelme, Dr. Laverne Gueco and Ms. Maria Lea Villavicencio of the
‘National Plant Genetic Resources Laboratory, Institute of Plant Breeding, UPLB

Dr. Roberto E. Coronel of the Crop Science Cluster, College of Agriculture, UPLB and
RC Fruit Conservation Farm, Calauan, Laguna

Mr. Ariel of Dolores, Quezon

Prof. Amold Esguerra of UP Manila and T-House Hotel and Spa, Tagaytay City, Cavite
Mr. Manding Inocentes of Inocentes Farm, Pinagdanlayan, Dolores, Quezon

Ms. Joana Rose Vergara of PhilRice Los Balos, Laguna

Mr. Rocky Marcelino of the Institute of Statistics, UPLB

Mr. Dionisio Pullan of BK Valley Mountain Lodge, Kinabuhayan, Dolores, Quezon

Dr. Pompe Sta. Cruz, and Mr. Ryan Tayobong of the Crop Science Cluster, College of
Agriculture, UPLB
