GENETIC DIVERSITY ASSESSMENT OF SELECTED PHILIPPINE INBRED RICE (Oryza sativa L.) LINES AND ITS USE IN HYBRID RICE BREEDING

FERGIE ANN AQUINO QUILLOY

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

Master of Science in Plant Breeding

DECEMBER 2016

ABSTRACT

Identification of heterotic groups reduces the task of crossing several parental
lines to develop high-yielding hybrids. This study aims to assess the genetic diversity of
the Philippine germplasm to help progress hybrid rice breeding by establishing heterotic
groups. Ten inbred lines were assembled as representatives of 182 elite rice inbred lines
from the hybrid rice breeding work of PhilRice CES and PhilRice LB-UPLB for half-
diallel crossing. The genetic distance values revealed narrow genetic diversity of inbred
lines within the population. Meanwhile, heterotic groups were established using different
schemes, namely F₁ yield per se, heterosis, heterotic grouping based on GCA of multiple
traits (HGCAMT), specific combining ability (SCA), and heterotic group’s specific and
general combing ability (HSGCA). Among the different schemes, classification of inbred
lines based on F₁ yield per se and heterosis were the most efficient at 66.67% with two
heterotic groups followed by the groupings based on SCA and HSGCA at 44.44%, and
HGCAMT at 34.29%. Hence, two-heterotic-group model is the most efficient
classification of the evaluated inbred lines. Additionally, the groupings based on
agronomic and on molecular data generated a breeding efficiency of 58.82% and 32.50%,
respectively. Inconsistencies between the different grouping methods assessed based on
genetic distance measures and on agronomic performance can be attributed to the narrow genetic diversity of the sample population. It is recommended that future work deal with
a more diverse population to have a better overview of the heterotic groupings within the
germplasm. Nonetheless, there exists commercially valuable heterosis within the population despite fairly narrow genetic diversity of the germplasm.

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

Background of the Study

Rice is among the most important cereal crops in the world as it is the staple food
and the primary source of dietary carbohydrates of more than half of the world’s
population. Coupled with continuous population expansion, worldwide rice demand is
projected to increase from 676 million tons to 763 million tons and to 852 million tons
from 2010 to 2020 and to 2025, respectively, which is an overall increase in rice demand
of 26% in 25 years (Khush, 2013).

Through the years, there has been a remarkable progress in rice productivity
especially during the green revolution phase in 1966 after the release of the first high-
yielding cultivar, IR8, (Peng et al., 1999; Peng et al., 2000). However, these gains started
to hit a plateau and thus, food security is still among the biggest challenges of the 21*
century. Addressing constraints in food security involves raising the yield ceiling of rice
by improving rice grain yield per unit land area (Yang et al., 2007) as land areas for rice
production are continuously diminishing due to land conversion for housing and
industrial needs (Khush, 2013).

Development of rice varieties with an inherently high yield potential, such as
hybrid rice, is a viable option for increasing grain yields. It was in 1976 when rice

hybrids were first commercialized in China (Tu et al., 2000; Yang et al., 2007; Virmani,

2002) and were found to have an approximately 30% hybrid yield advantage (Duvick,
1999). Peng et al. (1999) found about 9% advantage of indica‘indica hybrids over indica
inbred cultivars. Aside from additional yield gain, Tu et al. (2000) noted an additional
responsiveness and adaptability of hybrid rice to fertilizer and to different environments.
With this, hybrid breeding is deemed as valuable approach for breaking through the yield
barrier and addressing insufficient rice supply for the growing demand.

Hybrid rice breeding relies heavily on the exploitation of heterosis or hybrid vigor
produced through crossing distinct inbred cultivars. This breeding approach depends on
genetic diversity such that crosses of divergent parents are expected to produce offsprings
with greater heterotic effects (Ovung et al., 2012). However, an optimum magnitude of
divergence must be met for heterosis to be beneficial. In which case, it has been observed
that yield heterosis in the tropics is lower as compared to that in China which is probably
due to a limited divergence among inbred lines (Xie et al., 2012) as revealed through
molecular marker-aided studies.

Heterosis, as defined by Shull (1952), is “the interpretation of increased vigor,
size, fruitfulness, speed of development, resistance to disease and to insect pests, or to
climatic rigors of any kind manifested by crossbred organisms as compared with
corresponding inbreds, as the specific result of unlikeness in the constitution of uniting
parental gametes.” Due to the commercial value of these traits, heterosis is regarded as
one of the greatest applied achievements of genetics in agriculture (Pingali et al., 1996;

Nuruzzaman et al., 2002) which currently generates a multi-billion dollar business.

However, the physiological and genetic bases of heterosis remain unknown. Due to this,
hybrid rice development still depends on the breeder’s trial-and-error approach (Xie et
al., 2012).

Correspondingly, several crosses must be made to develop a high-yielding hybrid
especially when handling a number of inbred lines. In addition, the merit of each inbred
line should be determined to generate information on the genetic identity of the different
genotypes (Aliu et al., 2005) As mentioned by Khiabani et al. (2015), diallel mating
design offers an avenue to handle several lines in unique cross combinations. Moreover,
diallel crossing generates information on the genetic mechanisms governing different
traits (Khan et al., 2007) based on the analysis of combining ability between lines.
Sprague and Tatum (1942) defined combining ability as the capacity of a genotype to
transmit superior performance to its resulting offspring. GCA is gauged as the average
performance of a line in a series of crosses and gives an estimate of the relative ability of
the line to transmit its desirable performance; whereas, SCA is measured as the
performance of a line in a specific cross.

A number of studies in several crops such as maize, sunflower and sorghum have
shown that a precise assignment of parental lines in heterotic groups is valued for
successful hybrid breeding programs (Xie et al., 2014). A heterotic group is a germplasm
collection made up of related or unrelated genotypes with the same combining ability,
performance, and heterosis (Melchinger and Gumber, 1998), and can generate superior

hybrids when crossed to another genetically distinct germplasm group (Xie et al., 2012;

Rajendran et al., 2014). At present, several parameters have been employed to establish
heterotic groups. These parameters include the use of germplasm origin, pedigree
information, phenotypic differences, and molecular marker data, specific combining
ability, and heterosis (Fan et al., 2004; Badu-Apraku et al., 2005; Gafishi and
Kanyamasoro, 2012; Laude and Carena, 2015; Wang et al., 2015). Markedly, two novel
techniques have been proposed in the establishment of heterotic groups namely heterotic
groups’ specific and general combining ability (HSGCA) and heterotic groupings based
on GCA of multiple traits (HGCAMT).

HSCGA was initially proposed by Fan et al. in 2008 (cited by Fan et al., 2009) to
assign a maize line into a known heterotic group by crossing it to a tester from a known
heterotic group. It takes into account both the GCA of a line and the SCA of the cross
between two lines; hence, it can account for more variation than using GCA or SCA
alone. Meanwhile, HGCAMT was proposed by Badu-Apraku et al. in 2013b. It was
suggested that using the GCA values of several traits can provide a better heterotic
grouping since HSGCA and SCA only relies on the combining ability yield.

Therefore, selection of breeding materials for hybrid development can be
facilitated upon the establishment of heterotic groups (Hasan et al., 2013). Moreover,
heterotic groups can help maximize rice heterosis (Wang et al., 2015) and improves the
efficiency of a breeding program by producing more high-yielding hybrids while
handling fewer crosses (Rajendran et al., 2014). However, systematic studies targeted at

the heterotic grouping of tropical rice germplasm have been scarce. Moreover, no

particular study has focused on the possible heterotic groups found within the Philippine

rice germplasm, as of writing.

Objectives of the Study

The study primarily aims to asses the genetic diversity of the Philippine
germplasm to help progress rice hybrid breeding programs through the establishment od
heterotic groups. The specific objectives are to:

1) estimate the genetic diversity of selected parental inbred lines based on SNP
marker data and phenotypic parameters;

2) assess the general and specific combining abilities of yield and yield component
traits of inbred lines;

3) evaluate yield heterosis of hybrids over their respective parents and checks; and

4) classify inbred lines into heterotic groups and compare the efficiency of different

heterotic grouping methods.

CHAPTER II

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE

Hybrid Rice

Early records of hybridization were documented in 1716 when Cotton Mather
demonstrated the possibility of crossing two different corn varieties planted in different
rows (Harpsted, 1975). Yet, the discovery of hybrid breeding may not be credited to a
single event or person since this is a naturally occurring phenomenon among cross-
pollinated species. Therefore, hybrid breeding technique has existed for so long as cross
pollination has occurred among crops such as corn, cassava, sunflower, sweet potato, etc.

Natural populations of cross-pollinated species exist as an assortment of hybrids.
However, the advantages of particular hybrid combinations cannot be directly observed
because they can be offset by less advantageous hybrid combinations. On the other hand,
self-pollinated species mainly exist as a collection of inbred lines under natural
populations. Crops like rice, wheat, and sugarcane are only some of the self-pollinated
plants which are being utilized for hybrid development. Yet, hybrid production among
self-pollinated species tends to be more difficult because of their natural ability to inbreed
rather than hybridize.

Rice (Oryza spp.), a member of Poaceae or grass family, is among the self-

pollinated crops which is being widely exploited in hybrid breeding. Among 22

recognizable rice species, Oryza glaberrima and Oryza sativa are currently cultivated
worldwide in West Africa and in the rest of the world, respectively (Harlan, 1975).
Within O. sativa, japonica and indica are two acknowledged constituent groups. The
japonica types are characterized as short-grained and sticky when cooked, while the

indica types are long-grained and dry when cooked (Trinkley and Fick, 2003).

Tropical regions are predominantly planted with indica varieties. Prior to 1950s,
tice productivity seldom surpassed 2.5 tons/ha. Eventually, an international indica-
japonica hybridization project was implemented by the International Rice Commission in
1950s which resulted to the production of improved rice varieties such as ADT27 in India
and Malaysia (Van Nguyen, n.d). However, the rate of increase in rice productivity was
not significant. This prompted extensive hybrid research in 1964 by Professor Yuan
Long-Ping in China (Cheng et al., 2007). Eventually, China began the first
commercialization of hybrid rice in 1976 (Tu et al., 2000; Yang et al., 2007; Virmani,
2002). Although, the developed rice varieties were soon recognized to be susceptible to
pest and diseases in the tropics and that their grain qualities were inferior than those of
prevalent high-yielding varieties in the region (Virmani, 2002). This led the researchers
from the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) to focus on developing varieties

specifically adapted to the tropics.

Since rice is a self-pollinated crop its hybrid development is more tedious than
cross-pollinated crops. The technological breakthrough in rice hybrid breeding started

with the discovery of a wild male sterile line of O. sativa L. f. spontanea in 1970 (David,

2006; Guimaraes, 2009) which reduced the difficulty of crossing procedures. Since then,
several approaches have already been developed for hybrid rice breeding including male

sterility systems and emasculation techniques.

Male sterility allows breeders to conduct hybridization and selection cycles
repetitively with appreciably less effort (Rutger and Shinjo, 1979). During the early
discovery of male sterile plants, hybrid production was based on the three-line system.
The first line has genetic-cytoplasmic male sterility (CMS) which also serves as one of
the hybrid parents; the second line is needed for maintaining sterility; and the third line is
the other parent responsible for fertility restoration of the resulting hybrid (Guimaraes,

2009).

The three-line system had also been the basis of commercial hybrid rice
production in China. Interestingly, an alternative approach is through the two-line system
which employs photoperiod-sensitive genic male sterility (PGMS) and thermosensitive
genic male sterility (TGMS) (Yuan, 1996). However, Yuan (1996) further noted some
constraints in using this approach, namely (1) inability of new hybrid to encompass the
yield ceiling if no new techniques and materials are used, (2) poor sources of male
sterility-inducing cytoplasm for the development of CMS lines, and (3) level of heterosis

in the japonica is not as good as in indica hybrids.

Likewise, emasculation techniques have also been used for hybrid development in
China. Shao and Hu (1988) described chemical emasculation as the physiological male

sterility developed by spraying rice plants with chemicals, such as gametocides, which

10

induce stamen sterility without destroying the pistil. Further, they noted that this
approach is a promising alternative for the development of male sterile lines wherein vast
varieties can be used as the parental lines of hybrid crosses. Other emasculation
techniques are laborious especially for the development of large number of seeds for
commercial purposes. Nonetheless, these strategies may be used as a marginal approach
for breeding researches in the absence of male sterile lines, hence can also help in the
analysis of more diverse rice varieties.

Utilization of valuable hybrid combinations has been beneficial for commercial
purposes. Further, the discovery of different approaches for hybrid development has
eased the breeding process. However, not all crosses yield advantageous offsprings.
Rajendran et al. (2014) noted that the strength of a breeding program relies on the genetic
variability of the base population. Hence, studies on genetic diversity are still of key

importance.

Rice Genetic Diversity

Genetic diversity plays a significant role in the development of superior
genotypes. It is essential to cross divergent parents when developing desirable heterotic
hybrids (Akter et al., 2009; Xie et al., 2014). Xie et al. (2012) noted a limitation in hybrid
rice yield in the tropics which is possibly due to a narrow genetic divergence among

parentals within the germplasm. However, crossing extremely divergent parents has not

1]

always yielded advantageous results. Sun et al. (2002) recommends that the genetic
distance of parents for hybrid development must be 0.4-0.8. Ultimately, the assessment of
germplasm genetic diversity is an indispensible tool for hybrid breeding since genetic
diversity accounts for the genetic distance among genotypes.

Estimation of genetic diversity may be through the analysis of phenotypic traits,
pedigree records, or DNA markers. Utilization of phenotypic traits does not entail
expensive technology. However, it necessitates large land areas for experimentation.
Moreover, phenotypic traits usually exhibit phenotypic plasticity; conversely, this permits
diversity analysis in the presence of environmental variation (Mondini et al., 2009).
Wang et al. (2006) analyzed 41 parental lines used in commercial hybrid rice production
in China which formed two clusters, early or medium-maturing cluster and medium or
late-maturing cluster. However, these clusters do not reveal the genetic relationships
among parental lines due to grouping of different lines (i.e. D62B, Xinlu B, Xinciehuang
B and Zhenshan 97B into early or medium maturing; II-32B, Gang 46B into late or
medium-maturing) derived from the same source population (i.e. Zhenshan 97B) into
different clusters. Thus, due to genotype-by-environment interaction and unknown
genetic control of polygenic morphologic traits, the estimates of genetic diversity based
on plant morphology may be biased (Smith and Smith, 1992). Nonetheless, analysis of
morphological traits still gauge diversity analysis as shown by Ovung et al. (2012) where
they analyzed 70 rice genotypes using 13 quantitative characters. The rice genotypes
were divided into nine clusters. Meanwhile, the pattern of group assemblage

substantiated the existence of a significant amount of variability.

12

Diversity analysis through the use of pedigree information by calculating
coancestry or coefficient of parentage (COP) is an indirect (He et al., 2012) and
unpredictable measure since pedigree information is affected by previous selection
pressures and by the foundation breeding materials (Xu et al., 2002). Further, Xu et al.
(2002) studied 80 parental lines from the Philippine hybrid breeding program wherein the
pedigree information was traced back to the ultimate ancestor with unknown pedigree
information. Their study revealed greater diversity among restorer (R) lines than
maintainer (B) lines as accounted by the mean coefficient of coancestry of 0.11 and 0.27,
respectively, and 0.64 between R and B lines indicating a significant divergence among
them. Cluster analysis revealed two major clusters, R- and B-cluster, with major
constituents of restorer and maintainer lines, respectively. In addition, Wang and Lu
(2006) performed genetic diversity analysis of 100 parental lines of indica hybrid rice in
China. Their study estimated a low mean COP of 0.056 which translates to a high degree
of diversity in the Chinese breeding program while cluster analysis revealed 3 groups, A
(CMS lines), B (restorer lines and TGMS lines), and C (CMS lines and restorer lines).
Both studies showed a degree of uncertainty in assigning genotypes in different clusters.
Nevertheless, these authors stated that pedigree analysis may provide a good estimate of
diversity if the complete pedigree information is known.

Lastly, detection of DNA polymorphisms through DNA marker technology has
also been extensively used. These DNA markers highlight differences within the nucleic
acid sequences among different individuals (Mondini et al., 2009) and are less influenced

by temporal, spatial and environmental conditions (Wang et al., 2006). Some of the

13

widely used molecular markers for diversity studies include SSRs (Garris et al., 2005;
Wang et al., 2006; Yadav et al., 2013; Xie et al., 2014) and SNPs (Xie et al., 2012;
Choudhury et al., 2014; Rajendran et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2014). He et al. (2012) used
both simple sequence repeats (SSR) and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) markers
to estimate the overall genetic diversity across 168 hybrid rice parentals. The genetic
diversity estimates are 0.50 and 0.29 while genetic distance values are 0.45 and 0.26 for
SSR and SNP, respectively. This indicates the less polymorphic nature of SNPs than
SSRs due to its biallelic nature. Cluster analysis based on molecular markers, SNP, SSR,
and SNP-SSR combined, placed majority of the B and R lines into separate clusters.
Hence, both molecular markers are important tools for genetic diversity studies.
Meanwhile, Xie et al. (2012) characterized the diversity of 215 cultivated indica varieties
developed in different regions in Southern China and IRRI through SNP genotyping.
Genetic diversity was estimated at 0.3136 among all samples while the average genetic
distance of Chinese varieties was 0.2720, which is higher than the average genetic
distance of IRRI varieties. Cluster analysis revealed two groups wherein one cluster is
only composed of IRRI varieties and is evidently separated from the majority of Chinese
varieties which constituted the second cluster. In addition, principal component analysis
showed a scattered graph of the Chinese varieties due to sampling from different regions,
indicating the efficiency of SNP molecular markers for diversity analysis.

It may be presumed that using the three measures of genetic diversity may
provide the most accurate quantification of genetic distance. However, Xu et al. (2002)

revealed no clear correlation among the three measures. They studied maintainer and

14

restorer lines in the Philippine hybrid breeding programs and showed that these lines
were genetically distinct. Yet, there is a weak correlation between pedigree and
quantitative traits (r = 0.027), between pedigree and SSR __(r = 0.05), and between
quantitative traits and SSR (r = 0.027). Moreover, their study showed more pronounced
between-group differentiation at the molecular than at the phenotypic level. This implies
a certain degree of misclassification of parental lines using any of the three genetic
distance estimates. Accordingly, Wang et al. (2014) used SNP analysis to characterize the
genetic diversity and structure of elite indica lines. Interestingly, Zhenshan 97B and
Minghui63, the most well-known hybrid rice parents used in the development of an elite
hybrid in China, showed narrow genetic distance and were clustered into the same group.
Therefore, it remains a challenge to predict hybrid performance solely estimated through
marker-based genetic diversity. This necessitates the assessment of heterosis and

combining ability in field trials.

Heterosis

Exploitation of the advantages of hybrid technology relies on the occurrence of
heterosis or hybrid vigor resulting from the cross between two distinct parental lines
(David, 2006). Akita (1988) enumerated three deductions to assess the physiological
bases of heterosis. Firstly, attention must be focused on the physiological mechanism
during the initial growth stages since vigor is exhibited at the initial seedling growth and

is retained only until the heading stage, but the growth rate was minimal at the ripening

15

stage. Second, conflicting data on the heterosis of net assimilation rate (NAR) and
photosynthesis of F, hybrids necessitate further analysis of these activities. Lastly, the
underlying mechanism for better canopy structure and better partitioning of
photosynthates to grain during later growth stages of F, hybrids needs added
investigation. Moreover, Lin and Yuan (1979) enumerated some of the vegetative growth
traits which exhibit heterosis. These include superiority of the hybrids’ root system in
terms of penetration rate, depth and width of root sphere, number of adventitious roots
per plant, and quantity of root fibrils for each growth period; the capability of hybrids to
conserve their panicle size even when the population density increases; greater green leaf
area and higher photosynthetic ability of hybrids than their parents; and lower
photorespiration of hybrids than ordinary high yielding varieties.

Meanwhile, Reif et al. (2005) summarized three genetic hypotheses regarding the
causes of heterosis where (1) dominance hypothesis accounts for heterosis as the
combined action of several loci with partially or completely dominant favorable allele;
(2) overdominance hypothesis assumes overdominant gene action at multiple loci; and
(3) epistasis hypothesis characterizes heterosis as a result of epistatic interactions
between non-allelic genes. However, Zhou et al. (2012) noted the scarcity of studies
which assess the relative contribution of each genetic component. They also enumerated
four conditions which must be met for complete genetic characterization, namely (i) use
elite breeding materials with time-honored superiority in crop production; (ii) target key
traits of agronomic performance; (iii) use a sample population that allows identification

of the genetic components, including dominance, overdominance, and epistasis, and (iv)

16

identify markers that can detect the genetic effects of any region in the genome. Further,
the researchers evaluated the genetic composition of yield and yield component traits of
replicated field trials of an immortalized F, population where they discovered that
overdominance is the greatest contributor to heterosis of yield, grains per panicle, and
grain weight; dominance-by-dominance interaction is responsible for the heterosis of
tillers per plant, grain weight and grain number; and single-locus dominance has
relatively small contribution to these traits. Hence, the relative contribution of each
component varied with respect to the trait considered.

Heterosis can be expressed in three ways, mid-parent heterosis (performance of a
hybrid relative to the average performance of its parents), standard heterosis
(performance of a hybrid in comparison to the high yielding variety in the region), and
better parent heterosis or heterobeltiosis (performance of a hybrid in relation to
performance of the best parent in the cross), depending on the reference where the hybrid
performance is being compared (Nuruzzaman et al., 2002; Rahimi et al., 2010). Further,
the estimate of heterosis may be positive or negative depending on the studied traits.
Akinci (2009) evaluated the heterosis percentages of six durum wheat parents and 15
hybrids generated from half-diallel crosses. Results reveal mid-parent and better parent
heterosis of -0.74% and -2.16% for heading date; 3.78% and -1.64% for 1000-kernel
weight; 5.24% and -2.24% for plant yield, respectively. Likewise, Rahimi et al. (2010)
reported significant positive heterosis for reproductive growth period, plant height, 1000-
grain weight, and brown grain width, but significant negative heterosis for growth period,

flag leaf area, panicle length, number of panicles per plant, number of grains per panicle,

17

grain yield, and brown grain length through the analysis of 15 hybrids from half-diallel
crosses of six rice cultivars.

Combining Ability

Kim and Rutger (1988) and Reddy et al. (2012) stated that hybrid performance
can be predicted if the genetic effects (i.e. additive, dominance and epistasis) are known.
Correspondingly, combining ability analysis offers a measure of variance due to general
combining ability (GCA) and specific combining ability (SCA) which signifies a relative
estimate additive and non-additive (dominance and epistasis) gene actions, respectively
(Dar et al., 2014). GCA offers insights on the fixable portion of genetic variation hence
providing information on the choice of parents with respect to the projected progeny
performance, whereas SCA is a vital factor in hybrid evaluation thus of essentiality to the
breeders’ selection activities (Asfaliza et al., 2012; Gnanamalar and Vivekanandan,
2013). Together, evaluation of combining ability facilitates the selection of appropriate
materials to be used for breeding (Hasan et al, 2013)

Rajendran et al. (2014) noted the significant role of combining ability in crop
improvement by using line-by-tester and diallel analysis. Both designs provide
information on the performance of lines and offer a basis for the selection of good
combiners to be used for the breeding program. Further, these have been extensively
used in combining ability studies due to affordability and the ability to discriminate
between good and poor combiners (Akter et al., 2010). Independent studies of Pradhan et

al. (2006), Saleem et al. (2010), Swamy et al. (2003), and Sao and Motiramani (2006)

18

used line-by-tester mating design to evaluate combining ability of different rice inbred
lines. The studies concluded the preponderance of non-additive gene action for the
different traits based on the GCA:SCA ratio. However, Al-Falahy (2013) pointed out that
the evaluation of inbred lines must involve the assessment of all possible crosses.
Through diallel mating design the merits of each inbred line can be determined; hence
this is more appropriate for combining ability analyses.

Vanaja et al. (2003) studied 28 hybrids generated from crossing 8 rice varieties
through diallel mating. They discovered the significance of both additive and non-
additive gene effects governing yield while most of the yield component traits (i.e.
number of days to 50% flowering, leaf area per plant at maximum tillering stage, number
of days to harvest, ratio of vegetative phase to reproductive phase, number of panicles m™
2 number of spikelets per panicle, number of tertiary branches per panicle, panicle
length, number of grains per panicle, spikelet sterility percentage, length/breadth (L/B)
ratio of grain, grain yield per plant, harvest index, amylose content, and alkali spreading
value) are governed by non-additive gene effects. Meanwhile, Asfaliza et al. (2012)
evaluated seven Malaysian rice varieties and found significance of both GCA and SCA
mean square values which indicate the importance of additive and non-additive gene
effects, respectively. Yet, most grain quality traits (i.e. amylose, gel consistency, grain
length, grain weight, milled grain length, milled grain width, and length-to-width) are
controlled by additive gene action. Additionally, Gnanamalar and Vivekanandan (2013)
studied seven high yielding rice genotypes and their 21 hybrids where they revealed the

predominance of both additive and non-additive gene actions with respect to different

19

traits considered. Additive genetic variance was significant for hundred grain weight,
kemel length, kernel L/B ratio, and kernel length after cooking, whereas grain yield,
hulling percentage, milling percentage, head rice recovery, kernel breadth, linear
elongation ratio, water uptake, volume expansion ratio, alkali spreading value, amylose
content, and gel consistency were dominated by non-additive genetic variance.

Depending on the goals of the breeding program, parents with high positive
and/or negative GCA values can be used (Rahimi et al., 2010). For example, parents with
positive GCA can be used for breeding for high grain yield and 1000-grain weight, while
parents with negative GCA can be used in breeding for short growth period and low plant
height. Knowledge of combining ability provides a predictive measure to select superior
lines for hybrid development without the need of performing the laborious task of doing

actual crosses.

Heterotic Groups

Apart from using superior lines and the analysis of combining ability, the success
of hybrid breeding can be improved through the application of well-defined heterotic
groups. The notion of heterotic groups started from the observation that maize inbred
lines from certain populations produced better hybrids when crossed with inbred lines
from other populations (Hallauer et al., 1988).

Melchinger and Gumber (1998) proposed the following steps for the construction

of heterotic groups: (1) dividing the germplasm into groups based on genetic similarity;

20

(2) identifying parental lines from each subgroup to be used in a diallel cross; (3)
evaluation of parental lines and generated hybrids in replicated trials; and (4) selection of
the most promising crosses as the potential heterotic patterns based on the identification
criteria. Further, they recommended four parameters to identify heterotic groups and
patterns namely, (1) high mean performance and genetic variance in the hybrid
population to determine possible selection response; (2) high per se performance and
good adaptation of one or both of the parental heterotic group; (3) low inbreeding
depression of the materials to be developed as inbreds; and (4) a stable CMS system and
effective restorers and maintainers, if hybrid breeding is based on CMS.

Barata and Carena (2006) studied 13 maize North Dakota (ND) inbred lines from
diverse genetic background. Using a diallel mating design and molecular marker
information, they revealed that some ND lines such as ND284 and ND291, which were
both derived from NDSM, clustered separately into BSSS and Lancaster Sure Crop
groups, respectively. Unlike maize, however, rice is an autogamous species where gene
flow is restricted, and hence, ecologically and geographically distinct groups are expected
to show great differentiation (Garris et al., 2005). Xie et al. (2014) assessed 18 parents
used in the hybrid breeding program of IRRI using diallel mating and found two heterotic
groups which were based on the maintainer (B) and restorer (R) line germplasms.
However, based on the study of Menkir et al. (2004), the grouping of maize inbred lines
based of yield data were different from the groups identified using molecular markers.
Hence, germplasms cannot be accurately classified into groups based solely on molecular

marker data. This justifies the need for field trials in the classification of heterotic groups.

21

Using agronomic data Badu-Apraku et al. (2005) clustered 65 extra-early
maturing maize inbred lines into four clusters. However, as further noted by the authors,
groupings based on phenotypic data are only preliminary and must be confirmed for
GCA and SCA in hybrid combinations. In relation to this, Fan et al. (2004) used SCA
data from the diallel crossing of ten quality-protein maize (QPM) inbred lines where they
revealed three heterotic groups. Similarly, Gafishi and Kanyamasoro (2012) categorized
52 maize inbreds into two heterotic groups using SCA estimates. However in 2008 Fan et
al. (cited by Badu-Apraku et al., 2013a; 2013b) stated that yield SCA is likely influenced
by the interaction between the parental lines in the cross, and between the environment
and the hybrid which can cause the classification of the same inbred line in different
heterotic groups. Hence the authors proposed that use of combined GCA and SCA effects
in classifying heterotic groups, termed as heterotic groups’ specific and general
combining ability (HSGCA). Fan et al. (2009) used 23 maize inbred lines and found that
HSGCA was 16.7% and 23.6% more efficient that the groupings based on SSR marker
and SCA, respectively. However, Badu-Apraku et al. (2013b) mentioned that the SCA
and HSGCA values used for heterotic groupings were commonly evaluated from the
observed grain yield of genotypes. Further the authors noted that, since yield is
influenced by several traits, heterotic grouping based on the GCA effects of multiple
traits (HGCAMT) is more appropriate especially since GCA reflects additive gene
effects. Additionally they revealed that the use of HGCAMT had closer correspondence

to HSGCA than when SCA was used.

CHAPTER Il

METHODOLOGY

Experimental Materials

A population of rice elite inbred breeding lines from the germplasm collection of
the Philippine Rice Research Institute - Central Experiment Station at Munoz, Nueva
Ecija (PhilRice CES) and the Philippine Rice Research Institute Los Bafios and
University of the Philippines Los Bajfios collaborative project (PhilRice LB-UPLB) were
utilized in the study. A total of 300 rice inbred lines from 2014 dry season (DS) harvest
were initially requested. Based on pedigree information, the number of inbred lines was
reduced to 182. These inbred lines were assembled for seed increase during the 2014 wet
season (WS) at PhilRice LB, IRRI experiment station, block UG.

The selected 182 inbred lines were grown to produce seedlings for molecular
evaluation. Leaves were collected from five-week old seedlings for genomic DNA
extraction following the modified cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) method
(Murray and Thompson, 1980). The isolates were purified using RNase treatment and
then normalized to 50 ng/ul. Extracted genomic DNA from all entries were sent to the
Molecular Marker Applications Laboratory (MMAL) at IRRI for SNP genotyping using

Illumina 6K Infinium platform.

23

Out of 182 elite inbred lines, ten inbred lines (Table 1) were chosen as parental
lines for half-diallel mating to generate 45 hybrid crosses. The parental lines were
selected such that these lines represented the population structure and the distribution of
genetic distances of the original population and. Staggered planting of parentals at four to
seven days interval was done in PhilRice LB to assure appropriate flowering
synchronization. Inbred lines used as female parents were emasculated using a vacuum
emasculator. Pollination was done the following day. At about 21-25 days after
pollination, matured F, seeds were harvested. Crossing was done throughout the whole
duration of 2015 WS until enough F; seeds were produced for the replicated multi-

location trials.

Table 1. Sample population of ten inbred lines from the germplasm of PhilRice CES and
PhilRice LB-UPLB collaborative project and their inbred codes

INBRED CODE PARENTAL LINES
Line 1 PR26873-PJ21-2-1
Line 2 PR40502-4-2-1-1
Line 3 C7006-PR-B5-71-3-1-1
Line 4 C8262-7-3-1-1
Line 5 OWC2252
Line 6 OWC2304
Line 7 OWC2911(WC7-2641)
Line 8 C8278-15-1-1-2
Line 9 RPP6-25

Line 10 SN761


24

Field Trials

The generated F, hybrids, parents, and checks were evaluated in replicated multi-
location trials during 2016 DS at Munoz, Nueva Ecija and Los Bafios, Laguna. A total of
57 entries (10 parentals, 45 hybrids, 1 hybrid check, and 1 inbred check) were laid out in
a randomized complete block design (RCBD) in three replications.

The total numbers of seeds of each of the 45 hybrids were equally allocated to the
two experimental sites. The seeds were soaked in fungicide for 24 hours before they were
transferred into plant pots. Seedlings were grown for 21 days prior to transplanting into
the fields. Each entry was planted into 1 m by 2 m plots with 5 rows and 10 hills per row
at 20 cm by 20 cm spacing. Empty hills due to insufficient seeds were planted with sterile
inbred lines to minimize border effects.

Cultural field management practices were employed for optimum harvest. At the
appropriate growth stage, information on plant agronomic traits was recorded. Finally, at
maturity the plants were harvested, threshed, and cleaned for processing and further data

collection.

Data Gathered

a. Days to 50% heading — measured as number of days from soaking to the time

when 50% of the entries within a plot have exserted 50% of a plant’s panicle.

25
. Plant height (cm) — measured as the height from ground level to the top of the
tallest panicle of three randomly selected plants at maturity.
Productive tillers — measured as the number of productive tillers per plant of three
randomly selected plants at maturity.
. Moisture content — measured from three randomly harvested plants using a
moisture meter after threshing, cleaning, and drying.
Total spikelets — measured as the total number of spikelets per plant of three
randomly harvested plants. It was calculated using the following equation:

Total spikelets = Filled spikelets + Unfilled spikelets
Percentage of Filled Spikelets — measured as the ratio of developed rice grains to
the total number of spikelets produced, expressed in percentage, of three
randomly harvested plants. It was calculated using the following equation:

Number of Filled spikelets

9 i i =
DOA I CAE (Focal number of spikelets

) «100%

1000-Grain Weight (g) — measured as the weight of 1000 rice grains of three
randomly harvested plants. It was calculated using the following equation:

Dry weight of filled grains (g)
Number of filled grains

1000 — GW (g) = ( ) * 1000

. Grain yield (kg ha’' at 14% MC) — measured as the weight in kilograms of the
total harvested rice grains of all plants in each plot, normalized at 14% MC and
calibrated from yield per plot into yield per hectare. It was calculated using the

following equation:

26

[Yield per plot (g) * (100 e ] *10

Harvest area (m?)

Yield (Kg Ha*) =

Statistical Analyses

Analysis of Variance

Prior to combined ANOVA across environments, the homogeneity of error
variances was calculated using Levene’s test. After homogeneity of trait means is
assured, combined ANOVA was conducted using the PROC GLM procedure of SAS

version 9.0 using the following linear mixed model:

Yijnr = Wt Vij + ey + Ve)ijn + by + Fifa

where Yj jx; is the observed value of a trait from each test unit; 4 is the population mean;
v,j is the effect of the ij" genotype (parent or F1 hybrid); e, is the effect of the k*
environment; (ve)jij, is the interaction effect between the ij” genotype and k”
environment; b; is the effect of the I" block or replication within each environment; and,
£ijna is any residual effect. The genotype and environment effects were fixed factors

while the replication-within-environment effect was considered as a random factor.

27

Genetic Distance and Cluster Analysis

The genetic distance values were calculated based on molecular and phenotypic
data. The results of SNP genotyping was used to evaluate the genetic distance based on
molecular data of the sample population. SNP data was initially formatted using IRRI
GSL-Galaxy. The markers with 20% missing data and monomorphic patterns were
removed prior to downstream analyses.

The genetic distances were calculated using Cavalli-Sforza and Edwards (C.S.)
Chord Genetic Distances (1967) in PowerMarker version 3.25 (Liu and Muse, 2005).
Further, cluster analysis and viewing of the unrooted phylogenetic tree based on
neighbor-joining method was done using DARwin version 6 (Perrier et al., 2003). The
generated clusters based on C.S. Chord GD were used as the basis for selection of
parental lines used for diallel crosses.

Meanwhile, quantitative agronomic traits with significant genotype effects were
used to evaluate the phenotype-based genetic distance values. Raw agronomic values
were initially standardized (mean of zero and standard deviation of one) to minimize the
effects of differences in scales (Badu-Apraku et al., 2013b). Standardized values were
used to construct a dissimilarity matrix based on Euclidean distances of respective
agronomic traits. Furthermore, a dendrogram of the genetic relationship of inbred lines
was generated using the unweighted paired group method using arithmetic averages
(UPGMA) algorithm (Sneath and Sokal, 1973). These analyses were done using NTSYS

version 2.1 (Rohlf, 2000).

28

Combining Ability

General combining ability (GCA) and specific combining ability (SCA) effects of
each inbred line for the different agronomic traits were calculated following Griffing’s
method 2 model 1 (Griffing, 1956) using DIALLEL-SASOS program developed by

Zhang et al. (2005). The following genetic model was used for the analysis:

Vijn = Ut ee + git Gj + Siz + (Ge)gn + (Sl)sk + Eizx

where Y;;, is the observed value of a trait from each test unit, « is the population
mean; ¢; is the effect of the k” environment; g;/g; is the GCA effect of the i*/j parent;
sij is the SCA effect of the cross between the i and j” parents such that Si = Sis (ge) ix is
the interaction effect between GCA and k" environment; (se), is the interaction effect

between SCA and the k“ environment; and, ¢; jk is any residual effect.

Heterosis

Using the yield (kg ha‘) of hybrids, hybrid performance was evaluated against its

respective parents and against check varieties using the following formulas:

29

. . F, — MP
Midparent heterosis or MPH (%) = ———— x 100

MP
. F,— BP
Better parent heterosis or BPH (%) = x 100
SDHI (%) = F, — Check inbred variety 100
” ~~Check inbred variety
F, — Check hybrid variet
SDHH (%) = acer x 100

Check hybrid variety

where F,is the yield of the hybrid; MP is the average yield of the two inbred varieties
used as parents; BP is the value of the higher-yielding/better inbred used in the cross;
SDHI is the standard heterosis over inbred check; and SDHH is the standard heterosis

over hybrid check.

Correlation Analysis

Using Pearson product-moment correlation option of STAR version 2.0.1
(International Rice Research Institute, 2014), the correlation of several parameters were

measured including: SNP marker-based genetic distance and quantitative agronomic

30

traits-based genetic distance, GCA and SCA; GCA and F1 yield; SCA and F1 yield; and,
parent yield and hybrid yield. In addition, the genetic distance estimates were measured
for their correlation to F1 agronomic performance, yield heterosis, and yield SCA. The
cut-off point used to determine the relationship of these parameters were based on the
standards set by Taylor (1990) where correlation values (r) < 0.35 signifies low or weak
correlation, 0.36 to 0.67 represents weak to moderate correlation, and > 0.68 are strong

or high correlations.

Heterotic Grouping

F1 yield per se, SCA, heterosis (MPH, BPH, SDHI, and SDHH), HGCAMT, and
HSGCA were used to construct dendograms and subsequently assign inbred lines into
heterotic groups using the UPGMA algorithm of NTSYS version 2.1 (Rohlf, 2000).

HSGCA method was suggested by Fan et al. (2009) which classifies inbred lines
into heterotic groups based on combined GCA and SCA effects. HSGCA was calculated

using the equation proposed by Laude and Carena (2015):

HSGCA =

Gt 9;
= A+ si

Meanwhile, Badu-Apraku et al. (2013b) proposed grouping the inbred lines based

on the GCA of multiple traits, also known as the HGCAMT method. In this method, the

31

GCA effects of different traits were standardized (mean of zero and standard deviation of
one) used together simultaneously to identify the heterotic groups.

The efficiency of different heterotic grouping methods was evaluated based on the
method proposed by Fan et al. (2009). The hybrids were first categorized into inter-group
and intra-group crosses based on the different heterotic grouping methods. Subsequently,
the hybrids were classified into three yield groups (high-yielding hybrids, intermediate
yielding hybrids, and low-yielding hybrids). The breeding efficiency was calculated using
the following equation:

Number of high yielding hybrids
Fe eS Oe) *100

oe on) =
Efficiency (%) (Feat number of inter — group crosses.

CHAPTER IV

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Selection of the Sample Population

Accurate exploration of heterosis necessitates the use of highly diverse inbred
lines. Diversity is conventionally guaranteed when a large number of individuals
constitute a germplasm. However, evaluation of large germplasm collections is very
costly. To circumvent this, breeders assemble a sample population made up of few
individuals to serve as representatives of the original population.

In the study, an original population of 182 inbred lines was collected from the
germplasms of PhilRice CES and PhilRice LB-UPLB. A dendrogram of genetic
relationships of the original population based on SNP marker data was constructed using
C.S. Chord genetic distance values (Fig. 1A). Clustering and structure analysis revealed
five groups within the original population. In the study, these groupings were labelled as
SNP-G1, SNP-G2, SNP-G3, SNP-G4, and SNP-GS5S based on SNP markers.The
groupings served as basis in the selection of ten parental inbred lines for the hybrid
crosses, henceforth referred to as the sample population. Two lines from each cluster
were chosen to allow the generation of intra-group and inter-group hybrids. Fig. 1B
illustrates the relationship among the selected inbred lines. Remarkably, the relationship
among the selected inbred lines resembles the genetic relationship within the original

population. The five groups within the sample population were SNP-G1 (lines 1 and 2),

33

SNP-G2 (lines 3 and 8), SNP-G3 (lines 4 and 10), SNP-G4 (lines 5 and 6), and SNP-G5S

(lines 7 and 9).

Figure 1. Cluster of genetic relationship of rice inbred lines from the germplasm
collection of PhilRice CES and PhilRice LB-UPLB; generated using DARwin
v. 6 based on C.S. Chord Genetic Distances, estimated using 6000 SNP
markers. (A) Original population of 182 inbred lines. (B) Sample population
of ten inbred lines.

The pairwise comparisons of the genetic distances among 182 inbred lines ranged
from 0.0002 (OWC2843 vs. C8335-31-3-3) to 0.2872 (MB-169 vs. AB-94), with an
average of 0.1676. Further, about 81% of the original population have values greater than

0.15 (Fig 2A). Meanwhile, 87% of the sample population have values greater than 0.15

34

(Fig 2B). The genetic distance within the sample population has an average of 0.1623,

with values ranging from 0.0301 (Line 4 vs. Line 10) to 0.1966 (Line 6 vs. Line 7).

B

Frequency

Genetic Distance Genetic Distance

Figure 2. Distribution of pairwise genetic distance values estimated using C.S. Chord
Genetic Distance from 6000 SNP markers. (A) Original population of 182 rice
inbred lines. (B) Sample population of ten rice inbred lines.

The mean genetic distance values between the original population and the sample
population, revealed that the genetic distance values were not statistically (P>0.05)
different. Therefore, there was an efficient population reduction scheme which resulted to
the selection of ten inbred lines with the same allelic distribution as the original

population of 182 inbred lines.

35

Also, the similarity of genetic clusters and the parallel allelic frequency
distribution between the two populations indicates that the sample population was a
suitable representative for half-diallel mating. Hence, only ten parental lines and 45
hybrid crosses were considered; consequently reducing the amount of resources needed
for evaluation of the lines. Nonetheless, inferences regarding the original population can
still be generated from the observations collected upon crossing the inbred lines in the

sample population.

Genetic Distance Estimates

SNP Marker-Based Estimates

The genetic distance values of the sample population estimated using SNP marker
data are summarized in Table 2. The genetic distance values between inbred lines ranged
from 0.0301 (Line 4 vs. Line 10) to 0.1966 (Line 6 vs. Line 7), with an average of
0.1623. It must be noted that SNP-G1, SNP-G3, and SNP-GS are closer in terms of their
genetic relationships (Fig 1b). As such, SNP-G1 and SNP-G3 has a genetic distance of
0.1599, while the genetic distance between SNP-G3 and SNP-G5S is 0.1632. SNP-G2 and
SNP-G4 has the smallest estimated genetic distance of 0.1581, and the largest genetic
distance was evaluated between SNP-G4 and SNP-G5 at 0.1828. Moreover, the average
genetic distances of intra-groups range from 0.0301 to 0.1470, with an average of 0.0971;
while the inter-group differentiation ranges from 0.1581 to 0.1828, with an average of

0.1704.

36

Table 2. Genetic distance estimates of ten inbred lines based on CS Chord Genetic
Distance of 6000 SNP markers summarized by hybrid groups and by intra- and
inter-group crosses.

HYBRID CATEGORY GENETIC DISTANCE

Summarized by Hybrid Group
SNP-G2 X SNP-G4 0.1581
SNP-G1 X SNP-G3 0.1599
SNP-G3 X SNP-G5S 0.1632
SNP-G1 X SNP-G2 0.1645
SNP-G1 X SNP-G5 0.1645
SNP-G1 X SNP-G4 0.1746
SNP-G2 X SNP-G5S 0.1782
SNP-G2 X SNP-G3 0.1788
SNP-G3 X SNP-G4 0.1799
SNP-G4 X SNP-GS5 0.1828

Summarized by Intra- Or Inter-Group

Intra-group 0.0971
Inter-group 0.1704

Quantitative Traits-Based Estimates

Aside from molecular markers, analyses of phenotypic traits permit discovery of
underlying genotypic relationships (Rabara et al., 2014). Analyses of variance (Table 3)
were conducted to determine the sources of variation which significantly affected grain

yield and yield component traits.

prerk ures8 ,
‘Qy8iom urex8-9001 , ‘S1}4!ds payty Jo aBequaouad ,,, ‘syojexids [er0} | uoIUOD aanysiour ,, ‘S49]]1 aanonposd , “1ysiay ued, ‘Burpeay 0} skep. 1
Swopeey Jo seaiBap , ‘uoneotdar , SuouUOMAUe , “Aupiae Sururquios ‘oyroods , ‘Anqige Sururquios Tesoued , ‘adAjouad , ‘uoIeLIeA Jo SBOINOS ,
Ayeatyoadsa ‘sjana| Arpiqeqosd ¢0'O PUL [0'0 32 JULOIJIUBIS SI yy PUL

EER

00'86879LE £r'L7 IL LEI STIZE8ST 280 co SOTZ £OL 917 Joug
OL'OLLLE07 881 «9b €L01 6£ SS90SE Is'T xe8SL1 x87 171 oll + (@) dou
LO'I8I9ISb 8 0€ 87101 Lv'6ssspl L8'b L961 TE6 Sh AxVOS
#%16°90€L908 Ivve peso O€ P60EbT BL xSSES x0VSE 6 FseVOD
07'9098Z0S ve 0€ 9€°96 Lv 6€0IL1 LOT cbs erst x€0b «8 ax).
xOOLIT6PH0E8 ¥8ES9ET x6'SOTOI xSELZVEPID #98 xIT99 x98 1771 +08'%LP I od
«10 PS8Z9101 6b CE B88 E6L wave LOPTST CL'8 xCCEb =48E1T SP pvOS
*89 1S6LL6LZ 69° LL «L6OLIE +L 1868578 #8997 47TOIE x6LS7L 6 »V09
«OT C66b17CI e9L OE x09 EIT ~—- EB HSOTEE 401 x00 TT #8068 «=+b0Ib 0S a
oAD cMD-0001 = w PATA % SL yN Ld Hd yHLG
- 24d eAS

SLIVUL OINONOUDV FZAILVLILNVNO

‘9107 uosvas Aup ‘eunde’] ‘soueg soy] pue efiog eaonn ‘Zzounyy] Ssosoe syies} ofwoUoIe sAyeWUeNb
Jo} spuqhy cp pue soul] poqui QO, JO (YAONY) d0UeLIeA Jo siskfeue pourquiod oy} Wo sorenbs jo wins ues] “¢ F192

38

Absence of significant effects of genotype-by-environment interaction indicated
that any disparity between the two locations (Los Bafios, Laguna and Mufioz, Nueva
Ecija) equally altered the expression of agronomic traits in the hybrids, parents, and
checks. Therefore, all of the evaluated genotypes were stable in plant height, productive
tillers, grain moisture content, total spikelets, percentage of filled spikelets, 1000-grain
weight, and grain yield across both environments. This further validates collation of data
across environments for combined ANOVA and downstream analyses.

There were significant (P<0.05) differences across genotypes for the percentage
of filled spikelets and 1000-grain weight, while there were highly significant (P<0.01)
genotype effects for days to 50% heading, plant height, productive tillers, total spikelets,
and grain yield. Highly significant (P<0.01) environmental effect was observed for all
evaluated traits. This could be due to the occurrence of stem borer infestation in Mufioz,
Nueva Ecija during the field trial affecting grain yield and yield components. No
significant genotype-by-environment effect was observed for all the traits except days to
50% heading (P<0.01).

The mean number of days to 50% heading of each genotypic class was plotted
against the different locations used (Fig. 3) to evaluate whether the environment
selectively affects any of the genotypes. The ranking of different genotypic classes was
the same across both locations, where the checks had the earliest days to flower, followed
by the hybrids, and then, the parents. Hence, the environmental conditions in Mujioz,
Nueva Ecija caused all the genotypes to have shorter number of days to flowering than

the conditions in Los Bafios, Laguna.

39

88

2 87

3 86
= 85 = Checks
& 84 @ Parents

283
& 83 = Crosses

Q 82
® Overall

81

Location

Figure 3. Mean days to 50% heading of checks, parents, crosses, and overall rice entries;
dry season 2016, Los Bafios, Laguna (LB) and Mufioz, Nueva Ecija (NE),
Philippines.

From the results of combined ANOVA in Table 3, significant differences among
genotypes suggest that there exists sufficient genetic diversity within the sample
population. All the agronomic traits aside from grain moisture content were used to
reveal the relationship among the inbred lines in the population. Moisture content was
excluded since no genotypic differences were detected for this trait. Meanwhile,
quantitative measures of days to 50% heading, plant height, productive tillers, total
spikelets, percentage of filled spikelets, 1000-grain weight, and grain yield of all lines
were standardized and used to generate genetic distance values based on Euclidean
distance estimates, which were further utilized to construct a dendrogram of the genetic

relationships within the sample population (Fig. 4).

40

Three clusters were generated upon truncation of the dendrogram at 11.30. It must
be noted that there are noticeable differences between the groupings generated from the
two measures of genetic diversity. Molecular marker data categorized the inbred lines
into five groups while phenotypic data categorized the inbred lines into three where the

second and third group each had one member, Line 9 and Line 2, respectively.

Agro-G3

Figure 4. Dendrogram of the genetic relationships among the ten inbred lines of the
sample population constructed by means of unweighted paired group method
using arithmetic averages (UPGMA) of NTSYS v 2.1 based on quantitative
measures of seven agronomic traits.

The summarized genetic diversity values based on the seven agronomic traits are

presented in Table 4. The genetic diversity based on agronomic data ranged from 7.1685

41
(Line 4 vs. Line 10) to 14.6886 (Line 1 vs. Line 2), with an average of 10.8566. Similar
to the results from SNP marker data analysis, intra-group differentiation was smaller,

ranging from 7.1685 to 13.1009, than inter-group differentiation, ranging from 9.1521 to

14.6886.

Table 4. Genetic diversity estimates of ten inbred lines based on the Euclidean distance
estimates of seven agronomic traits, summarized by hybrid groups and by intra-
and inter-group crosses.

HYBRID CATEGORY GENETIC DISTANCE
Summarized By Hybrid Group
Agro-Gl X Agro-G2 11.5927
Agro-G2 X Agro-G3 11.6687
Agro-G1 X Agro-G3 11.8248

Summarized By Intra- Or Inter-Group
Intra-group 10.2943
Inter-group 11.7001

Both quantitative agronomic traits and SNP marker data showed that inter-group
differentiation was consistently higher than intra-group differentiation. This was in line
with the expectation that genetically similar individuals are grouped together in a single
cluster. In addition, the genetic diversity values estimated using the two measures were
positively correlated at r = 0.3858. According to the standards set by Taylor (1990), this

value indicates a modest correlation between the phenotypic and molecular data.

42
Contrary to this, Xu et al. (2002) found a weak correlation between the molecular and
phenotypic diversity estimates of maintainer and restorer lines of IRRI and PhilRice
using 37 SSR markers.

Dias et al. (2003) reported that the number of markers used to assay the whole
genome affects the association detected between molecular and phenotypic data. Yet,
although the current study used 6000 SNP markers, there was still a large degree of
discrepancy between the two measures of genetic distance. Additionally, utilization of
these genetic distance data in relation to hybrid performance and in identifying heterotic

groups still remains to be evaluated.

Combining Ability

From the results of ANOVA (Table 3), highly significant (P<0.01) genotype
differences for the traits days to 50% heading, plant height, productive tillers, total
spikelets, percentage of filled spikelets, 1000-grain weight, and grain yield, manifest the
presence of genetic variability within the sample population. Hence, genetic analysis was
done to determine the underlying genetic mechanisms that govern the expression of
different traits (Al-Falahy, 2013; Khiabani et al., 2015).

GCA was highly significant (P<0.01) for all traits evaluated for combining ability.
Meanwhile, SCA was highly significant (P<0.01) for days to 50% heading, plant height,
and grain yield. In addition, there was significant differences (P<0.05) for total spikelets

and no significant differences were observed in the remaining three characters.

Paid wress , “YB!om uresB-00OT , ‘sie]94!ds poy|y Jo eBequaoied , ‘syopayids [e103 , ‘su9]H eanonpoud , “yYy8t9y quejd , ‘Burpeoy %0¢ 08 skep,

eee

ZO ELEY 8S'SIb IZI- €0'1 ST'Ebl wy vl C- 0L'0- Ol
98 LILE 7BSE srl $60- 66LS 8e0 SUL 870" 6
tL 606 96:LLE- 0°0- 70 89°%- 901- ss0 wz'I 8
88°999b 11'S68 s$'0- 6S 7% 08°SOl 170 70 IL-0- L
Zl peze L€99L- 6l'l 19 I- S6'801- 8L0- S80 690 9
77 'HSBE I@'POL- slo 0S I- ty 16 €70- 100 9E I- s
LL 6b6b 68'09- 19'I- ev'Z $8°9¢ 610 — €Z0- vL'0 v
90° L%6b 09°S9b- 801 1L0- 0S brl- leo- = 0s LVI €
p79ETh 6r'ZS01 $8'0- ose 97 FEL ss'0 LL 001 z
6L'9S9€ €8 9bE- Sz'0- 60°b- 6S OLI- lol 6Lb- 98°7- I
3AD yM9D-0001 {Pall % ps old qd eHLG
(24 84) SNVAW CTSA aguaNiI

SLIVUL OINONOUDV SAILVLILNVNO

“9107 Uoseas Aip ‘eunde’] ‘soueg so] pue efiog
PANN ‘ZOUNJ] $SO1De 111] O1WIOUOITE oANJEUENb Aq soul] PaiquI Us} Jo sayeUINS (YOO) ArlfIqy SuIUIquIOD yeIoUdy ‘¢ aIqQeL,

44

Significance of GCA and SCA effects indicates the relevance of additive and
dominance genetic effects in trait expression, which further relates to the performance of
parental lines and hybrids, respectively (Pradhan et al., 2006; Asfaliza et al., 2012).
Therefore, within the sample population, additive gene action solely governs the number
of productive tillers, percentage of filled spikelets, and 1000-grain weight, while both
additive and non-additive gene effects determine the number of days to 50% heading,
plant height, total spikelets, and grain yield.

The GCA estimates of the yield component traits are presented in Table 5.
Depending on the trait of interest, a breeder may prefer an inbred line with a positive or a
negative GCA value. Asfaliza et al. (2012) reported that a positive GCA contributes to a
high value of a trait while a negative GCA implies a lower value. Negative GCA values
for plant height (-2.86) and days to maturity (-4.79) of Line 1 are desirable since breeding
programs aim to develop rice varieties that are short to intermediate in height and early-
maturing. However inbred lines with highly positive GCA values for yield and yield
components are desired to boost the yielding ability of the resulting hybrid.

In terms of the GCA of yield components, inbred lines 1, 10, 2, and 9 gave the
highest GCA values for the number of tillers, total number of spikelets, percentage of
filled spikelets, and 1000-grain weight, respectively. Taking all yield components into
consideration hybrids with desirable performances can be generated from crosses using
parental lines 7 and 10. Based on the estimated GCA values, these lines were desirable
for contributing earliness, short stature, and productivity, in terms of high number of

tillers, spikelets, and percentage for filled spikelets.

45

Yield GCA and yield means are also listed in Table 5. Yield GCA ranges from -
766.31 (Line 6) to 1052.49 (Line 2). Remarkably, the highest yielding inbreds, Line 3
(4927.06 kg ha”) and Line 4 (4949.77 kg ha"), had negative yield GCA effects.
Meanwhile, the inbreds with highest positive yield GCA effects, Line 2 and Line 7,
ranked fifth and third, respectively, in terms of actual yield means. Therefore, the
performance of an inbred line does not provide an accurate predictive value of its GCA.

SCA effects are also commonly evaluated by breeders. SCA accounts for the
interaction of specific inbred lines in a trait. Moreover, it provides insights to identify
cross combinations which can likely generate transgressive segregants (Kumar et al.,
2011; Machikowa et al., 2011). Furthermore, SCA may also be positive or negative
which is suggestive of the possible value of a trait upon crossing of respective parental
lines (Asfaliza et al., 2012).

Crosses with highest SCA effects for yield and agronomic traits are listed in Table
6. Line 2 x Line 6 expressed desirable SCA effects for days to 50% heading, Line 3 x
Line 10 for plant height, Line 1 x Line 9 for the number of tillers, Line 2 x Line 7 for
total number of spikelets, Line 1 x Line 2 for percentage of filled spikelets, and Line 5 x
Line 9 for 1000-grain weight. Remarkably, Line 1 x Line 9 had desirable SCA estimates
for several traits, namely plant height, number of productive tillers, total number of
spikelets, and grain yield. However, these crosses with the most desirable SCA values do

not show significant differences.

46

Table 6. Top five crosses with most desirable SCA estimates by trait, its per se
performance, the GCA effects of parental lines, and the GCA status of crosses
across Mufioz, Nueva Ecija and Los Bafios, Laguna, dry season 2016.

CHARACTER/ MEAN sca* _GCAEFFECT_ GCA
CROSS PERFORMANCE EFFECT Gca? GCA,° STATUS
Days to 50% heading
Line 2 x Line 6 82.83 -3.89 1.00 0.69 LxL@
Line 4 x Line 8 84.83 -2.65 0.74 1.72 LxL?
Line 2 x Line 9 83.33 -2.42 1.00 -0.28 LxH®
Line 1 x Line 3 81.00 -2.34 -2.86 1.17 HxL*®
Line 3 x Line 7 83.83 -2.25 1.17 -0.11 LxH®
Plant Height (cm)
Line 3 x Line 10 96.83 -13.26 2.50 = -2.74 LxH*
Line 5 x Line 10 95.72 4.16 0.01 -2.74 HxH!
Line 8 x Line 10 97.78 -3.78 0.55 -2.74 LxH*
Line 1 x Line 10 89.83 -3.54 -4.79 -2.74 HxH!
Line 1 x Line 9 92.28 -3.02 4.79 1.15 HxL*

Number of Productive Tillers

Line 1 x Line 9 18.67 2.08 101 038  HxH?
Line 2 x Line 10 18.28 2.08 055 0.42 HxH’
Line 5 x Line 10 16.17 1.80 0.23 042 LxH®
Line 7 x Line 8 15.83 1.49 0.21 -1.06  HxL*
Line 1 x Line 8 16.61 1.46 101-106  HxL*

Total Number of Spikelets

Line 2 x Line 7 2215.94 315.54 134.26 105.80 HxH!
Line 2 x Line 4 2158.83 307.38 134.26 56.85 HxH'
Line 6 x Line 7 1952.89 295.69 -108.95 105.80 LxH*
Line 6 x Line 9 1869.83 260.45 -108.95 57.99 LxH®

Line 1 x Line 9 1833.39 225.65 -110.59 57.99 LxH*®


47

Table 6. Continued...

CHARACTER/ MEAN SCA® GCA EFFECT GCA
CROSS PERFORMANCE EFFECT GCA? GCA,° STATUS
Percentage of Filled Spikelets
Line 1 x Line 2 78.94 9.17 -4.09 3.54 LxL?
Line 5 x Line 10 77.75 8.93 -1.50 1.03 LxH®
Line 4 x Line 10 76.07 8.61 2.43 1.03 HxH'
Line 5 x Line 7 79.87 8.46 -1.50 2.59 LxH®
Line 1 x Line 10 64.58 7.39 -4.09 1.03 LxH*

1000-grain weight (g)

Line 5 x Line 9 41.52 1297 0.75 = --0.95 HxL*
Line 1 x Line 7 27.13 1.61 -0.25 2.59 LxL?
Line 6 x Line 8 28.82 1.35 1.19 -0.72 HxL*
Line 6 x Line 10 27.72 1.33 1.19 1.03 HxL*
Line 2 x Line 3 27.64 1.09 3.54 -0.71 LxH®

Grain Yield (kg ha”)

Line 2 x Line 7 10638.78 3093.30 1052.49 895.11 HxH'
Line 6 x Line 9 7713.37 2753.63 -766.31 358.62 LxH*
Line 1 x Line 2 8722.52 2365.20 -346.83 1052.49 LxH®
Line 4 x Line 7 8181.21 1979.56 -60.89 895.11 LxH*
Line 1 x Line 9 7138.15 1758.93 -346.83 358.62 LxH®

* specific combining abiliy; ° general combining ability of ith parent; ° general combining ability of jth
parent; ¢ low-by-low cross of general combiners; * low-by-high/high-by-low cross of general combiners; ‘
high-by-high cross of general combiners

Meanwhile, it was observed that five hybrids, namely Line 2 x Line 7, Line 6 x
Line 9, Line 1 x Line 2, Line 4 x Line 7, and 1 Line x Line 9 had the highest SCA

estimates for yield. Notably, these combinations ranked first, fifth, second, fourth, and

48

seventh, respectively, in terms of grain yield. Moreover, only 17 out of 45 hybrid crosses
gave positive SCA effects for yield. The lowest SCA value was recorded for the cross
Line 1 x Line 10 at -2294.61. This hybrid had one of the lowest yields at 4158.55 kg
ha’, Remarkably, some of the highest yielding hybrids were developed from crosses with
highly negative SCA values such as crosses Line 2 x Line 10, Line 7 x Line 10, and Line
9 x Line 10 with yields 8512.41 kg ha’, 7450.11 kg ha’, and 6389.43 kg ha”,
respectively. Notably, these hybrids share a common parent, Line 10. Further, these four
parental (Line 2, Line 7, Line 9, and Line 10) were the only inbreds with positive GCA
values for yield. From this we can conclude that the yield of the hybrid is a result of the
effect of both GCA and SCA such that high-yielding hybrids were generated from
crosses with low SCA but high GCA status and high SCA but low GCA status.

The hybrids with desirable SCA values were generally products of high x low
type GCA combinations. Although there were some exceptions such as Line 2 x Line 7,
which a cross between high x high yield GCA, about 60%-80% of the most desirable
combinations involved high x low types of general combiners. Dubey (1975) explained
that high x low combinations are products of the interaction between the dominant and
recessive alleles from the good and the poor combiners, respectively. Remarkably, low x
low combinations were also able to generate desirable SCA values for some of the yield
component traits, such as days to 50% heading (Line 2 x Line 6 and Line 4 x Line 8),
percentage of filled spikelets (Line 1 x Line 2), and 1000-grain weight (Line 1 x Line 7).
Based on the GCA of crosses, the results of this study are in conformity with the findings

of Saidaiah et al. (2010) and Hasan et al. (2013).

49

The weak association between yield GCA of parental lines and yield SCA of
crosses was also revealed by Pearson’s coefficient at r = -0.0850. Meanwhile, both GCA
(r = 0.6481) and SCA (r = 0.5390) were moderately correlated to F; grain yield.
Therefore, for this population, crosses should not be limited to using parental lines with
positive GCA since desirable SCA values can also be expected from crossing high x low
and low x low general combiners. Furthermore, SCA and GCA present no predictive
value to the resulting hybrid performance; therefore, in the analysis of the population at
hand, utilization of either SCA or GCA is inadequate to provide a firm characterization of

the inbred lines.

Heterosis

Although yield components contribute to the yielding ability of a plant, the final
grain yield still remains as the ultimate measure of plant performance (Joshi et al., 2001).
Table 7 presents the recorded yields of the generated hybrids, as well as the different
measures of heterosis evaluated.

Hybrid yield ranged from 10408.33 kg ha! (Line 2 x Line 7) to 3381.23 kg ha”
(Line 1 x Line 8). It was observed that Line 1 x Line 6, a cross between the lowest-
yielding parentals, produced a relatively low-yielding hybrid at 4162.54 kg ha. This was
expected since parental performance was likely to reflect the yielding ability of its hybrid

(Young and Virmani, 1990; Sun et al., 2002), however, the cross between highest

50

yielding inbreds, Line 3 and Line 4, also had a relatively low yield (4573.39 kg ha’).
Nonetheless, Line 2 x Line 7, the best hybrid cross with a yield of 10408.33 kg ha™!, was

a product of crossing two high-yielding parents.

Table 7. Mean yield values and percentage heterosis of hybrids across Mufioz, Nueva
Ecija and Los Bafios, Laguna, dry season 2016.

TT S™*t*tCSYTELD~S~=“‘«i‘~MPH®”~—~SOS&BPH’~S™~C*«SSHDI®—S—=<C*é«SSD HH?
HYBRID (kg ha’) (%) (%) %) (%)
Line 2 x Line 7 10408,33 138.99 127.96 156.46 167.87
Line 1 x Line 2 8674.11 121.02 105.90 110.27 119.62
Line 2 x Line 10 8512.42 98.65 96.41 105.20 114.33
Line 4 x Line 7 8181.21 70.15 65.28 97.22 105.99
Line 6 x Line 9 7713.37 122.22 107.47 85.94 94.21
Line 7 x Line 10 7450.11 73.64 67.45 88.38 96.76
Line 1 x Line 9 7138.15 93.59 92.00 72.07 79.73
Line 8 x Line 10 6647.30 69.33 64.66 72.02 79.67
Line 9 x Line 10 6389.43 58.71 47.43 54.03 60.87
Line 2 x Line 9 6313.14 58.74 49.03 52.19 58.95
Line 5 x Line 7 6079.36 42.69 30.27 46.55 53.07
Line 2 x Line 4 5977.52 21.15 12.42 34.13 40.10
Line 3 x Line 8 5932.83 36.83 29.62 43.02 49.38
Line 8 x Line 9 5746.55 47.11 40.34 38.53 44.69
Line 2 x Line 8 5496.12 31.94 29.74 32.49 38.38
Line 3 x Line 10 5407.14 21.36 18.13 30.35 36.14
Line 1 x Line 7 5401.22 29.78 15.74 30.20 35.99
Line 1 x Line 3 5387.60 30.86 17.71 29.88 35.65

Line 7 x Line 9 5355.70 27.75 14.76 29.11 34.85

a=-_,,Xe_oos——ssssssaaeaSsSswmmareeses ess

51

Table 7. Continued...

YIELD. MPH*BPH®SHDI SDHH®
HYBRIDS YIELD MPH* BPH SHDI SD)

(kg ha’) (%) (%) (%) (%)
Line 4 x Line 9 5315.42 22.65 7.39 28.14 33.83
Line 2 x Line 5 $291.52 30.81 24.91 27.56 33.23
Line 7 x Line 8 5270.48 20.31 12.93 27.05 32.70
Line 2 x Line 3 5250.93 19.16 14.72 26.58 32.21
Line 4 x Line 10 5245.33 13.00 5.97 26.45 32.07
Line 5 x Line 9 5210.01 37.61 35.18 25.59 31.18
Line 5 x Line 10 5166.80 26.20 19.22 24.55 30.09
Line 4 x Line 8 5162.10 14.15 4.29 24.44 29.97
Line 3 x Line 7 5096.90 10.27 9.21 22.87 28.33
Line 6 x Line 7 4715.24 19.51 1.04 13.67 18.72
Line 4 x Line 6 4692.13 14.81 5.21 13.11 18.14
Line 4 x Line 5 4681.11 6.34 -5.43 12.84 17.86
Line 3 x Line 4 4573.39 -5.84 -9.38 8.13 12.94
Line 6 x Line 10 4519.11 19.58 4.27 8.94 13.78
Line 6 x Line 8 4386.21 19.86 712 5.74 10.44
Line 3 x Line 9 4360.86 5.14 472 5.12 9.80
Line 5 x Line 6 4309.99 21.78 11.83 3.90 8.52
Line 1 x Line 4 4287.46 -0.37 -13.38 3.35 7.95
Line 2 x Line 6 4274.68 10.99 2.27 -0.20 4.24
Line 1 x Line 5 4194.23 11.68 8.82 111 5.60
Line 1 x Line 6 4162.54 20.99 13.83 0.34 4.81
Line 1 x Line 10 4158.55 4.08 4.05 0.25 4.70
Line 3 x Line 5 4067.77 3.51 -11.13 -1.94 2.42
Line 3 x Line 6 4013.90 -5.83 -19.75 “11.45 -7.52
Line 5 x Line 8 3777.23 4.96 -1.75 -8.94 4.90
Line 1 x Line 8 3381.23 -12.76 -17.42 -18.49 -14.87

*Mid-Parent Heterosis; > Better-Parent Heterosis; ‘Standard Heterosis over Inbred check;
4 Standard Heterosis over Hybrid check

52

There were no significant differences in the yield of the ten top yielding hybrids.
Out of the ten top high-yielding hybrids, four were derived from crosses between two
high-yielding inbreds; another four were from low x high crosses; and two crosses were
from two low-yielding inbred lines. The grain yield of the hybrid crosses were weakly
correlated (r = 0.1811) to the expected yield based on the average value of observed
parental yields. From this it can be concluded that the parental performance of the
evaluated lines do not provide an accurate measure of its breeding value. Therefore,
selection of parentals for hybrid crosses must not be restricted to inbred lines with high
yield. This is in coherence with the report of Tenkouano et al. (1998) in their evaluation
of the Musa germplasm.

Further, grain yield was used to evaluate mid-parent heterosis (MPH), better-
parent heterosis (BPH), and standard heterosis against inbred (SDHI), and hybrid checks
(SDHH) (Table 7). As Laude and Carena (2015) noted, heterosis or hybrid vigor was best
estimated using grain yield. Heterosis values ranged from -12.76% to 138.99%, -19.75%
to 127.96%, -18.49% to 156.46%, and -14.87% to 167.87%, for MPH, BPH, SDHI, and
SDHH, respectively. The highest percentages among all the measures of heterosis were
detected from best-yielding hybrid, Line 2 x Line 7. Notably, this hybrid had 110% yield
advantage over the best performing parental, Line 4. The hybrid of highest-yielding
parental lines, Line 3 x Line 4, had low heterosis values at -5.84% for MPH, -9.38% for
BPH, 8.13% for SDHI, and 12.94% for SDHH.

From the results of the study, Line 2 x Line 7, Line 6 x Line 9, Line | x Line 2,

Line 2 x Line 10, and Line 1 x Line 9 were the best performing hybrids based on MPH

53

and BPH percentages. Among the 45 hybrids, 39 had higher yield than the mid-parental
value while 34 yielded higher than their respective better-performing parent. However,
among the different measures of heterosis, standard heterosis is of practical importance
among breeders (Young and Virmani, 1990) since this compares the performance of the
new hybrid to the existing commercialized varieties. The best performers based on SDHI
and SDHH were Line 2 x Line 7, Line 1 x Line 2, Line 2 x Line 10, Line 4 x Line 7, and
Line 7 x Line 10.

Majority of the produced hybrids from half diallel crosses out yielded both of the
checks used. The inbred check, PSB Rc82/Pefiaranda, yielded 4148.29 kg ha’! while the
hybrid check, NSIC Rcl16H/Mestiso 3, had 3971.68 kg ha’'. The observed yields of the
checks were lower than expected average yield of 5400 kg ha’! and 5800 kg ha” for the
NSIC Rc82 and NSIC Rc116H, respectively. Moreover, the best hybrid (Line 2 x Line 7)
outyielded the standard inbred and hybrid checks by 156.46% and 167.87%, respectively.

Results of the study were in accordance to the findings of Patnaik et al. (1990),
and Young and Virmani (1990) where they detected heterosis values beyond 100%.
Moreover, the findings of the study indicate the presence of commercially valuable
heterosis in the current germplasm since a number of hybrids yielded 20-25% higher than
the minimum value of economically important heterosis set by the National Seed Industry
Council. Hence, desirable hybrids can be developed for commercial production using the

germplasm employed in this study.

54

Genetic Distance, Hybrid Performance,
SCA and Heterosis

Hybrid performance is a reflection of the divergence of its parental lines (Xu et al.
2002). However, the positive correlation between divergence and hybrid vigor does not
stand true for the entire range of genetic diversity (Moll et al. 1965). Therefore, it is
necessary to establish the extent to which the relationship between genetic distance and
hybrid performance remains favorable, such that an increase in hybrid performance can
be inferred from any increase or decrease in the genetic distance between the parents of
the hybrid cross (Joshi et al., 2001). The genetic distance between inbred lines based on
SNP marker data and seven agronomic traits was assessed for its correlations to the
resulting hybrid agronomic performance, yield heterosis, and yield SCA (Table 8).

All of the correlations measured using both phenotypic and SNP marker data were
weakly correlated to hybrid performance. The highest coefficients were recorded between
SNP-based genetic distances and plant height at r = 0.3098, followed by the correlation
for grain yield at r = 0.3016. Similarly, the correlations of hybrid performance to the
genetic distance estimates generated from quantitative phenotypic traits were all weak,
with the exception of grain yield. The correlation was at r = 0.4071, which detects a
moderate correlation between phenotype-based genetic distance and grain yield. In
addition, negative correlations were noted for both genetic distance measures for the
traits days to 50% heading and percentage of filled spikelets. Hence, the genetic distance
between parental lines, whether based on molecular or phenotypic data, cannot provide

an accurate measure in the changes in the phenotypic traits of the resulting hybrid.

55

Therefore, for this set of inbred lines, genetic distance cannot be used to predict hybrid

per se performance.

Table 8. Pearson correlation coefficients of F; performance, heterosis, and yield specific
combining ability to genetic distance estimates based on phenotypic traits and
SNP marker data.

AGRONOMIC PERFORMANCE PHENOTYPIC TRAITS SNP” MARKERS

DTH" -0.3336 -0.2626
PH? 0.2229 0.3098
PT? 0.2841 0.1533
Ts? 0.3260 0.2613
% Filled® -0.1203 -0.1249
1000-GW' 0.2295 0.2490
Gy® 0.4071 0.3016
YIELD HETEROSIS
MPH™ 0.4677 0.3286
BPH' 0.3841 0.2415
SHDP 0.4071 0.3016
SDHH* 0.4071 0.3015
YIELD COMBINING ABILITY
sca! 0.0122 -0.0257

* days to 50% heading; > plant height; © number or productive tillers; ¢ total number of spikelets;

© percentage of filled spikelets; ‘1000-grain weight; ® grain yield; * mid-parent heterosis; ‘ better-parent
heterosis; ’ standard heterosis over inbred check; * standard heterosis over hybrid check;

' specific combining ability, " Single Nucleotide Polymorphism

56

There were also no strong correlations found between the genetic distance
estimates and the different forms of heterosis. The highest relationship was between
phenotype-based genetic distance and MPH at r = 0.4677. Likewise, MPH had the
highest correlation with the SNP marker-based genetic distance at 1 = 0.3286. Notably,
the correlations between the different heterosis values and SNP marker-based genetic
distance values were all weak while the correlations of heterosis to phenotype-based
genetic values were all moderate. Also, the relationship of SCA to both forms of genetic
distance estimates was very low, signifying that genetic distance between parental lines
also presents no predictive value to heterosis and SCA. This was in coherence with the
findings of Das et al. (2013) in sesame where the SCA effects did not correlate
significantly with neither of the genetic distance estimates based on morphology nor on
SSR marker data.

It was expected that parental divergence reflects the degree of heterosis since
combining genetically distinct parental lines provides opportunities to explore an array of
favourable gene combinations (Laude and Carena, 2015). However, results in this study
suggest that there is no robust relationship between the genetic distances of the parental
lines within the sample population and the resulting hybrid performance. This may be due
to fairly narrow genetic diversity of the original population from which the sample were
selected as revealed by genetic distance estimates ranging from 0.0002 to 0.2872. As
pointed out by Sun et al. (2002), a genetic distance of 0.4 to 0.8 between parental lines
offers the maximum potential to produce offsprings with desirable F, performance and

heterosis. Therefore, due to the narrow divergence of parental lines, the actual overview

57

of the role of genetic divergence to F, agronomic performance, heterosis, and combining

ability cannot be established.

Heterotic Grouping Methods

Assignment of inbred lines into their respective heterotic groups allows breeders
to maximize heterosis and improve the performance of a hybrid (Barata and Carena,
2006) while minimizing the number of crosses to be made since it permits breeders to
focus on making crosses between genotypes from two distinct groups. Moreover,
identification of heterotic groups reduces the trial-and-error approach which impedes
hybrid breeding. Previous methods used to assign inbred lines into heterotic groups
include pedigree analysis, quantitative genetic analysis, and molecular analysis (Fan et
al., 2004). However, these approaches do not reflect the actual level of hybrid vigor from
the crosses among heterotic groups.

In the study, the heterotic groupings of ten rice inbred lines were constructed
based on heterosis (MPH, BPH, SDHI, and SDHH), HGCAMT, SCA, HSGCA, and yield
per se. In utilizing these methods, it was hypothesized that the parameters underlying
these schemes reflected the actual performance of inbred lines in crosses; hence,
providing the best avenues to classify inbred lines into heterotic groups. Table 9 presents

the different heterotic groupings based on the different grouping schemes.

58

Table 9. Grouping assignments of ten rice inbred lines from the germplasm collection of
PhilRice CES and PhilRice-UPLB collaborative project and breeding efficiency
by different heterotic grouping methods.

SCHEMES I ll Il IV 9
(%)
1,3,4,5
BPH/MPH/ Dep eden
SDHI/SDHH' © ne Ee SEH)
HGCAMT? —_1,3,5,6 8 2,7,10 4,9 34.29
1,2, 3,4,
SCA® 5,6,7,8, 10 44.44
9
1, 2, 3, 4,
HSGCA‘ 5,6,7,8, 10 44.44
9
1,3, 4,5,
Yield per se 6,7,8,9, 2 66.67
10
SNP° Marker 1,2 38 410 56 79 32.50
Quantitative 1,3, 4, 5, 9 2 58.82

agronomic data 6,7, 8, 10

“better-parent heterosis/mid-parent heterosis/standard heterosis over inbred check/standard heterosis over
hybrid check; ° heterotic groupings based on general combining ability of multiple traits; ° specific
combining ability; “heterotic grouping based on general and specific combining ability; ‘ Single Nucleotide
Polymorphism

Two heterotic groups were identified using any of the measures of heterosis

(MPH, BPH, SDHI, and SDHH), SCA, HSGCA, and yield per se. Both heterosis and

59

yield per se classified Line 2 in the second group while the rest of the inbred lines were
categorized in the first group; whereas, both SCA and HSGCA solely classified Line 10
in the second group. Meanwhile, HGCAMT divided the inbred lines into four clusters
which were fairly distinct from the heterotic groupings generated using the other
methods.

Since there were several grouping schemes employed in the study, the breeding
efficiency of each heterotic grouping method was calculated based on the method
proposed by Fan et al. (2009). Evaluation of breeding efficiency allowed identification of
the best heterotic grouping method which identified the most number of high-yielding
crosses across the total number of inter-heterotic group crosses. Therefore, the most
efficient method permits making less number of crosses while still producing several
high-yielding hybrids.

Among all the grouping methods, the highest efficiency (66.67%) was from the
groupings based on the different heterosis measures and yield per se. These two methods
identified six high-yielding hybrids among nine inter-heterotic group crosses. Meanwhile,
both SCA and HSGCA identified four out of nine inter-group crosses with a breeding
efficiency of 44.44%. The similarity between the groupings and efficiencies based on
SCA and on HSGCA is attributed to the large influence of SCA in the calculation of
HSGCA (Laude and Carena, 2015). HGCAMT had the lowest efficiency of 34.29%
which only identified 12 high-yielding hybrids out of 35 inter-group crosses. In addition,
the breeding efficiency of the clusters based on SNP marker data and agronomic data

were listed in the table. The phenotype-based groupings identified 10 out of 17 inter-

60

group crosses with an efficiency of 58.82%. Notably, the groupings identified using
agronomic data gave one of the highest efficiencies. Meanwhile, the groups identified
using SNP marker data had the lowest efficiency of 32.50% which identified 13 out of 40
inter-group crosses that were high-yielding. These findings were in coherence with the
results of Menkir et al. (2004) where the groupings of maize inbre lines generated based
on combining ability varies from the grouping identified using molecular marker data.

It can be concluded that the groupings SNP marker data only reflected the
diversity of the population. However, the groupings cannot be used to establish desirable
heterotic groups in the population. This was contrary to the findings of Badu-Apraku et
al. (2015) in quality protein maize inbres where the groupings based on SNP markers was
the best method to classify inbred lines into heterotic groups. Conversely, as noted by
Barata and Carena (2006), the heterotic group classification based on molecular markers
are not reliable due to the complex genetic nature of economically important traits. In
addition, the groupings based on quantitative agronomic data offered a better
classification of inbred lines to reveal heterotic groups within the population. The most
efficient heterotic grouping for this set of inbred lines was based on heterosis and yield
per se. The correspondence between these methods was expected since all forms of
heterosis were calculated based on the recorded grain yield data. Moreover, based on
heterosis and yield per se, two-heterotic-group model was the most appropriate

classification for the sample population.

CHAPTER V

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

The increasing rice demand calls for a cost-effective breeding strategy which
develops desirable high-yielding rice varieties. Hybrids offer a unique strategy to
improve the yielding ability of rice varieties. However, a breeder is often daunted of the
task of evaluating several lines during hybrid development. To address this, several
researchers have proposed establishment of heterotic groups within the germplasm.
However, studies regarding the heterotic groupings of the tropical rice germplasm have
been scarce. Moreover, no particular study has focused in identifying the heterotic groups

within the Philippines germplasm.

The present study assembled ten elite rice inbred lines which represented a
population of 182 inbred lines from the breeding work of PhilRice CES and PhilRice LB-
UPLB. The ten inbred lines were crossed in a half-diallel fashion and planted in field

trials to generate the information needed to classify the inbred lines into heterotic groups.

Prior to the classification of lines into heterotic groups the genetic distance
between lines, combining ability, and heterosis were determined. The genetic distance
values assessed using molecular marker data and phenotypic data generated different
groupings of the ten inbred lines. Moreover, the distance estimates were moderately

correlated; nonetheless, intra-group differentiation was consistently higher than inter-

62

group differentiation which was expected since cluster analysis groups individuals with

closer relationships.

Combining ability and heterosis were determined after crossing the ten inbred
lines. Combining ability analysis revealed that additive gene action governed the number
of productive tillers, percentage of filled spikelets, and 1000-grain weight while both
additive and non-additive gene action governs the expression of number of days to 50%
heading, plant height, total number of spikelets, and grain yield. However, the correlation
between GCA and SCA to grain yield was weak. This suggests that crosses should not be
limited to parental lines with high GCA values and to crosses with desirable SCA values.
With this, the relationship of inbred lines with regard to hybrid combinations cannot be

characterized based solely on GCA or SCA values.

Evaluation for heterosis revealed that majority of the hybrids had positive
heterosis values and that there is commercially valuable heterosis within the germplasm.
However, the observed value of hybrid yield deviates from the expected value based on
the average yield of parental lines which indicates that parental performance do not
reflect its breeding value especially since the interaction of both parental lines affects
hybrid performance. Nonetheless, commercially desirable hybrids can be generated using

the current germplasm.

The genetic distance values from SNP marker and agronomic quantitative trait
data were evaluated for their correlation to hybrid performance, heterosis, and yield

combining ability. It was revealed that there is a weak to moderate correlations F,

63

performance, heterosis and yield combining ability to the different genetic distance
estimates. These findings can be attributed to narrow genetic diversity of inbred lines
within the sample population as a result of the narrow genetic diversity of the original
source population. With this, genetic distance values based on molecular marker data and
phenotypic data did not provide a predictive measure to the performance of the hybrid.

Hence, field assessment is necessary to classify the inbred lines into heterotic groups.

Different heterotic grouping schemes, namely F, yield per se, heterosis (MPH,
BPH, SDHI, and SDHH), SCA, HSGCA, and HGCAMT, were used to classify the
inbred lines into heterotic groups. HGCAMT identified four groups, though generated the
lowest breeding efficiency. Heterosis measures, SCA, HSGCA and F, yield per se
identified two heterotic groups within the population. However, the assignment of inbred
lines into groups based on SCA and HGCA were different than the assignment based on
heterosis and F; yield per se. The highest efficiencies were detected from the groupings
using the different forms of heterosis and F, yield per se which grouped Line 2 separately
from the rest of the inbred lines. Further, the breeding efficiency of the clustering based
on quantitative traits was better than the groupings based on SNP marker data. Hence,
molecular markers can classify inbred lines in relation to their genetic diversity while

phenotypic data can classify the inbred lines to reveal the heterotic groups.

The comparison of efficiencies indicate that the two-heterotic-group model based
on both F, yield per se and heterosis was the most desirable approach to grouping the

parental inbreds used. Since the ten inbred lines were fairly representative of the original

64
population of 182 inbred lines as revealed by the similarity in cluster structure and allelic
frequency distribution between the two populations, therefore, it can be presumed that the
original population of 182 inbred lines must also be clustered into two heterotic groups.
However, the precise assignment of 182 inbred lines into the two heterotic groups
remains a challenge primarily because the original population had only been

characterized based on SNP marker data.

CHAPTER VI

LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
FOR FURTHER RESEARCH

The precise correlation between field performance, heterosis, and combining
ability to genetic distance values were not determined. This may be due to a fairly narrow
genetic diversity within the evaluated germplasm as revealed by the analyses of
molecular markers and quantitative traits. Since the establishment of the relationship of
hybrid performance and parental genetic divergence is important, other studies on rice
should consider a more diverse population to evaluate this relationship. With regard to
the germplasm of 182 rice inbred lines, it is ideal to diversify the populations by

incorporating new genotypes into the population.

Moreover, although 6000 SNP markers were used in the study it was revealed that
these were not sufficient to establish a strong correlation between the estimated genetic
distance and the resulting performance of the hybrid. Therefore, SNP marker data was
not able to efficiently categorize the inbred lines into heterotic groups. As suggested by
other reports, forthcoming studies can focus on using molecular markers that are linked to
yield and yield component traits which can possibly generate better predictive value of

hybrid performance and heterotic groupings.

66

Also, due to the limited amount of resources, the study was only able to evaluate
the groupings of ten rice inbred lines within a population of 182 rice inbred lines. Future
work in the analysis of the population would require generating a number of crosses to
assign the inbred lines into heterotic groups. However, it is well-established among
breeders that the values of heterosis and combining ability vary upon the use of different
germplasm collections. Therefore, the relationship between these measures does not
reflect any universally pre-existing conditions and the most efficient methods for
heterotic grouping identified in the study may not provide the best groupings when
handling other germplasm collections. Nonetheless, the framework of the study can
provide an overview to identify the best heterotic grouping method to be used in

classifying other germplasm collections.

LITERATURE CITED

AKINCI, C. 2009. Heterosis and combining ability estimates in 6x6 half-diallel crosses
of durum wheat (Triticum durum Desf.). Bulgarian Journal of Agricultural
Science 15(3):214-221.

AKITA, S. 1988. Physiological bases of heterosis in rice. pp. 67-77. In Hybrid Rice:
Proceedings of the International Symposium on Hybrid Rice. International Rice
Research Institute, Los Bafios, Laguna, Philippines.

AKTER, A., HASAN, M.J., PAUL, A.K., MOTALIB, M.M., AND HOSSAIN, MLK.
2009. Selection of parent for improvement of restorer line in rice (Oryza sativa
L.) SAARC Journal of Agriculture 7(2):43-50.

AKTER, A., HASAN, M.J., BEGUM, H., KULSUM, M.U., AND HOSSAIN, M.K.
2010. Combining ability analysis in rice (Oryza sativa L.) Bangladesh Journal of
Plant Breeding Genetics 23(2):07-13.

AL-FALAHY, M.A.H. 2013. Combining ability analysis of 300-grain weight in maize
using diallel and triallel analysis. International Journal of Pure Appied Science
and Technology 18(1):73-80.

ALIU, S., FETAHU, S.H., AND SALILLARI, A. 2005. Estimation of heterosis and
combining ability in maize (Zea mays L.) for ear weight (EW) using the diallel
crossing method. Latvian Journal of Agronomy 11:7-12.

ASFALIZA, R., RAFII, M.Y., SALEH, G., OMAR, O., AND PUTEH, A. 2012.
Combining ability and heritability of selected rice varieties for grain quality traits.
Australian Journal of Crop Science 6(12):1718-1723.

BADU-APRAKU, B., MENKIR, A., AND LUM, A.F. 2005. Assessment of genetic
diversity in extra-early Striga resistant tropical inbred lines using multivariate
analyses of agronomic data. J. Genet. & Breed. 59:67-80.

BADU-APRAKU, B., OYEKUNLE, M., AKINWALE, R.O. AND ADEROUNMU.
2013a. Combining ability and genetic diversity of extra-early white maize inbreds
under stress and nonstress environments. Crop Science 53:9-26.

BADU-APRAKU, B., OYEKUNLE, M., FAKOREDE, M.A.B., VROH, I,
AKINLAWE, R.O. AND ADEROUNMU. 2013b. Combining ability, heterotic
patterns and genetic diversity of extra-early yellow inbred under contrasting
environments. Euphytica 192:413-433.

68

BADU-APRAKU, B., ANNOR, B., OYEKUNLE, M., AKINWALE, R.O.,
FAKOREDE, M.A.B., TALABI, A.O., AKAOGU, I.C., AND FASANMADE, Y.
2015. Grouping of extra-early maturing quality maize protein maize inbreds based

on SNP markers and combining ability under multiple environments. Field Crops
Research 183:169-183.

BARATA, C. AND CARENA, M.J. 2006. Classification of North Dakota maize inbred
lines into heterotic groups based on molecular and testcross data. Euphytica
151339-151349.

CAVALLI-SFORZA, L.L. AND EDWARDS, A.W.F. 1967. Phylogenetic analysis:
models and estimation procedures. American Journal of Humann Genetics
19:233-257.

CHENG, S., ZHUANG, J., FAN, Y., DU, J., AND CAO, L. 2007. Progress in research
and development on hybrid rice: a super-domesticate in China. Annals of Botany
100:959-966.

CHOUDHURY, D.R., SINGH, N., SINGH, A.K., KUMAR, S., SRINIVASAN, K.,
TYAGI, R.K., AHMAD, A., SINGH, N.K., AND SINGH, R. 2014. Analysis of
genetic diversity and population structure of rice germplasm from North-Eastern
tegion of India and development of core germplasm set. PLoS ONE
9(11):e113094.

DAR, S.H., RATHER, A.G., AHANGER, M.A., SOFI, N.R., AND TALIB, S. 2014.
Gene action and combining ability studies for yield and component traits in rice
(Oryza sativa L.): A review. Journal of Plant Pest Science 1(13):110-127.

DAS, A., PANDEY, S., AND DASGUPTA, T. 2013. Association of heterosis with
combining ability nd genetic divergence in sesame (Sesamum indicum L.)
International Journal of Scientific and Technology Research 2(12):307-314.

DAVID, C.C. 2006. The Philippine hybrid rice program: a case for redesign and scaling
down. pp. 1-11. In Philippine Institute for Development Studies, Philippines.

DIAS, L.A.S., MARITA, J., CRUZ, C.D., GONCALVES DE BARROS, E.,
SALOMAO, T.M.F. 2003. Genetic distance and its association with heterosis in
cacao. Brazilian Archives of Biology and Technology 46(3):330-347.

DUBEY, R.S. 1975. Combining ability for cigar filler tobacco. Indian Journal of
Genetics and Plant Breeding 75:76-82.

DUVICK. D.N. 1999. Heterosis: feeding people and protecting natural resources. pp. 12-
29. In The Genetics and Exploitation of Heterosis in Crops, J. G. Coors and S.
Pandey (ed.), American Society of Agronomy, Inc., Crop Science Society of
America, Inc., Soil Science Society of America, Inc., Madison, Wisconsin.

69

FAN, X.M., TAN, J., YANG, J.Y., AND CHEN, H.M. 2004. Combining ability and
heterotic grouping of ten temperate, subtropical and tropical quality maize
inbreds. Maydica 49:267-272.

FAN, X.M., ZHANG, Y.M., YAO, W.H., CHEN, H.M., TAN, J., XU, C.X., HAN, X.L.,
LUO, L.M., AND KANG, M.S. 2009. Classifying maize inbred lines into
heterotic groups using a factorial mating design. Agronomy Journal 101:106-112.

GAFISHI KANYAMASORO, M., KARUNGL J. ASEA, G., AND GIBSON, P. 2012.
Determination of the heterotic groups of maize inbred lines and the inheritance of
their resistance to the maize weevil. African Crop Science Journal 20:99-104.

GARRIS, A.J., TAI, T.H., COBURN, J., KRESOVICH, S., AND MCCOUCH, S. 2005.
Genetic structure and diversity in Oryza sativa L. Genetics 169:1631-1635.

GNANAMALAR, R.P. AND VIVEKANANDAN, P. 2013. Combining ability analysis
of grain quality traits in rice (Oryza sativa L.) Asian Journal of Plant Science
Research 3(2):145-149.

GRIFFING, B. 1956. Concept of general and specific combining ability in relation to
diallel crossing systems. Australian Journal of Biological Science 9: 463-493.

GUIMARAES, E.P. 2009. Rice breeding. pp. 99-126. In Cereals, The Banks and the
Italian Economy, M.J. Carena (ed.).

HALLAUER, A.R., RUSSELL, W.A., AND LAMKEY, K.R. 1988.Com breeding. pp.
463-564. In Corn and Com Improvement. 3“ ed, G.F. Sprauge and J.W. Dudley
(ed.). American Society of Agronomy, Madison, Wisconsin.

HARLAN, J.R. 1975. Crops and man. American Society of Agronomy, Madison,
Wisconsin.

HARPSTEAD, D.D. 1975. Man-molded cereal story — hybrid com’s story. pp. 213-224.
In That We May Eat. Department of Crop and Soil Science, Michigan State
University, East Lansing.

HASAN, M.J., KULSUM, U.K., LIPI, L.F.. AND SHAMSUDDIN, A.K.M. 2013.
Combining ability studies for developing new rice hybrids in Bangladesh.
Bangladesh Journal of Botany 42(2):215-222.

HE, Z., XIE, F., CHEN, L., AND DELA PAZ, M.A. 2012. Genetic diversity of tropical
hybrid rice germplasm measured by molecular markers. Rice Science 19(3):193-
201.

INTERNATIONAL RICE RESEARCH INSTITUTE. 2014. Statistical tool for
agricultural research version 2.0.1: user’s manual.

70

JOSHI, S.P. BHAVE, S.G., CHOWDARI, K.V., APTE, G.S., DHONUKSHE, B.L.
LALITHA, K., RANJEKAR, P.K. AND GUPTA, V.S. 2001. Use of DNA
markers in prediction of hybrid performance and heterosis for a three-line hybrid
system in rice. Biochemical Genetics 39:179-200.

KHUSH, G.S. 2013. Strategies for increasing the yield potential of cereals: case of rice as
an example. Plant Breeding 132:433-436.

KIM, C.H. AND RUTGER, J.N. 1988. Heterosis in rice. pp. 39-54. In Hybrid Rice:
Proceedings of the International Symposium on Hybrid Rice. International Rice
Research Institute, Los Bafios, Laguna, Philippines.

KUMAR, A., MISHRA, V.K., VYAS, R.P. AND SINGH, V. 2011. Heterosis and
combining ability analysis in bread wheat (Triticum aestivum L.). Journal of Plant
Breeding and Crop Science 3(10):209-217.

LAUDE, T.P. AND CARENA, M.J. 2015. Genetic diversity and heterotic grouping of
tropical and temperate maize populations adapted to the northern US corn belt.
Euphytica.

LIN, S. AND YUAN, L. 1979. Hybrid rice breeding in China. pp. 35-51. In Innovative
Approaches to Rice Breeding: Selected papers from the 1979 International Rice
Research Conference. The International Rice Research Institute, Los Baiios,
Laguna, Philippines.

LIU, K.J. AND MUSE, S.V. 2005. PowerMarker: integrated analysis environment for
genetic marker analysis. Bioinformatics 21:2128-2129.

MACHIKOWA, T., SAETANG, C., AND FUNPENG, K. 2011. General and specific
combining ability for quantitative characters in sunflower. Journal of Agricultural
Science 3(1):91-95.

MELCHINGER, A.E. AND GUMBER, R.K. 1998. Overview of heterosis and heterotic
groups in agronomic crops. pp.29-44. In Concepts and Breeding of Heterosis in
Crop Plants, K.R. Lamkey and J.E. Staub (ed.). CSSA, Madison, Wisconsin.

MENKIR, A., MELAKE-BERHAN, A., THE, C., INGELBRECHT, I., ADEPOJU, A.
2004. Grouping of tropical mid-altitude maize inbred lines on the basis of yield
data and molecular markers. Theor Appl Genet 108:1582-1590.

MOLL, R.H., LONNQUIST, J.H. VELEZ FORTUNO, J., AND JOHNSON, E.C. 1965.
The relationship of heterosis and genetic divergence in maize. Genetics 52:130-
144.

MONDINI, L., NOORANI, A., AND PAGNOTTA, M.A. 2009. Assessing plant genetic
diversity by molecular tools. Diversity 1:19-35.

71

MURRAY, M.G. AND THOMPSON, W.F. 1980. Rapid isolation of high molecular
weight plant DNA. Nuclein Acids Research 8:4321-4326.

NURUZZAMAN, M., ALAM, M.F., AHMED, M.G., SHOHAEL, A.M., BISWAS,
M.K., AMIN, M.K., AND HOSSAIN, M.M. 2002. Studies on parental variability
and heterosis in rice. Pakistan Journal of Biological Studies 5(10):1006-1009.

OVUNG, C.Y., LAL, G.M., AND RAI, P.K. 2012. Studies on genetic diversity in rice
(Oryza sativa L.). Journal of Agricultural Technology 8(3):1059-1065.

PATNAIK, R.N., PANDE, K., RATHO, S.N., AND JACHUCK, P.J. 1990. Heterosis in
rice hybrids. Euphytica 49:243-247.

PENG, S., CASSMAN, K.G., VIRMANI, S.S., SHEEHY, J., AND KHUSH, S.S. 1999.
Yield potential trends of tropical rice since the release of IR8 and the challenge of
increasing rice yield potential. Crop Science 39:1552-1559.

PENG, S., LAZA, R.C., VISPERAS, R.M., SANICO, A.L., CASSMAN, K.G., AND
KHUSH, G.S. 2000. Grain yield of rice cultivars and lines developed in the
Philippines since 1966. Crop Science 40:307-314.

PERRIER, X., FLORI, A., AND BONNOT, F. 2003. Data analysis methods. In Genetic
Diversity of Cultivated Tropical Plants, P. Hamon, M. Seguin, X. Perrier, and J.C.
Glaszamann (ed.). Enfield Science Publishers, Montpellier. pp. 43-76.

PINGALI, P.L., MORRIS, M., AND MOYA, P. 1996. Prospects for hybrid rice in
tropical Asia. pp. 11-26. In Advances in Hybrid Rice Technology, S.S. Virmani,
E.A. Siddiq, and K. Murralidharan (ed.). International Rice Research Institute,
Los Bafios, Laguna, Philippines.

PRADHAN, S.K., BOSE, L.K., AND MEHER, J. 2006. Studies on gene action and
combining ability analysis in Basmati rice. Journal of Central European
Agriculture 7(2):267-272.

RABARA, R.C., FERRER, M.C., DIAZ, C.L., NEWINGHAM, M.C.V., AND
ROMERO, G.O. 2014. Phenotypic diversity of farmer’s traditional rice varieties
in the Philippines. Agronomy 4:217-241.

RAHIMI, M., RABIEI, B., SAMIZADEH, H., AND RAFI GHASEMI, A. 2010.
Combining ability and heterosis in rice (Oryza sativa L.) cultivars. J. Agr. Sci.
Tech. 12:223-231.

RAJENDRAN, A., MUTHIAN, A., JOEL, J., SHANMUGASUNDARAM, P., AND
RAJU, D. 2014. Heterotic grouping and patterning of quality protein maize
inbreds based on genetic and molecular marker studies. Turkish Journal of
Biology 38:10-20.

72

REDDY, M.R., RAJU, C.S., SRAVANI, D., REDDY, T.D., AND REDDY, G.N. 2012.
Heterosis for yield and kernel size in aromatic rice (Oryza sativa L.). Annals of
Biology Research 3(6):2662-2666.

REIF, J.C., HALLAUER, A.R., AND MELCHINGER, A.E. 2005. Heterosis and
heterotic patterns in maize. Maydica 50:2 15-223.

ROHLF, F.J. 2000. NTSYS pc: Numerical taxonomy and multivariate analysis system
version 2.1. Applied Biostatistics Inc. Port Jefferson, New York.

RUTGER, J.N. AND SHINJO, C. 1979. Male sterility in rice and its potential use in
breeding. pp. 52-66. In Innovative Approaches to Rice Breeding: Selected papers
from the 1979 International Rice Research Conference. The International Rice
Research Institute, Los Bafios, Laguna, Philippines.

SAIDAIAH, P., SUDHEER KUMAR, S., AND RAMESHA, M.S. 2010. Combining
ability studies for development of new hybrids in rice over environments. Journal
of Agricultural Science 2(2):225-233.

SALEEM, M.Y., MIRZA, J.I1., AND HAQ, M.A. 2010. Combining ability analysis for
yield and relative traits in basmati rice (Oryza sativa L.) Pakistan Journal of
Botany 42(1):627-637.

SAO, A. AND MOTIRAMANI, N.K. 2006. Combining ability analysis for yield and
yield contributing traits using cytoplasmic male sterility-fertility restoration
system in rice hybrids. Jordan Journal of Agricultural Sciences 2(1):29-34.

SHAO, K. AND HU, D. 1988. Chemical emasculators for hybrid rice. pp. 139-145. In
Hybrid Rice: Proceedings of the International Symposium on Hybrid Rice.
International Rice Research Institute, Los Bafios, Laguna, Philippines.

SHULL, G.H. 1952. Beginnings of the heterosis concept. pp. 14-48. In Heterosis, J.W.
Gowen (ed.). Iowa State College Press, Ames, IA.

SMITH, J.S.C. AND SMITH, O.S. 1992. Fingerprinting crop varieties. Advances in
Agronomy 47:85-140.

SPRAUGE, G.F. AND TATUM, L.A. 1942. General vs. specific combining ability in
single crosses of corn. Journal of American Society of Agronomy 34:923-932.

SUN, C.Q., JIANG, T.B., FU, Y.C., AND WANG, X.K. 2002. Indica-Japonica
differentiation of paddy rice and its relationship with heterosis. Plant Breeding
121:330-337.

SWAMY, M.H., GURURAJA RAO, M.R., AND VIDYACHANDRA, B. 2003. Studies
on combining ability in rice hybrids involving new CMS lines. Karnataka Journal
of Agricultural Science 16(2):228-233.

2B

TAYLOR, R. 1990. Interpretation of the correlation coefficient: A basic review. Journal
of Diagnostic Medical Sonography 1:35-39.

TENKOUANO, A., CROUCH, J.H., CROUCH, H.K., AND ORTIZA, R. 1998. Genetic
diversity, hybrid performance, and combining ability for yield in Musa
germplasm. Euphytica 102:281-288.

TRINKLEY, M. AND FICK, S. 2003. Rice cultivation, processing, and marketing in the
eighteenth century. Chicora Foundation Inc., Columbia. pp. 1-33.

TU, J., ZHANG, G., DATTA, K., XU, C., HE, Y., ZHANG, Q., KHUSH, G.S., AND
DATTA, S.K. 2000. Field performance of transgenic elite commercial hybrid rice
expressing Bacillus thuringiensis 5-endotoxin. Nature Biotechnology 18:1101-
1104.

VAN NGUYEN, N. n.d. Sustainable intensification of rice production for food security
in the near future — a summary report. International Rice Commission.

VANAJA, T., BABU, L.C., RADGAKRISHNAN, V.V., AND PUSHKARAN, K. 2003.
Combining ability analysis for yield and yield components in rice varieties of
diverse origin. Journal of Tropical Agriculture 41:7-15.

VIRMANI, S.S., MAO, C.X., TOLEDO, R.S., HOSSAIN, M., AND JANAIAH, A.
2002. Hybrid rice seed production technology and its impact on seed industries
and rural employment opportunities in Asia. International Rice Research Institute,
DAPO 7777 Metro Manila, Philippines. pp. 1-13

WANG, K., QUI, F., DELA PAZ, M.A., ZHUANG, J., AND XIE, F. 2014. Genetic
diversity and structure of improved indica rice germplasm. Plant Genetic
Resources: Characterization and Utilization 12(2):248-254.

WANG, K., QIU, F., LARAZO, W., DELA PAZ, M.A., AND XIE, F. 2015. Heterotic
groups of tropical indica rice germplasm. Theoretical Applied Genetics 128:421-
430.

WANG, S. AND LU, Z. 2006. Genetic diversity among parental lines of indica hybrid
tice (Oryza sativa L.) in China based in coefficient of parentage. Plant Breeding
125:606-612.

WANG, S., LU, Z., AND WAN, J. 2006. Genetic diversity among parents of hybrid rice
based on cluster analysis of morphological traits and simple sequence repeat
markers. Rice Science 13(3):155-160.

XIE, F., GUO, L., REN, G., HU, P., WANG, F., XU, J., LI, X., QIU, F., AND DELA
PAZ, M.A. 2012. Genetic diversity and structure of indica rice varieties from two
heterotic pools of Southern China and IRRI. Plant Genetic Resources:
Characterization and Utilization 10(3):186-193.

74

XIE, F., HE, Z., ESGUERRA, M.Q., QUI, F., AND RAMANATHAN, V. 2014.
Determination of heterotic groups for tropical indica hybrid rice germplasm.
Theoretical Applied Genetics 127:407-417.

XU, W., VIRMANI, S.S., HERNANDEZ, J.E., SEBASTIAN, L.S., REDONA, E.D.,
AND LI, Z. 2002. Genetic diversity in the parental lines and heterosis of the
tropical rice hybrids. Euphytica 127:139-148.

YADAV, S., SINGH, A., SINGH, M.R., GOEL, N., VINOD, K.K., MOHAPATRA, T.,
AND SINGH, A.K. 2013. Assessment of genetic diversity in Indian rice
germplasm (Oryza sativa L.): use of random versus trait-linked microsatellite
markers. Journal of Genetics 92(3):xx-xx.

YANG, W., PENG, S., LAZA, R.C., VISPERAS, R.M., AND DIONISIO-SESE, M.L.
2007. Grain yield and yield attributes of new plant type and hybrid rice. Crop Sci.
4:1393-1400.

YOUNG, J. AND VIRMANI, S.S. 1990. Heterosis in rice over environments. Euphytica
51:87-93.

YUAN, L.P. 1996. Hybrid rice breeding in China. pp. 27-33. In Advances in Hybrid Rice
Technology, S.S. Virmani, E.A. Siddiq, and K. Murralidharan (ed.). International
Rice Research Institute, Los Bafios, Laguna, Philippines.

ZHANG, Y., KANG, M.S. AND LAMKEY, K.R. 2005. DIALLEL-SAS05: A
comprehensive program for Griffing’s and Gardner-Eberhart analyses. Agron J
97:1097-1106

ZHOU, G., CHEN, Y., YAO, W., ZHANG, C., XIE, W., HUA, J., XING, Y., XIAO, J.,
AND ZHANG, Q. 2012. Genetic composition of yield heterosis in an elite rice
hybrid. PNAS 109(39):15847-15852.