PHYTOREMEDIATION AND EFFECT OF SOIL AMENDMENTS ON CHROMIUM AND NICKEL UPTAKE IN LOWLAND RICE SOILS AFFECTED BY MINING ACTIVITIES

VENUS OTADOY SAZ

UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES LOS BAÑOS

DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY in SOIL SCIENCE

JUNE 2018

ABSTRACT

The presence of Cr and Ni in agricultural land particularly in rice paddies as affected by
mining activities represents a major risk to the environment and human health. Thus, remediation
techniques such as the application of soil amendments and vetiver as phytoremediator are very
important to remove or minimize the concentration of these heavy metals. The study was
conducted to evaluate various remediation techniques to reduce the absorption and translocation
of Cr and Ni in lowland rice in Barangay Lomboy, Santa Cruz Zambales and at the same time
increase rice productivity in the area. The experimental set-up was conducted in two (2) cropping
seasons, phytoremediation using vetiver and application of different soil amendments to NSIC
Rc 160 rice seed variety at a rate of 10t ha⁻¹ combined with inorganic fertilizer were used. Each
plot has a dimension of 4m x 5m and spaced at 0.50 m from each other. All agronomic, soil and
tissue parameters were laid out in Randomized Complete Block Design with four replications
except for the vetiver set-ups. The use of vetiver significantly reduced the amount of total Cr by 4.3%, available Cr by
8.53%, total Ni by 9.86% and available Ni by 14.26% in the soil. When grown for 3 months, the
roots were able to accumulate 3.83 kg Cr ha⁻¹ and 3.66 kg Ni ha⁻¹ with only 0.03 kg Cr ha⁻¹ and
0.07 kg Ni ha⁻¹ in shoots. After 8 months, the amount of Cr accumulated in the roots and shoots
increased to 6.36 and 0.04 kg Cr ha⁻¹ respectively. For Ni, it only increased to 4.12 and 3.66 kg
Ni ha⁻¹ . Measured in terms of bioaccumulation factor (BAF), vetiver had a BAF of 0.97 for Cr
and 1.07 for Ni after 3 months of growth and 1.48 for Cr and 1.38 for Ni after 8 months,
indicating higher concentration of Cr and Ni in the plant than in the soil. The translocation
factors at both 3 and 8 months were below 0.2 mg kg⁻¹ which is the prescribed limit given by
the Codex Standard and European Union, suggesting that vetiver accumulates Cr and Ni in the
roots and very small amount of Cr and Ni are translocated to the shoots, making the plant safe
for forage purposes. Aside from the beneficial effects in mitigating soil ‘pollutants, vetiver also
improved soil pH and percent organic matter. The Cr and Ni content in rice grains after planted
the area with 3 months vetiver, were efficiently reduced to below detection limits. Also, growing
vetiver before rice reduced grain yield since vetiver is also a good accumulator of nutrients. The use of vermicast, carbonized rice hull, bagasse ash and zeolite combined with
inorganic fertilizer increased grain yield and at the same time reduced the uptake of Cr and Ni in
grains. Total and available Cr and Ni in the soil were markedly reduced as compared to the
control. Higher yield was obtained with the addition of vermicast. Zeolite was the most effective
soil amendment in mitigating total and available Cr, available Ni while carbonized rice hull for
total Ni in the soil. Highest return on investment was realized with the application of bagasse ash
due to its cheaper/free cost while lowest ROI was observed with zeolite due to its relatively
higher cost.

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

Background of the Study

Rice is most widely consumed as staple food by a large part of the world's human
population, especially in Asia. With regards to human nutrition and caloric intake, rice
provides more than one-fifth of the calories consumed worldwide by humans. It is the
agricultural commodity with the third-highest worldwide production, after sugarcane and
maize, according to (FAOSTAT, 2012).

In the Philippines, rice is considered as the major food and is the source of income
for over 12 million Filipino farmers (FAO, 2007). Thus, the country ranks as the 8th largest
rice producer in the world, accounting for 2.8% of global rice production and world’s largest
rice importer in 2010 (FAOSTAT, 2011).

Rice production in the Philippines is largely under lowland rice culture, either rainfed
or irrigated. More than 90% of global rice harvest comes from irrigated or rainfed lowland
rice fields. This is contributed by the major rice producing parts of the country such as Central
Luzon, Western Visayas, Cagayan Valley, Ilocos region, SOCCSKSARGEN and Bicol region
(Ricepedia, 2012).

In Central Luzon, Zambales province is considered to be one of the rice producing
areas with a total land area of 371,440 hectares. It is composed of thirteen (13) municipalities,

one (1) city and two hundred thirty (230) barangays (CLUP, 2002; BSWM, 1988).

The municipality of Santa Cruz composed of 25 barangays has a rich arable lands
that are conducive for farming. It has a land area of 43, 846 hectares which is 11.14% of the
total land area of the province. The municipality is primarily an agricultural town and out of
the total land area devoted to agriculture which is 5,082.85 hectares 3, 503.85 hectares are
planted to rice. This shows that slightly less than three-fourths of the agricultural land is for
rice farming, the main agricultural or primary crop of the municipality (SDMP, 2013).

However, mining industry has recently been booming in the area of Santa Cruz
where there is an abundant deposit of nickel and chromite minerals. As of 2015, mine permit
for nickel and chromite operations covers about 9, 791.8084 hectares operated by four large-
scale mining companies (Environmental Justice Atlas, 2015).

The processing of metals in the municipality has become a major source of farmland
heavy metal contamination (Navarro et al., 2008). The mining activities, by their nature,
cause disturbance of the natural environment in and around the area where the minerals are
located. Environmental problems such as landslides, flooding, pollution of water, air and soil
due to siltation of river systems, and farmlands create destruction of the irrigation system in
the area, severely reducing palay production. Before the mining operation started, the Santa
Cruz River could irrigate up to 2,000 rice fields, but now it can only accommodate 800 fields
losing 8,000 tons of palay (rice paddy) production annually worth Php 200-million
(Environmental Justice Atlas, 2015). In 2016, DA-RFU III reported that the soil in Barangay
Lomboy, Santa Cruz, Zambales was already contaminated with these metals (Cr and Ni),
thus it requires remediation.

With rice being an important staple crop in the Philippines, it becomes a matter of

urgency to reduce the concentrations hazardous chemicals such as Cr, and Ni particularly in

paddy soil and rice grains. Therefore, to ensure food safety, measures are needed to be taken
in mitigating metal pollution and subsequent uptake by crops. Some of the cost-effective
remediation techniques used in minimizing metal uptake by crops grown in contaminated
soils include the application of raw or processed agro-industrial wastes like vermicast,
bagasse ash and carbonized rice hull.

The use of these organic amendments are recognized as beneficial in several
different ways to the enhancement of crop production (Chiu et al., 2006), and is often
practiced in immobilization of heavy metals and soil amelioration of contaminated soils
(Clemente et al., 2005).

Other remediation techniques include using low cost and locally available natural
mineral-based approach like zeolite and a potential phytoremediator like vetiver grass which
is more efficient in absorbing certain heavy metals and chemicals due to the capacity of its
root system to reach greater depths and widths.

Based on the identified problems in Santa Cruz, Zambales, there is an urgent need to
determine cost effective techniques in mitigating heavy metals in a contaminated rice field
and at the same time increase the yield safely without compromising the environment and
human health. Accumulation of heavy metals like Cr and Ni, particularly in an agricultural
soil brings disorder of soil function which, in turn, affects crop growth. The heavy metals can
be transferred to crops thus posing a risk to human health.

The study was conducted based on the hypothesis that the accumulation of
chromium (Cr), and nickel (Ni) in the rice field of Santa Cruz, Zambales has greatly affected

rice production in the area as a result of the mining industry and the removal of these metals

will result to improve growth and yield of lowland rice. The results of this study can serve as

a basis for mitigating heavy metal pollution in the affected area.

Objectives of the Study

Generally, the study aimed to identify remediation techniques to effectively reduce
the content of soluble Cr and Ni in lowland rice paddies in barangay Lomboy, Santa Cruz,
Zambales. The specific objectives were:

1. To determine the heavy metal profile of selected lowland rice farm on the
basis of Cr and Ni concentration;

2. To determine the effect of phytoremediation and some soil amendments
(vermicast, carbonized rice hull, bagasse ash and zeolite) on the accumulation
of Cr and Ni by lowland rice grown in contaminated soil;

3. To determine the effect of phytoremediation and some soil amendments
(vermicast, carbonized rice hull, bagasse ash and zeolite) on the translocation
and accumulation of Cr and Ni in rice at various growth stages of the crop;

4. To compare the efficiency of the different remediation techniques in heavy

metal mitigation and rice production;

Methodological Framework

Heavy metal contamination (Figure 1) in agricultural soil is a potential environmental
threat to the safety of agricultural food crops such as rice which is consumed by majority.
Soils polluted with heavy metals have become common across the globe due to increase in
geologic and anthropogenic activities like mining. Plants growing on these soils suffer metal
toxicity as shown in the reduction of growth performance, and yield as a result of changes in
physiological and biochemical processes in plants. Continued decline in plant growth reduces
yield which eventually leads to food insecurity. Soil rehabilitation using phytoremediator or
application of organic soil amendment is a practical and low-cost measure that can be used to
inhibit the uptake of heavy metals by crops grown on contaminated agricultural soils.
Immobilizing agents, such as Ca, P and Si containing materials (Violante et. al.,2010) in the
different soil amendments can selectively reduce the availability or mobility of heavy metals
in the soil by adsorbing, complexing or precipitating heavy metals. Li et. al., (2016) reported
that soil amendment like carbonized rice hull / biochar treated in Pb contaminated paddy
soils resulted in 54 and 94 % decreases in the acid soluble and CaClz -extractable Pb. This
organic amendment contains high amount of Si that might impede Pb translocation from root
to shoot and subsequently reduce Pb accumulation in rice grain. This could also immobilizes

lead thus reduces its phytoavailability.

Heavy Motal Contamination

(Cr und Ni)
Contamination
Soi] Amendments
Phytoremediation Polite
(veliver) ici,

*Carhumi ced rice hull
sPhayzaset ash

v¥_ Reduce heavy metal concentration in the
soil

v Prevent the absorption and translocation
of heavy metals in rice grains

¥Y Maintain soil fertility to support rice
productivity, achieving food security,

Figure 1. The methodological framework of the study

CHAPTER II
REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE
Heavy Metals: Sources and Effects in the Environment

Heavy metals are conventionally defined as elements with metallic properties
and an atomic number >20. The most common heavy metal contaminants in the mining
sites are chromium (Cr) and nickel (Ni). Metals are natural components in soil (Lassat,
2000) and some of these metals including Zn, Cu, Mn, Ni, and Co, are micronutrients
necessary for plant growth, while others, such as Cd, Cr, Pb, and Hg have unknown
biological functions (Tangahu et. al., 2011).

Brown et. al., (1987) proved that nickel is a nutritionally essential trace metal for
several animal species, microorganisms and plants, and is the 24 most abundant
element in the earth’s crust. Moreover, increased levels of Ni are encountered in highly
industrialized and mined areas (Cempel & Nickel, 2006). Too little or too much of this
element may cause a number of either deficieny or toxicity symptoms on plants (Molas,
2004).

Chromium is mined in different countries around the world including Philippines
(Sneddon, 2012) as the naturally occurring form, chromite ore (FeCr20s). These heavy
metals are released into the environment by both natural and anthropogenic sources. With
the exception of soils derived from the physical and chemical weathering of parent

materials containing elevated levels of trace elements (e.g. black shales and basic igneous

rocks), the presence of elevated metal concentrations in the environment is related to
man's activities (Jung, 2001). Mining, smelting, and the associated activities are
important sources by which soils, plants, and surface waters are contaminated (Thomton
et. al; 1980).

Metal pollution has a harmful effect on biological systems; these metals do not
undergo biodegradation. Toxic heavy metals such as Cr, and Ni can be differentiated
from other pollutants, since they cannot be biodegraded. However, they can be
accumulated in living organisms, thus causing various diseases and disorders even in
relatively lower concentrations (Pehlivan et. al., 2009). Heavy metals, with soil residence

times of thousands of years, pose numerous health dangers to higher organisms.

They are also known to have effect on plant growth, ground cover and have a
negative impact on soil microflora (Roy, 2005). It is well known that heavy metals cannot
be chemically degraded and need to be physically removed or be transformed into

nontoxic compounds (Gaur and Adholeya, 2004).

Effects of Mining in the Philippines

The Philippines has an estimated USD840 billion worth of untapped mineral
resources, according to the Mines and Geosciences Bureau of the Philippines (2015).
Large-scale mining is destructive, as it uses the open-pit method which entails clearing
thousands of hectares of rainforests and agricultural lands, making deep excavations to

extract minerals, using of toxic heavy metals and chemicals to process mineral ores, and

consuming millions of liters of water. All of these negatively impact the lives of the
Filipino citizens with the grave disregard for their right to health, life, food security,

livelihood, and a clean environment.

Mining companies contribute to the massive siltation of the rivers, poisoning the
waterways and agricultural fields with toxic chemicals and rendering communities more
vulnerable to flooding. At the same time, local communities affected by mining bewail
the loss of their former livelihood in fishing, agriculture and forestry, (Salamat, 2013).
Heavy metals from mining operations find their way into streams and rivers and percolate
into ground water. Contamination of a high level may cause destruction of farm crops
with resultant injuries to humans (Iddrisu & Akabzaa, 1996).

The impact of mining in Benguet had a devastating effect according to Cordillera
Peoples Alliance (2007). As proven by the experience of the people in Benguet, mining
could lead to dislocation of indigenous people from ancestral land and traditional
livelihoods, land destruction, subsidence and water loss, pollution of water and soil,
siltation of rivers, lakes and other water system, serious health problems due to water,
soil, and air pollution, loss of flora, fauna, biodiversity, and food insecurity. These
impacts have not only violated the collective rights of the indigenous people but have also
caused serious environmental destruction and suffering in the affected communities
especially the farmers.

However, its impact on Santa Cruz, Zambales is the dissolution and transport of

metals and heavy metals, particularly Cr and Ni from the mining sites by run-off and

ground water that leads to soil quality degradation and reduction of the capacity of the
soil to grow healthy plants. Crops and vegetables cultivated in soils with heavy metal
contamination or irrigation water with Acid Mine Drainage (AMD) accumulate a greater
quantity of heavy metals than those cultivated in uncontaminated soil and water.

Agricultural soils may be contaminated by heavy metals through practices such
as irrigation and use of heavy metals containing agrochemicals such as pesticides,
herbicides and fertilizers. The greatest risk of contamination has been reported in soils
around mining operations (Simon et. al., 2016). Plants have a natural tendency to absorb
toxic substances including heavy metals which are eventually transferred from the mining
industry. Their high solubility in the aquatic environment is the main reason for the
decrease in the production of food grains and vegetables as well as the adverse effect on
the health of human beings.

The Center for Environmental Concerns (CEC, 2015) reported that agricultural
production in the municipality of Santa Cruz has been affected since mining operations
started in 2006. People attribute the diminishing production to the nickel laterite, which
had contaminated their rice fields, waterways and coastline. Farmers’ harvest had gone
down from an average of 100 to 120 cavans per hectare in 2009, to only 75 to 80 cavans
because the nickel laterite-laden soil was hard to till, and water was hard to permeate,
thus the rice plants growth were stunted because high Ni concentrations retard shoot and
root growth, deform various plant parts, decrease biomass production, disturb mitotic root
tips, and produce Fe deficiency that leads to chlorosis and foliar necrosis. Additionally,

excess Ni also affects nutrient absorption by roots, impairs plant metabolism, inhibits

photosynthesis and transpiration (Ahmad & Ashraf, 2011). Farmers tried to remedy this
by applying more fertilizer, which jacked up their production costs, but hardly made a

difference.

Fate of Heavy Metals in the Soil

Heavy metals such as Cr and Ni are the most common toxic metals with a
density at least five times greater than water (Sardar et. al., 2013). They are persistent,
non-biodegradable and non- thermodegradable that lead to their accumulation to toxic
levels (Chopra et. al., 2009). Naturally, all soils contain trace levels of metals that vary in
concentration depending on the geology of the parent material from which the soil was
formed (McLean et. al., 1992).

Acceptable limit of heavy metals in the soil and rice grain samples have been
cited by Kabata-Pendias (2011). Heavy metals concentrations above the Trigger Action

Value (TAV) require remediation (Tables | and 2).

Table |. Total heavy metals in paddy soils [mg/kg].

CHROMIUM NICKEL
(Cr) (Ni)

MAC* 50-200 20-60

TAV* 200 - 450 60 - 150

maximum allowable concentration
igger action value


12

Table 2. Heavy metals concentration in rice grain samples (mg/kg)

CHROMIUM NICKEL

(Cr) Ni)
Normal 0.03-14 0.02-5
Critical 14-30 6-100

Chromium. Chromium is a trace element in most natural environments where it
occurs as Cr (III). The potential for Cr (III) to oxidize to form Cr (VI) is a function of the
concentration of high valence manganese oxides, the redox conditions and increased

dissolved oxygen and microbial oxidation (Oze et. al., 2003). Cr (VI) is considered the

most toxic form of Cr, which usually occurs associated with oxygen as chromate (C1047)
F 2. B
or dichromate (Cr2O7" ) oxyanions.

Shanker et. al., (2005) discussed the effects of chromium toxicity to plant growth
and development as well as on the physiological processes. They concluded that
chromium compounds are highly toxic to plants and are highly detrimental, which
includes alterations in the germination process as well as in the growth of roots, stems
and leaves which may affect total dry matter production and yield. The toxic effects of Cr
are primarily dependent on the valence state: Cr (VI) is highly toxic and mobile whereas
Cr (III) is less toxic. Since plants lack a specific transport system for Cr, thus it is taken
up by carriers of essential ions such as sulfate or iron. Most of the Cr is located in

refractory primary minerals (pyroxene, garnet and spinels), a minor part is found in

13

secondary Fe oxides; therefore, Cr tends to accumulate in the upper mineral part of the

soil profiles and is generally less mobile than Ni.

Nickel. Nickel is an essential nutrient for plants. However, the amount of Ni
required for normal growth of plants is very low (Polacco, 1977). The essentiality of
nickel as a micronutrient in plants has been established because it is part of the active site

of the enzyme urease, which hydrolyzes urea in plant tissues (Eskew et. al., 1983, 1984).
Ni * has been identified as a component of a number of enzymes, including

glyoxalases (family 1), peptide deformylases, methyl-CoM reductase and ureases, and a
few superoxide dismutases and hydrogenases. Therefore, Ni plays a role in various
important metabolic processes, including ureolysis, hydrogen metabolism, methane
biogenesis and acitogenesis. It was shown in rice (Oryza sativa) that Ni may also activate
glyoxalase I enzyme in plants (Mustafiz et. al., 2014). Studies tracing the origin of metal
ion requirement of glyoxalase J in plants suggested that gene expansion led to multiple
two-domain Ni-Glyoxalase I and different forms of the enzyme have evolved to help
plants adapt to stress (Kaur et. al., 2013).

The uptake of Ni* in plants is carried out mainly by root systems via passive
diffusion and active transport (Mulrooney et. al., 2003). Soluble Ni compounds can be
absorbed via the cation transport system. However, addition of Cu-* and Zn”" inhibit
Ni” uptake competitively, these three soluble metal ions seem to be absorbed by the

same transport system (Alloway, 1995). In addition, soluble Ni compounds could also be

ligand complexes and proteins that specifically bind Ni (Ahmad et. al., 2007).

Excess in Nickel availability leads to plant toxicity and interfere with Fe uptake
and metabolism causing chlorosis and necrosis, reduced growth of roots and shoots, poor
branching, deformation of various plant parts, decreased yield, leaf spotting abnormal
flower shape, mitotic root tip disturbance, germination inhibition (Canadian Council of
Ministers of the Environment, 1999).

According to Rabie et. al., (1992), Ni phytotoxicity varies with the concentration
of Ni in soil solution as well as with the plant species. The highest Ni" was found in
horizons with C characteristics (AiC, BC and C) which had a relatively high pH (in CaCl2
= 5.6). In these horizons, Ni was likely to adsorb onto phyllosilicates; however, an
adsorption of a part of the Ni onto Fe oxides cannot be excluded (Ni adsorption edge at
pH >S, as cited in Schwertmann & Taylor 1989). Ni released from serpentinitic parent
material is more mobile than Cr within the parts of the soil profile where lower pH values
prevail (in CaCl2 .5.0). As pH increases with soil depth, Ni is retained by adsorption in

the lower part of the soil profiles.

Effects of Heavy Metals on Human Health

Rice is widely cultivated globally, especially in southeastern Asia, and is a staple
food for many people. It has been shown that rice accumulates considerable amounts of
heavy metals in its grains (Singh et. al., 2010). Therefore, rice is assumed to be an
important source of dietary heavy metal intake for people who consume it regularly.
Heavy metal toxicity and the danger of their bioaccumulation in the food chain represent

one of the major environmental and health problems of modem society. Primary sources

15

of pollution are the burning of fossil fuels, mining and melting of metallic ferous ores,
municipal wastes, fertilizers, pesticides, and sewage sludge (Peng et. al., 2006; Xiong,
1998). The most common heavy metal contaminants are: cadmium (Cd), chromium (Cr),
copper (Cu), mercury (Hg), lead (Pb), nickel (Ni) and zinc (Zn) (Lasat et. al., 2001;
USEPA, 1997). At high concentrations, these metals exhibit toxic effects on cells (Baker
& Walker, 1989).

Heavy metals have been used by humans for thousands of years. Although
several adverse health effects of heavy metals have been known for a long time already,
exposure to heavy metals continues, and is even increasing in some parts of the world.
Some heavy metals have bio-importance as trace elements but the biotoxic effects of

many of them in human biochemistry are of great concern (www.granthalayah.com).

Chromium. Numerous industrial applications have raised the consideration of
chromium to that of being a very important economic element. At the same time, with the
development of its uses, the adverse effects of chromium compounds in human health
have been defined. Trivalent chromium is an essential trace element in humans and in
animals. Chromium as pure metal has no adverse effect. Little toxic effect is attributed to
trivalent chromium when present in very large quantities. Both acute and chronic toxicity
of chromium are mainly caused by hexavalent compounds. The most important toxic
effects, after contact, inhalation, or ingestion of hexavalent chromium compounds are the
following: dermatitis, allergic and eczematous skin reactions, skin and mucous membrane

ulcerations, perforation of the nasal septum, allergic asthmatic

16

reactions, bronchial carcinomas, gastro-enteritis, hepatocellular deficiency, and renal
oligo anuric deficiency (Burrows, 1983).

Excessive chromium can lead to stomach problems and low blood sugar
(hypoglycemia), can damage the liver, kidneys, and nerves, and may cause irregular heart

rhythm (De Mattia, Bravi et. al., 2004).

Nickel. Is a compound that occurs in the environment only at very low levels. It
is moderately soluble in soil water and is typically true for metals, increases at low pH
(McGrath, 1995). Humans use nickel for many different applications. The most common
application of nickel is an ingredient of steel and other metal products. It can be found in
common metal products such as jewelry. Foodstuffs naturally contain small amounts of
nickel. Chocolate and fats are known to (Social Issues and Environmental Problems:
September 2015) contain severely high quantities.

Nickel uptake is boosted when people eat large quantities of vegetables from
polluted soils (Das et. al., 2009). Plants are known to accumulate nickel and as a result,
the nickel uptake from vegetables will be eminent. Aquino et. al., (2009) cited that
humans may be exposed to nickel by breathing air, drinking water, eating food or
smoking cigarettes. Inhalation of nickel during refining of ore produces respiratory tract
cancer and teeth disorder; allergic contact dermatitis to nickel alloys is also common
(Goyer and Clarkson, 2001).

Skin contact with nickel-contaminated soil or water may also result in nickel

exposure. In small quantities nickel is essential, but when the uptake is too high, it can be

a danger to human health. An uptake of too large quantities of nickel has the following
consequences: Higher chances of developing lung cancer, nose cancer, larynx cancer and
prostate cancer, sickness and dizziness after exposure to nickel gas, respiratory failure,
lung embolism, birth defects, asthma and chronic bronchitis, allergic reactions such as
skin rashes.

Nickel fumes are respiratory irritants and may cause pneumonitis. Exposure to
nickel and its compounds may result in the development of a dermatitis known as “nickel

itch” in sensitized individuals (Chervona et. al., 2009).

Soil Amendments for Rice Production
on a Contaminated Field

Brady and Weil (1999) described soil amendment as any substance other than
fertilizers that is used to alter the chemical or physical properties of a soil, generally to
make it more productive. Amendments may contain important fertilizer elements, but the
term commonly refers to added materials other than those used primarily as fertilizers.

The presence of heavy metals in agricultural land particularly in rice paddies
represents a major risk to human health. It is therefore important to find materials to

remove or minimize the concentration of these pollutants.

18

Natural Mineral-Zeolite

Zeolites. Zeolites are microporous and_ naturally-occurring hydrated
aluminosilicate minerals commonly used as commercial adsorbents and catalysts. They
belong to the class of minerals known as “tectosilicates”. Most common natural zeolites
are formed from the alteration of glass-rich volcanic rocks (tuff) with fresh water in lakes
or with seawater (Almaraz et. al., 2003). The structures of zeolites consist of three-
dimensional frameworks of SiO« and AlOs tetrahedra. The aluminum ion is small enough

to occupy the position in the center of the tetrahedron of four oxygen atoms. The
. 4+ cd + . 5

isomorphous replacement of Si. by AI produces a negative charge in the lattice. The
net negative charge is balanced by the exchangeable cation (sodium, potassium, or

calcium). These cations are exchangeable with certain cations in solutions such as lead,

cadmium, zinc, and manganese (Barer, 1987).

According to the pioneer producer of natural zeolite in the Philippines (Saile

Industries, Inc.), zeolites have a porous structure that can accommodate a wide variety of

2- 2+ see .
cations, such as Na’, K’, Ca’, Mg’, and others (Table 3). These positive ions are

rather loosely held and can readily be exchanged for others in a contact solution.

Table 3. Typical analysis of zeolite (Saile Industries, Inc.)

CHEMICAL COMPOSITION WT. PERCENTAGE
SiOz 73.20
AkO3 10.72
Na2O 0.99
CaO 3.84
Fe203 4.05
TiO2 0.45
MgO 4.34
bso) 0.36
CEC (meq/100g) ------------ 45.00*
pH---------- 7.8 to 8.2

It displays an excellent affinity for metal cations and adsorption of catalytic
properties. In addition, cations of sodium, calcium, and potassium that are typically
present in the channels of the zeolite structure can be replaced by other metal cations,
including lead, cadmium, zinc, copper, nickel, iron, and manganese (Barakat, 2011;
Apreutesei et. al., 2008; Dursun & Pala, 2007).

Sanchez and Francisco (2010) found out the potential use of Philippine natural
zeolites for treating acid mine drainage (Cu, Ni, As, Pb and Zn) in Rapu-Rapu. The
authors reported that the heavy metal uptake of zeolite was 35.88% for Cu; 35.36% for Ni;
95.79% for As; 99.03 for Pb; and 33.91% for Zn. Addition of this mineral increases pH,
that causes precipitation of hydrous ferric oxides and decrease in dissolved metal
concentrations (Wingenfelder et. al., 2005). Thus, it has been widely used for its effective,

efficient, adsorptive property, low cost and local availability for mitigating heavy metals.

20

It possesses a net negative structural charge resulting from the isomorphic substitution of
cations in the crystal lattice that gives zeolites little or no affinity for anions.

Moreover, zeolite can produce the same yield from less fertilizer applied because
of the reduction of volatilization and leaching losses. It is particularly suitable for
banding under drip irrigation planting where it will assist water infiltration, distribution
and retention. When fertigation is practiced it will actively hold the nutrients in the
rootzone (Kavoosi, 2007). Sepaskhah & Barzegar (2010) also concluded that by
decreasing N application rates, higher zeolite application rate is needed to improve grain
yield of rice. The higher N retention in soil, improved grain yield quality, nitrogen-use
efficiency (NUE), and nitrogen recovery efficiency (NRE) could be obtained at under the

zeolite application rate of 8 t hee and N application rate of 80 kg ha? or more.

Moreover, it was found that at higher N application rates, lower Z application rates were

needed to effectively retain soil residual mineral nitrogen. Furthermore, at N application
rates of 80 kg ha__ or more, Z application increased soil water retention and resulted in

lower seasonal water use and higher water productivity. In general, it was concluded that
the effect of Z application in retaining soil N was also effective.

Organic Amendments

Another technique to clean up pollutants in the soil is the use of organic

amendments from agro-industrial waste such as vermicast, carbonated rice hull, and

21

sugarcane mill ash/ bagasse ash. These are abundant abandoned biomass resources from

cellolusic residues of agricultural production and processing in our country.

Vermicast. Vermicomposting constitutes a special form of composting in which
earthworms metabolize and excrete a mixture of soil and organic matter. In the digestive
system of these worms, microorganisms transform organic species (proteins, nucleic
acids, fats, carbohydrates, etc.) into more stable products in the form of vermicast
(Bianchina, 2009). Vermicast is usually a finely divided peat-like product from
vermicomposting with excellent structure, porosity, aeration, drainage and moisture
holding capacity (Edwards, 1988). It can be used to remediate metal-contaminated sites
because it binds metals and increases uptake by providing nutrients such as sodium,
magnesium, iron, zinc, manganese and copper that can serve as a natural fertilizer, giving
high biomass yield and the microbial consortium helps the overall growth of the plant. It
is a rich source of beneficial microorganisms and nutrients (Paul, 2000) and is used as a
soil conditioner or fertilizer (Elcock and Martnes, 1995; Hattenschwile and Gaser, 2005).
It also enhances the quality of growing plants and increases biomass which could suggest
that more metal can be taken up from the contaminated growth media and the tolerance to
the metal toxicity is improved (Tang et. al., 2003). This promotes our agricultural
development in a more efficient, economical and environmentally- friendly manner
representing an excellent treatment method for contaminated soils, not only for waste

reduction but also soil reconditioning.

22

Application of vermicast in contaminated soil is reported to improve soil
fertility and physical properties (Zheljazkov and Warman, 2004; Jadia and Fulekar
2008a). Several researchers have demonstrated that earthworm castings (excretory pellets)
have excellent aeration, porosity, structure, drainage, and moisture-holding capacity.
Nuhaa et. al., (2015) reported that vermicast caused significant reduction in Cd (43.3—
73.5%), Cr (11.3-52.8%), Cu (18.9-62.5%), Co (21.4-47.6%), Zn (34.6%) and Ni (19.9—
49.6%). It has been considered as a soil additive for reducing the use of mineral fertilizers
because it provides required nutrient amounts, increases cation exchange capacity and
improves water- holding capacity (Tejada and Gonzales, 2009). It is not only increases
yield of rice but can also substitute chemical fertilizers to some extent (Sharma et. al.,
2008; Guera, 2010).

Vermicast has a positive effect on the performance of crops in terms of higher

number of branches and fruits (Singh et. al., 1997). Tomar et. al., (1998) recorded the
highest yield (97 gplant |) through vermicast in eggplant (Solanum melongena L.).

Kalembasa and Deska (1998) obtained significantly higher yield of sweet pepper

(Capsicum annum L. var. grossum) with vermicast. Reddy et. al., (1998) recorded

- wo
maximum plant height at harvest, days to first flowering, and branches plant — with the

application of vermicast (10tha '). Similarly, Tomar et. al., (1998) reported that the

application of vermicast significantly increased leaf area in carrot (Daucus carota L.)

plants.

23

Ferreras et. al., (2006) observed that addition of 20 t ie of vermicast alone to

an agricultural soil in two consecutive years significantly improved soil porosity and

aggregate stability. The number of large, elongated soil macropores increased
significantly after a single application of a dose of vermicast (equivalent to 200 kg ha’ of
N) to a corn field (Marinari et. al., 2000). Similarly, Gopinath et. al., (2008) reported a
significant decrease in soil bulk density and a significant increase in soil pH and total
organic carbon after application of vermicast for two consecutive growing seasons, at a
rate equivalent to 60 kg ha! of N. Together these changes in soil properties improve the
availability of air and water, thus encouraging seedling emergence and root growth.
Highest rice grain and straw yields were obtained in crops treated with 50%
recommended fertilizer application along with 10 t ha? vermicast; this was significantly
higher than in crops under 100% recommended NPK fertilizers (Kumar et. al.,2006). As
per production economics, the highest gross retum was achieved from 50%
recommended dose of fertilizer with 10t vermicompost ha’, significantly higher than the

treatments with 75% or 50% recommended dose of fertilizer along with 10 tonnes/ha

farmyard manure.

Carbonized Rice Hull. Rice hull is another potential organic soil amendment for
bioremediation. Rice hull is a processing by-product of rice milling and accounts for
about 20% of the rice yield. It is mostly used as a fuel in the boiler furnaces of various
industries to produce energy. In some areas, rice hull constitutes a severe disposal

problem (Naiya et. al., 2009; Srivastava et. al., 2006). Rice hull consists mainly of crude

24

protein (3%), ash (including 17% silica), lignin (20%), hemicellulose (25%), and
cellulose (35%), rendering it suitable for metallic cation fixation (Krishnani et. al., 2008).
It can be a good bio adsorbent for the individual removal of Pb(II) and Cu(II) ions from
metal-containing effluents. The maximum sorption found for both ions was 0.0561 and

0.0682 mmol metal g "of carbonized rice hull, respectively (Vieira et. al., 2012) . It is

indicated that the Pb adsorption process is exothermic and spontaneous, while Cu
adsorption is endothermic and spontaneous. The physical characterization of rice hull in
nature, before and after adsorption of metal ions, points to properties such as the presence
of functional groups (carboxyl, silanol, hydroxyl, etc.), amorphous silica and a fibrous
and longitudinal structure of this material.

The use of rice hull in the field has been practiced for some time (Ponamperuma,
1982). Research has shown that rice hull can significantly improve soil properties by
decreasing soil bulk density, enhancing soil pH, adding organic carbon, increasing
available nutrients and removing heavy metals from the system, ultimately increasing
crop yields (Williams et. al., 1972) as cited in FFTC, 2001. According to Muthayya
(2014), rice hull constitutes about 20 wt % of the paddy production and is an abundantly
available biomass. The carbonized rice hull usually contains more than 60% silica (SiO2),
10%—40% carbon, potassium and other minor mineral components and nutrients that have
great potential for amending soil. It consists of very light material with a micro-porous

structure and a bulk density of about 0.150 g ene (Haefele et. al., 2009). The

carbonization process also improves the water-holding capacity of the rice hull (Oshio et.

al., 1981). Additionally, the widespread old practice of burning rice hull

25

indicates that black carbon from incompletely burned (i.e. carbonized) rice residues could
be an important source of organic matter in rice soils (Schmidt and Noack, 2000).
Masulili et. al., (2010) reported that application of carbonized rice hull at 10 to

15 tons ha? with NPK fertilizer significantly improved some properties of the acid

sulfate soil, decreased soil bulk density, soil strength, exchangeable Al, and soluble Fe,
and increased soil pH, soil organic matter, total P, CEC, exchangeable K, and
exchangeable Ca. The improvement of soil properties with this organic soil amendment
applications resulted in an improvement of rice growth as shown by an increase in plant

height, number of tillers, and dry biomass.

Bagasse Ash. Another agro-industrial waste for mitigating heavy metals is
bagasse ash. It is a major biomass waste produced and mostly utilized in the boilers of the

sugar mills, which has amounted to more than 5.9 million metric tons per year. Bagasse
production is 643,900 t ha! (321,950 t ha’, dried). Bagasse ash is one of the important

organic wastes capable of supplying sufficient amounts of plant nutrients such as, Mg, S,
P, K, Fe, Mn, Zn and Cu to soil (Anguissola et. al., 1999). In the data of SRA-OPSI
(2004), bagasse ash contains 0.02% N, 4.52% P2Os and 8.00% K2O on a dry weight
basis. When applied to fields as an organic amendment, its favorable effects on soil-water
holding capacity and aeration have also been proven. Sugarcane straw and bagasse are
lignocellulosic agro-industrial residues, wastes generated by the sugar and alcohol
production processes, respectively. Inappropriate dumping method of bagasse ash creates

soil pollution and also causes air pollution and allergy problems to humans

26

(Cancado et. al., 2006 and Andrade et. al., 2010). It has been reported that bagasse ash
obtained from heaps of open-air burnt straw in the vicinity of a sugar factory showed a
high pozzolanic activity (Martirena et. al., 1998). It also contains aluminosilicates glass,
mullite and quartz that have a high potential of being developed as an efficient low cost
adsorbents. Thus, it contributes to the mitigation of environmental problems and turns this
biomass waste of the sugar industry into an attractive and useful material, which will be
used in the future as an ion exchanger in removing pollutants. Nasim Ahmad Khan (2004)
studied the adsorption of Cd (II) and Pb (II) into functionalized formic lignin from
bagasse ash. It was reported that the removal of Cd (II) and Zn (II) increases as pH
increases beyond 2 and at pH > 8.0, the uptake is 100%. Increase in adsorption capacities

towards metal ions were multiplied by around 2.0 for zn* and 2.3 for ca’* (Osnick et.

al., 2009).

Dotaniya et. al., (2016) reported that bagasse ash improves the soil chemical,
physical, and biological properties and enhance the crop quality and yield. In general,
bagasse contains cellulose as a major portion at 47-52% while hemicellulose, and lignin
are 25-28%, and 20-21 %, respectively. Apart from this 0.8-3 %, other compounds and
ashes are pre-dominantly found (Rocha et. al., 2011). It contains sugar, which is
responsible for fast bio-degradable within 3 months. The application of bagasse ash in
agricultural crop production system can reduce the application rate of fertilizers. It
produces organic acids, which mobilizes the insoluble P from soil to soil solution in

labile form and enriches it with utilizable plant nutrients associated with enhanced yield

27

of wheat crop. Amending the soil with bagasse ash at 2.0% was found to be the most

appropriate dose for higher yield of wheat crop in a calcareous soil (Jamil et. al., 2004).

Phytoremediation

Vetiver. Another technique in remediating heavy metals is by using Vetiver
grass (Vetiveria zizanioides L.) as phytoremediator. This is one of a few plant species
meeting all the criteria required for phytoremediation. Vetiver grass is a new and
innovative phytoremedial technology for environmental protection due to its
effectiveness and low-cost natural method. It has been used in many countries worldwide
such as Australia, Brazil, Philippines, Thailand and Vietnam as slope stability and
phytoremediation technique due to its high tolerance to adverse climatic conditions,
elevated levels of heavy metals, and submergence. Its phytoremediation application has
been actively used for treating and disposing polluted waste water, mining wastes and
contaminated lands in Australia, Asia, Africa and Latin America (Truong, 1999a).

Vetiver has neither stolons nor rhizomes but a massive, finely structured root
system, reaching 3-4 m in the first year. This massively thick root system reinforces the
soil and makes it very difficult to be dislodged under high velocity flows
(Hengchaovanich, 1999; Hengchaovanich and Nilaweera, 1998). This has high tolerance
to Al, Mn, As, Cd, Cr, Ni, Pb, Hg, Se and Zn in the soil (Truong 1999a; Truong & Baker
1998). It has high efficiency in absorbing dissolved N, P, Hg, Cd and Pb in polluted water

(Pinthong et. al., 1998; Sripen et. al., 1996). Thus, vetiver has played an important role in

28

the retention and decontamination of soil pollutants, preventing them from contaminating
and accumulating in the soils and crops. It has been successfully used to stabilize and
rehabilitate a highly erodible acid sulphate soil on the coastal plain in tropical Australia,
where actual soil pH is about 3.5 and oxidized pH is as low as 2.8 (Truong & Baker
1996, 1998).

Research conducted in cabbage crops grown on steep slope (60%) in Thailand
indicated that vetiver hedges had an important role in the process of captivity and
decontamination of agrochemicals, especially pesticides such as carbofuran,
monocrotophos and anachlor, preventing them from contaminating and accumulating in
the soils and crops (Pinthong et. al., 1998; Sripen et. al.,1996).

Truong (1999a) reported that very little of the arsenic, cadmium, chromium and
mercury absorbed by vetiver was translocated to the shoots (1 to 5%); a moderate
proportion of copper, lead, nickel and selenium was translocated (16 to 33%); and zinc
was almost evenly distributed between shoot and root (40%). The important implication
of these findings is that when vetiver is used for the rehabilitation of sites contaminated
with high levels of arsenic, cadmium, chromium and mercury, its shoots can be safely
grazed by animals or harvested for mulch, as very little of these heavy metals is
translocated to the shoots. As for copper, lead, nickel, selenium and zinc, their uses for
the above purposes are limited to the thresholds set by the environmental agencies and
the tolerance of the animal concerned. In addition, although vetiver is not a hyper-
accumulator, it can be used to remove some heavy metals from the contaminated sites to

be disposed off safely elsewhere, thus gradually reducing the contaminant levels,

29

because vetiver roots and shoots can accumulate more than five times the chromium and
zinc levels in the soil.

In Australia, vetiver grass is highly successful in the rehabilitation of old
quarries and mines, where very few species can be established due to the hostile
environment. Vetiver is able to stabilize the erodible surface first so that other species can
colonize the area between hedges later. After two years, the site was completely re-
vegetated with vetiver and local species (Truong et. al., 1995).

In Queensland, vetiver has been successfully used to stabilize mining
overburden, highly saline, sodic and alkaline tailings of coal mines (Radloff et. al., 1995)
and highly acidic (pH 3.5) tailings of a gold mine. Recently, vetiver was used to
rehabilitate bentonite mines, and tailing dam walls of major bauxite and copper mines and
an alumina refinery in northern Australia (Truong, 1999a).

In China, similar results were obtained in Guangzhou, where rehabilitation was
quickly achieved with vetiver planting. The effectiveness of vetiver in purifying urban
garbage leachate was compared with that of Alternanthera philoxeroides, Paspaulum
notatum and Ejichhornia crassipes. On the whole, the results showed that the growth of
vetiver in highly concentrated leachate (HCL) and its purification of HCL were much
better than those of the other species. In addition, vetiver showed a quite high purification
rate for phosphorus (more than 74%) (Xia et. al., 1997). Similarly, in Thailand, vetiver
was successfully used to rehabilitate a landfill site near Bangkok.

In the United States, researchers have recently reported that vertical flow

wetland and horizontal flow wetland cells planted with vetiver, respectively removed 98

30

and 96% of total suspended solids, 91 and 72% of total chemical oxygen demand (COD)
and 81 and 30% of dissolved COD from sludge derived from a trout farm. Both wetland
types removed most (82-93%) of the dissolved phosphate, total Kjeldahl nitrogen and
total phosphate.

Danhl et. al., (2009) showed that vetiver grass can produce high biomass (>100t

ha year ) and can highly tolerate extreme climatic variation. Thus, it can accumulate

heavy metals, particularly lead (shoot 0.4% and root 1%) and zinc (shoot and root 1%).
The majority of heavy metals are accumulated in its roots, thus it suitable for
phytostabilization, and for phytoextraction with addition of chelating agents. It can also
absorb and promote biodegradation of organic wastes (2,4,6-trinitroluene, phenol,
ethidium bromide, benzo[a]pyrene, atrazine). Furthermore, it was found to be highly
tolerant to an extremely adverse condition. Thus, it can be used for rehabilitation of mine
tailings, garbage landfills and industrial waste dumps that are often extremely acidic or
alkaline, and high in heavy metals (Roongtanakiat et. al., 2010). All these special
characteristics make vetiver a choice plant for phytoremediation of heavy metals and
organic wastes.

Amount of Cr and Ni in the Soil and Plant
Samples as Affected by Mining

Mohanty et. al., (2011) reported mean Cr levels of 11,170 mg/kg in the surface

soils (0-20 cm) of an Indian mine area. It was found out also that Cr accumulation was

significantly high in surface soils (0-20 cm) with a mean value of 11,170 mg ke! but it

decreased significantly after the crop harvest. About 70% to 90% reduction of cr’® levels

31

were observed in irrigated mine wastewater when passed through successive rice plots.
High bio-concentration of Cr in leaves with values ranging from 125-498 mg kg! as
compared to stem (25-400 mg kg) and grain (5-23 mg kg ') was noticed. The
reduction of cr’é levels is related to plant age, high biomass and area of water passage
and was attributed to rhizofiltration technique.

Marwa et. al., (2012) showed that soil samples in Tanzania contain up to 136.8
mg ke! of Ni, which exceeds the maximum tolerance level set by the European
Economic Community. ni* concentration is increasing in certain areas due to human
activities such as mining works, emission of smelters, burning of coal and oil, sewage,
and use of phosphate fertilizers and pesticides (Gimeno-Garcia et. al., 1996). ni*
concentration in polluted soil may range from 20- to 30- fold (200-26,000 mg ke)
higher than the overall range (10-1,000 mg ke!) found in natural soil (Izosimova, 2005).
Denkhaus & Salnikow (2002) reported that farm soils contain approximately 3-1,000 mg
kg! Ni soil, but the Ni concentration can reach up to 24,000 mg Lee Ni in soils near
metal refineries and 53,000 mg kg? Ni in dried sludge and mining. It was also reported

that the mean concentrations of heavy metals in brown rice grown near a mining area

were Cd 0.325, Cr 0.109, and Ni 0.610, mg/kg, respectively.

CHAPTER III

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Time and Place of the Study

Ocular survey was conducted in the vicinity of a mining area in Santa Cruz,
Zambales. The basic criterion for the selection of the study site was the presence of an
irrigated rice field.

The field experiment was conducted from June 2017 to February 2018 in
Barangay Lomboy, Sta. Cruz, Zambales. The geographical location of the study area is

15°46'38.1"N latitude and 119 °5614.1"E longitude with elevation of 11.8 m above sea

level (Figure 2).

33

The study site

MAP OF

MUNICIPALITY OF STA. CRUZ
PROVINCE OF ZAMBALES

Figure 2. Map showing the location of the study site.


34
Experimental Design and Treatments
Treatments

2017 WS. For the first cropping season (2017 WS), the area was divided into two
large blocks. One block was planted with a phytoremediator (vetiver) while the other block
was planted with rice. The rice area was treated with soil amendments (vermicast,
carbonized rice hull, bagasse ash, and zeolite). All cultural management practices
(fertilizer rate, weeding, pest control) were based on the Rice Crop Manager (RCM). Soil

amendments were applied at a rate of 10 t ha’, Each block was randomly divided into 20

plots, each having a dimension of 4m x 5m and spaced at 0.50m from each other. All plots
were separated by small bunds and canals to avoid contamination of treatments. All
agronomic and soil parameters were laid out in Randomized Complete Block Design
(RCBD) (Gomez and Gomez, 1984) with four replications. NSIC Rc160 (Tubigan 14) rice
seed variety was used for all treatments. The experimental layout is shown in Figure 3. The
details of the treatments were as follows:

T1- Control (No soil amendment)

T2- Vermicast (10t ha”)

T3- Carbonized rice hull (10t ha”)

T4- Bagasse ash (10 t ha!)

T5- Zeolite (10 tha”)

All plots received 82-16-16 kg N- P20s - K20 ha! which was based on Rice Crop

-1
Manager (IRRI, 2013). During basal application, 2.3 bags (116.66 kg ha) of 14-14-14

35

(complete fertilizer) was used. Second application was on July 18, 2017 at 21-25 DAT
with 1.3 bag (66.67 kg ha”) of urea (46%N) and 3 application was on July 30, 2017 at

35-39 DAT with 1.5 bags (76.66 kg ha’) of urea (46% N). Plots grown to vetiver did not

receive fertilizer and soil amendments.

2018 DS. During the second cropping season (2018 DS) the area previously
planted with vetiver plant was divided into two (2) sub-block. One sub-block was grown
with rice using farmer’s practice of fertilization while the other sub-block remained
planted with vetiver. (Figure 4). The other block of the field, was planted again with rice
treated with the same soil amendments except that higher rates of NPK were applied. The

experimental layout is shown in Figure 4. The details of the treatments were as follows:

TI - Farmer’s Practice (129-36-46 kg ha! N-P20s-K20, respectively) based on
Rice Crop Manager procedure.
Basal: 5.07 bags (253.33 kg ha’) of 14-14-14 (complete fertilizer)
2"4 application: 21-25 DAT: 1.93 bag (96.67 kg ha” ) of 46-0-0 (urea)
3° application: 35-39 DAT: 2.13 bags (106.67 kg ha’) of 46-0-0 (urea)
0.33 bag (16.67 kg ha’) of 0-0-60 (muriate of potash)
T2- Farmer’s Practice + 10 t ha”! vermicast
T3- Farmer's Practice + 10 t ha”! carbonized rice hull
T4- Farmer's Practice + 10 tha’! bagasse ash

TS5- Farmer's Practice + 10 tha’ zeolite

V-  * vetiver (phytoremediator)

36

Experimental Field Layout

2017 WS

VETIVER RICE

4m 4m 4m 4m 4m 4m 4m 4m
Rep 4 Rep3 Rep2_ Repl Rep 4 Rep3 Rep2 Rep]

Sm

Sm

5m

Figure 3. Experimental lay-out of the first cropping (2017 WS)

Legend:
11- Control (No soil amendment) T4- Bagasse ash (101 ha!)
12- Vermicast (10t ha) 13-Zeolite (10 tha)

13 Carbonized rice hull (10t ha”')

2018 DS

VETIVER RICE RICE-RICE
4m 4m 4m 4m 4m 4m 4m 4m
Rep 4 Rep3 Rep2 Rep | Rep 4 Rep 3 Rep2_ Rep!

Figure 4. Experimental lay-out of the second cropping (2018 DS)

Legend:
T1- Control (No soil amendment)
T2-  Vermicast (10 tha”) “1
T3-  Carbonized rice hull (1 Otha )
T4- Bagasse ash (10 tha)
TS- Zeolite(10tha )

V- Vetiver (phytoremediator)

37

38

Cultural and Management Practices

The experimental field was tilled before planting with a moldboard plow, and then
two passes with a leveling disk were done. The first one was done soon after the
moldboard plow tillage and the second one shortly before transplanting. Bunds and
drainage canals were constructed around the experimental field. Final leveling was done

after puddling the soil. Sprouted rice seeds at 60 kg ha! NSIC Rc160 (Tubigan 14) seed

variety was sown on a nursery seedbed to raise the seedlings.
Fertilizers were applied based on the recommended rate of the Rice Crop Manager

(RCM) for both first (WS) and second cropping (DS). Organic soil amendments were

applied 7 days before transplanting at a rate of 10t hal.

F -1 = or
For the first cropping, 82-16-16 kg N P20s K20 ha was applied. Basal fertilizer
was applied at a rate of 2.3 bags (116.66kg ha’) of 14-14-14 prior to transplanting.

Another 1.3 bag (66.67kg ha’) of 46-0-0 were applied at 21-25 DAT and 1.5 bag (76.66kg
ha-1) of 46-0-0 at 35-39 DAT.

For the second cropping, 129-36-46 kg N P20s K20 ha! was applied. Basal
application of 5.07 bags (253.33 kg) of 14-14-14 (complete fertilizer) ha! prior to
transplanting and second application at 21-25 DAT with a rate of 1.93 bag (96.67 kg) of
46-0-0 (urea) ha! and third fertilizer application at 35-39 DAT with a rate of 2.13 bags
(106.67 kg) of 46-0-0 (urea) ha! and 0.33 bag (16.67 kg) of 0-0-60 (muriate of potash) ha’
1

Seventeen to twenty-day old seedlings were transplanted in the field on June 2017

(wet season) and November 2017 (dry season) at 0.20m x 0.20m planting distance with 2-3

39

tice seedlings per hill. Missing hills were replanted during the first two weeks after
transplanting to ensure uniform crop stand.

All plots were kept weed-free during the growing season, particularly before each
fertilizer application. Pests and insects were controlled according to the best management
standard for irrigated rice production at the farm. The crop was supplemented with
irrigation water if required. Excessive water and water deficit that could affect the growth
and yield of the crop were avoided. Intermittent or controlled irrigation system was
employed. Water depth of 3-5 cm was maintained at every irrigation time from early
tillering until 1-2 weeks before crop maturity or harvest. However, rainfall during first
cropping from July to August 2017 were high as 585.0 mm to 879.9 mm thus no irrigation
was done.

Harvesting was carried out when the crops reached physiological maturity (85%
of the spikelets in a panicle were yellow) by cutting the culms close to the ground and
threshing immediately. Yield samples were taken from 5.0 ma (2.5 m x 2.0 m) sampling
area. Samples were cleaned and sundried then oven dried until 14% moisture content (MC)
was attained.

Soil samples were collected before and after harvesting for two (2) cropping
seasons. Before planting, about one kilogram of composite soil sample was collected from
the top 20cm layer using soil auger and was placed in a properly labeled plastic container.
After planting, soil samples (composite) were collected per treatment from the top 20 cm
layer using soil auger and were placed in a properly labeled plastic container. Two (2)
metal ions were considered to be investigated in this study namely: Chromium (Cr) and

Nickel (Ni).

40

Data Gathered

Soil Characteristics

Soil sampling was conducted before and after planting and samples were analyzed
for various soil properties, as follows: Soil texture (Hydrometer Method), pH in water
(Potentiometric Method), organic matter (Walkley-Black Method), total N (Kjeldahl
Method), available P (Bray No. 2 Method), exchangeable K (Flame Spectrophotometer
Method), and cation exchange capacity (NH4OAc Method). Heavy metal (Total Cr and Ni)
and (Available Cr and Ni) concentrations in the soil were analyzed using acid digestion on
Microwave plasma-Atomic Emission Spectrometer Method (ICP-AES). All the analyses
were conducted at the Regional Soils Laboratory-Department of Agriculture in Caraga
Region. The available Cr and Ni concentrations in the soil were represented in the
availability of these metals in the field for plant absorption. Also, the analytical results
served as a guide in identifying constraints for agricultural crop production in the area, and

in formulating recommendations for rehabilitation/mitigation.

Growth and Agronomic Parameters

The following agronomic parameters were determined:
1. Plant height (cm). Plant height from 10 sample plants at random per treatment
were measured from the base of the plant to the tip of the longest leaf

(14DAT) vegetative stage, (SODAT) panicle initiation stage, and 80-85%

41

maturity. Plant height was measured, at the same time, the tillers were
counted.

2. Number of tillers per hill. The number of tillers per hill was counted from 10
sample plants at random, which was done during the measurement of plant
height.

3. Panicle per hill. The number of panicles per hill was counted from 10 sample
plants at random during harvest.

4. Spikelets per panicle. The number of spikelets per panicle were determined from
10 randomly selected panicle samples representing each of the treatments.

5. Numbers of filled and unfilled spikelet. At harvest, filled and unfilled spikelets
were counted from 10 randomly selected samples treatment. These were
obtained from the same plant samples used in the determination of other yield
components.

Percent filled spikelets was calculated using the formula:
Number of filled spikelets

Percent Filled Spikelets = ------------------
Total number of spikelets

6. Weight of 1,000 grains (g). It was determined by measuring the weight of 1000
grains and moisture content (MC) from each plot/ treatment after harvest. The
weight of 1000 grains were adjusted to 14% MC.

7. Harvest index (HI). \t refers to the efficiency of translocation of assimilates to the
desired sink or the coefficient of effectiveness on the movement of dry

matterto the grains. The HI was determined from the grain yield samples

42

(2.5 m x 2 m). Straw and grain weight measurements were taken and HI was
computed as the ratio of economic to biological yield.

Total dry weight of grains

Total Plant Dry weight

8. Grain yield. It was taken from 5 mm (2.5 m x 2.0 m) sampling area located at the

center of each plot. Grain yield was adjusted to 14% MC, and at per hectare basis

using the formula:

2
1 Yield sample (kg) 10,000 m 100-MC
Yield (kg ha’) = --------- _
Sampled area (m’)

Economic Analysis

Return on investment. This was calculated using this formula.

Net Profit
ROI = ------- —o
Total Investment

Tissue Analysis

Plant samples were collected at 14 DAT (vegetative stage), 50 DAT (panicle

initiation stage), and at maturity. Samples were cleaned from dusts and soil particles or any

contamination, then oven-dried at 70° C to minimize loss of soluble constituents and to

43

avoid thermal decomposition of the material. Oven-dried tissue samples were ground and
placed in a properly labelled coin envelope and stored in a desiccator.

The root and straw of rice from 14 DAT (vegetative stage), 50 DAT (panicle
initiation stage) in two croppings were analyzed separately for Cr and Ni, while at harvest,
root, straw and rice grain were segregated for N, P, K, Cr, and Ni analyses. However, for
vetiver plants only root and shoot were determined for N, P, K, Cr, and Ni. Analyses were
determined using Kjeldahl N analyzer, Spectrophotometer and acid digestion using
Microwave plasma- Atomic Emission Spectrometer Method (ICP-AES) at the Regional

Soils Laboratory-Department of Agriculture in Caraga Region.

Bioaccumulation Factor

The bioaccumulation factor (BAF), is an indicator of the ability of a plant to

accumulate a specific metal and was calculated using the formula (Codex 1995).

where the heavy metal concentration C in the edible parts of the plant and the soil are

represented by Cplant and Csoil, respectively.

44

Translocation Factor

To establish the relative translocation of metals from the soil to grains, the

Translocation Factor (TF) or mobilization ratio was calculated (Codex 1995) using the

formula:

Conc. of metal in grains

Conc. of metal in soil

Meteorological Data

Monthly averages of rainfall, and temperature were obtained from PAG-ASA weather

station at Iba, Zambales.

Data Analysis

The data collected (except meteorological parameters) were analyzed using

standard statistical procedures such as ANOVA in RCBD (Gomez and Gomez, 1984) with
repeated measures for plant and soil parameters a* and ond cropping). If significance
were detected, post-hoc analysis was done. Average parameter means as comparison using
Least Significant Difference (LSD) and group means comparisons. The software Statistical
Procedures for Agricultural Research (STAR Nebula, 2013 version) was used in data

analysis.

CHAPTER IV

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

General Description of the Study Area

Field experiments were conducted during 2017 WS (June — September) and 2018
DS (November 2017 — February 2018) in Barangay Lomboy, Sta. Cruz, Zambales. Sta. Cruz,
is the first class municipality of Zambales. It has a rich arable land that is conducive for
farming, particularly rice. However, the area is suffering from devastating effects of mining
industry because of its abundant deposit of chromite and nickel minerals (Environmental
Justice Atlas, 2015) causing a major source of farmland heavy metal contamination together
with other inorganic materials deposited by surface run-off and or percolation from higher
topographic position in the landscape. Besides, heavy laterite siltation of river systems, and

farmlands were observed in the area which severely reduced the palay production.

Meteorological Condition

Figure 5 shows the total monthly rainfall and average temperature at different growth
stages of rice. Higher rainfall was observed during the first cropping season from July to
August (450 to 650 mm), while no rainfall was detected during the second cropping between

November 19 to December 8 and December 10 to January 12, 2018. This is the typical

46

weather condition in areas under Climate Type 1 which is characterized by two pronounced
seasons, dry from the month of November to April and wet during the rest of the year.

In 2017 WS, there was a remarkable increase in the amount of rainfall during the
critical growth stages (57 to 87 DAT) of NSIC Rc160, which is an early maturing variety.
The crop received the highest rainfall (650 mm) during the booting stage (60 DAT). Due to
frequent and high amount of rainfall, average temperature ranged from 27.90 to 28.30 all
throughout the first cropping season. However, rice planted during 2018 DS received low
amount of rainfall (83.8mm) at vegetative stage then gradually declined from reproductive

stage until harvesting (<0.1mm) thus irrigation was supplied throughout the cropping season.

5 5 0 0
Due to decreasing amount of rainfall the average temperature ranged from 27.15 C to 28 C.

sappquing ‘Dgy-uonorg audouds YSYOVd P4I :224n0¢
“Sq 810Z PUR SM L10Z BuLNp 2011 Jo soBEIs YMo4d JUAJAYyIP 1e aINyeraduta} UeOUT pu [TeFUTEI [e}O} ATMO *¢ aunty

(90) aumesadwayueaw © (wi) jpeyurey AjyUoW,
#9.
(8107) uoseas Aug (2102) uoseas 19M
Aumew uonentuy ajsiued angeyaian ‘mojied AumeW uoneniul aiued paneyasa/
“
3 szqey etuer | zruer 628d | 899d 8TAON | ZTAON ©8390: | 4190 veanv | Ezsnv GT INE | vz euNr
: 0
3
BSlt
z oot
3 gz o0z
8
5 oot 5
S8z 3
8 oor 3
oos 3
009 =
3
3

6

eJep [e300] a


48

Soil Characteristics

The soil type in the study area is Bani silty clay with initial soil characteristics are presented
in Table 4. It appears that, the area has an adverse soil fertility condition as indicated by its

extremely to strongly acidic pH (4.38 to 5.1), low OM (1.52 to 1.76 %), low total N content

(0.15 %), low CEC (11.32 cmol kg”), extremely low available P (2.7 mg ke), and low

exchangeable K (0.14 cmole ke). The soil also contains very high concentrations of total
-1 . 5

(4314 to 4520 mg kg_) and available Cr (1875 to 1925 mg kg 4. and total (2648 to 2783 mg

kg) and available Ni (1689 to 1725 mg kg”) that may have resulted from the weathering of

parent material composed of ultramafic rocks rich in mineral resources such as Ni, chromite,
Fe and Mn (Sevilla, 2011). The improper disposal of mining waste from chromite and nickel

mines also resulted in groundwater contamination or seepage in the area. Moreover, the
continuous use of irrigation water contaminated with Cr (<0.05 mg kg") and Ni (0.019 mg
ke!) has also aggravated the situation.

Soil organic matter content was higher on the surface horizon (0-20 cm) compared
to the sub-surface horizon (20-40 cm) probably due to its higher amount of moisture, plant
litter and temperature received that favor the decomposition process. When these variables
are put together, percent organic matter increases (Antonladis et al., 2008).

Cation exchange capacity (CEC) was higher on the surface compared to the sub-
surface soil. This is attributed by higher OM content on the surface than sub-surface (Table
4). It is usually means that high CEC soils have a greater nutrients and water holding

capacity than those with low CEC.

49

It was also observed that the experimental area contains higher concentration of
heavy metals such as chromium and nickel. This might be due to the improper disposal of
mining waste causing groundwater contamination / seepage from chromite and nickel mines
in the area resulting to soil acidity, low organic matter content and CEC. It was also agreed
by many other researchers that the availability of heavy metals in soil is associated with
several environmental soil factors including pH, soil organic matter content (SOM), and
(CEC) cation-exchange capacity (Antonladis, et al. 2008). It was also found out that the
higher nickel content on the surface than the sub-surface soil might be due to runoff and
deposition to the top soil/ surface. However, chromium was present in higher amounts in the
subsoil/sub-surface, this might be attributed to the weathering of ultramafic rocks as parent

material.

Table 4. Initial soil properties of the experimental area

50

RATING / CRITICAL LEVEL
SOIL PROPERTY VALUE DESCRIPTION” RANGE
Particle size Analysis
% sand 7.0 - -
% silt aS - :
% clay 49.7 F ;
Textural class silty clay
Soil pH (H20,1:1) 5.1 Strongly acidic 5.1-5.5
0-20 cm
20-40 cm 4.38 Extremely acidic 3.5-4.4
ce sms 1.76 Low 1.0-2.0
-20 cm
20-40 cm 1,52 Low 1.0-2.0
Total N (%) 0.15 Low 0.1-0.15
; 4 5.0 (acid soils)
Available P (mg kg) 27 Low >25.0 (calcareous soils)
Exchangeable K 4 0.14 Tow <0.1
(cmolckg )
Cation exchange | 11.32 Low <5.0
capacity (cmole kg )
Total Cr Content
(mg kg-') 4314 Very high >240
0-20 cm
20-40 cm 4520 Very high >240
Total Ni Content
(mg kg) 2648 Very high >720
0-20 cm
20-40 cm 2783 Very high >720
Available Cr Content
(mg kg”) 1875 Very high 50-450
0-20 cm
20-40 cm 1925 Very high 50-450
Available Ni Content
(mg kg’) 1725 Very high 75-150
0-20 cm
20-40 cm 1689 Very high 75-150
Soil type Bani silty clay

Ne eee Eee
Source: DOBERMANN, A AND T. FAIRHURST, 2000. Rice Nutrient Disorders and Nutrient Management. 1"!
Ed. International Rice Research Institute, Los Banos, Laguna Philippines. 191 pp.

Kabata -Pendias (2011).

51

Use of Vetiver in the Phytoremediation of Chromium
and Nickel in Contaminated Soils

Dry Matter Yield, NPK Concentration
and Uptake of Vetiver

Dry matter yield, NPK concentration and uptake of vetiver used are presented in

Table 5. Vetiver grass grew very well in the field. Just after 3 months, it was able to produce
a root and shoot biomass of 2,320 and 5,701 kg ha’, respectively. A notable characteristic of
vetiver is the large root dry matter that is produced resulting in a high root to shoot ratio
(1:2.5). When grown up to 8 months, root and shoot dry matter yield increased to 3,125 and
7,810 kg ha).

NPK concentration in roots and shoots of vetiver grass were relatively high. This
result was in agreement with Patra (2011) and Singh et al., (2010) because this type of plant
needs higher amounts of nutrients for shoot production. These nutrients are incorporated into
their system for their growth and development for higher biomass. Truong and Truong (2011)
also reported that vetiver has a very high capacity for uptake of nutrients particularly nitrogen,
phosphorus and potassium.

Because of the massive and deep roots of vetiver, it was able to take up large amounts
of NPK (Figure 6). In 3 months, a total uptake of 35.95 kg N ha’, 20.54 kg Pha”! and 43.94
ke K ha! was accumulated in the shoot and 10.44 kg N ha', 3.25kgP ha’ and 6.50 kg K
ha’! in the roots. NPK uptake significantly increased after 8 months with 53.89 kg N ha’',
33.89 kg P ha’! and 72.64 kgK ha’! inthe shoot and 17.19 kg Nha, 10.31 kg Pha! and

17.50 kg K ha’ Hengchaovanich & Nilaweera, (1998) reported that vetiver grass is good for

52

phytoextraction of heavy metals and as well as prevent soil erosion due to its massive, finely

structured root system reaching 3-4 m in the first year.

Table 5. Dry matter yield, NPK concentration and uptake of vetiver grown in the field for 3
and 8 months

DRY CONCENTRATION UPTAKE
GROWTH PLANT MATTER (%) kg ha’

DURATION PART YIELD
(kgha') ON PK ON P K

Shoot 5107 0.63. —S0.36-0.77 35.95 20.54 43.94
3 months Root 2320 0.45 0.14 0.28 1044 3.2565

Shoot 7810 0.69 ~—-0.43.«0.93 53.89 33.58 72.64
Smonths Root 3125 0.55033 0.56 «17.19 1031 17.5

0

Shoot Root Shoot Root |

2017 WS 2018 DS

=N mp omK

Figure 6. Nutrient partitioning in vetiver grown in the field for 3 and 8 months

53

Cr and Ni Concentration and Uptake in Vetiver

A different trend in Cr and Ni concentration and uptake in vetiver are shown in Table 6

and Figure 7. More Cr and Ni were accumulated in the vetiver roots compared to the shoots.

After growing for 3 months, the vetiver roots were able to accumulate 3.83 kg Cr hats and

a. | 7 - -
3.66 kg Niha while only 0.03 kg Cr ha L and 0.07 kg Ni ha L were measured in the shoots.
After 8 months, the amount of Cr accumulated in the roots and shoots increased to 6.357 and

0.04 kg Cr ha", respectively. For Ni, it only increased to 4.12 kg Ni ha”! and 3.66 kg Ni ha”

. Results implied the importance of vetiver in extracting these metals from the soil and

accumulating them in their roots keeping the shoots safe for animal consumption as forage.
Due to their extensive rooting system, they can take up considerable amount of heavy metals
using ion channels and metal transport proteins in their roots. This type of plant is suited in
polluted soils due to its metal accumulating ability coupled with metal tolerance and high

shoot biomass (Randloff, et al., 1995; Truong and Baker, 1998; Chen 2000).

Table 6. Cr and Ni concentration and uptake in vetiver after 3 and 8 months

CONCENTRATION UPTAKE
DRY (mg kg‘) (mg ha”)
CROPPING PLANT MATTER
SEASON PART. YIELD Cr Ni Cr Ni
(kg ha)
2017 WS Shoot 5706.5 6 12.6 34.24 19
Root 2320 1650 1576 3828 3656.32
2018 DS Shoot 7810.25 5 5 39.05 39.05

Root 3125 2102 1319 6568.75 4121.88


54

7000
6000

~ 5000

4000

2000

1000

0

Shoot Root Shoot Root
2017 WS 2018 DS
=Cr oMNi

Figure 7. Heavy metal partitioning in vetiver after 3 and 8 months

Table 7 shows the effect of vetiver plant as phytoremediator on soil pH, organic

matter. total and available Cr and Ni. After 3 months, soil pH increased to 6.21 and soil
organic matter content to 2.6%. Total Cr and Available Cr were reduced by 186 mg ke”!
(4.3%) and 160 mg ke! (8.53%), respectively. Total and available Ni on the other hand were
reduced by 261 mg kg! (9.86%) and 246 (14.26%) mg kg, respectively.

Results indicate that vetiver is very efficient in increasing soil organic matter content
due to the unique characteristics of its root system. It has been considered an ideal plant to
build up organic matter in poor or degraded soils (Truong 2007). Moreover, vetiver also
significantly reduced the amount of total and available Cr and Ni indicating its potential in

the phytoremediation of heavy metals.

55

IIs- 896 9be- 6Lr1 StLI G By Bul) IN o]quireay
L87- SZ 09I- SILI SL81 (By Bw) 1D a]QeTEAW
LEs- Oss 197- L8EZ 8797 Ca Sut) IN [210L
LOE- IZ8e 981- 8ZIb bier (34 But) 1D [RIOL,
v0"! sz +8°0 097 9L'1 — (%) 4onew o1UeBI0 [10g
207 ae orl 179 ors (O¢H) Hd [og

SHLNOW 8 YaLAv SHLNOW SHLNOW € Ya.LAV SHLNOW ¢

ASVAMOSC/ASWAUONI «8 UALYW =ASVANOSC/ASVAUONI UaLAV TETSU EME AM AN  Ta etd

s1ojourvied [10s Uo JOWWIpotUoAOLdyd se JURA AANA JO 9ANIF *LAIGLL

56

Bioaccumulation and Translocation
Factors of Vetiver

The bio-accumulation factor (BAF) of vetiver, which is the ratio of the concentration
of the heavy metal in the shoot to the soil, is presented in Table 8. Based on the guidelines of
Dixit et al., (2001), the BAF of vetiver after 3 months is 0.97 for Cr and 1.07 for Ni which
means that vetiver has the capacity to absorb Cr and Ni from the soil and store them in their
system, particularly in the roots. Allowing vetiver to grow for 8 months increased BAF to
1.48 for Cr and 1.38 for Ni indicating higher concentration in the plant than in the soil. This
further shows the potential of vetiver in mitigating heavy metal pollution in soils.

The translocation factor (TF) of vetiver, which is the ratio of the shoot heavy metal
concentration to the root heavy metal concentration, is also presented in Table 8. TF at 3 and
8 months are very low, indicating that vetiver accumulates Cr and Ni in the roots and very
small amount of Cr and Ni were translocated to the shoots, making them safe for forage
purposes. Higher TF was obtained for Ni as compared to Cr both at 3 and 8 months of

growth. These values are below 0.2 mg kg” which is the prescribed limit given by the Codex

Standard and European Union (EU Standards).

Table 8. Bioaccumulation and translocation factors of vetiver after 3 and 8 months of growth

AFTER 3 MONTHS _ AFTER 8 MONTHS DIFFERENCE
Cr Ni Cr Ni Cr Ni

Bioaccumulation 0.97 1.07 1.48 1.38 0.51 0.31

Translocation 0.004 0.008 0.002 0.004 -0.002 -0.004


57

Agronomic Characteristics of Rice
Grown after Vetiver

Yield and yield components of rice grown after vetiver are presented in Table 9.

Number of tillers and panicles/hill were very low and % filled grains was only 73% resulting
in a very low grain yield of only 3.54 t ha, An unbalanced distribution of assimilates

resulted in higher biological yield than economic yield with a harvest index of 0.45.

Dry Matter Yield and NPK Concentration
and Uptake in Rice

Dry matter yield, NPK concentration and uptake in rice grown after vetiver during

2018 DS are presented in Table 10 and Figure 8. As expected root biomass, NPK

concentration and uptake were lowest in roots. Straw dry matter yield was 3396 kg ha’
while grain yield was 3540 kg he Higher N and P concentration and consequently uptake
were recorded in grain with 45.67 kg N ha! and 15.22 kg P ha? compared to 26.49 kg N ha
' and 7.47 kg P ha’! in straw. On the other hand, K concentration (1.28%) and uptake (43.47

kg ha!) was found in rice straw. The lower translocation of K to the grain resulted in a lower

grain yield as shown in Table 9. K is very important in dry matter production and is involved
in active translocation of assimilates during grain filling. This also contributed to lighter
weight of 1000 seeds, which are less filled and with smaller grain size (Table 9). Results
indicate that the nutrients naturally found in the soil were fully utilized by vetiver for their

higher biomass since vetiver was not fertilized.

58

v8 w7si L9°Sb £70 €r'0 671 Ops ureip,
9v'z 19° ses 670 610 £90 6¢8 100y
(LVd88-8s) Amey
Ly'ey Lyl 6b'97 87'1 70 80 96€E Mens
W d N x d N ) —
YALLV a AOVLS HLMOUD
mad INV1d

( ey 8y) ayWLdN (%) NOILVULNAONOD
——_—_—_{_— eee

SC 8102 Surnp
JOAOA Joye UMOIS dol Jo UIeIS puke MENS JOOI UT JWOLINU Jo UONNQINSIp aye}dn pue UONeNUIOUOS YAN ‘PIPIA JaneW Aq ‘O] 3192.

SPO PSE 9G6EE 68 10'PZI SB LOL zor Tel Tol ws 986 ST‘08 Zo've
meng Jooy anne1989A @ eae) eel Lvdzs) ea) eae
xapuy “UM (%) (ajotuedou) you) _ SUN00g aANeIoA Isaarey SuNoog aanriado~
ee (24) aa SNIVUD ianay LINNOO 5 tL
A aS dS a1
CTaIA ( ey aati ATOINVd (wo) LHOIIH LNV 1d
aun (248%) ssWWOIE nant Ol COPECO L LNV

(@dUI-J9ANPA) SG 8107 BuLNp JBANDA JayJe UMOIT DOL Jo s}UdUOdWOD PIAIK pur siojoureied o1tuouosy “6 9198


59

90
80
70
60
50

40

30

20

10

N re K
Straw m Root mGrain

Figure 8. Nutrient partitioning in rice grown after vetiver during 2018 DS

Distribution of Cr and Ni in Rice Grown
after Vetiver (2018 DS)

Cr and Ni concentration and uptake in rice grown after vetiver during 2018 DS at

various growth stages is shown in Table || and Figure 9. During the vegetative stage, roots

had the highest Cr concentration (456.5 mg kg!) and uptake (0.05 kg ha!) compared to
straw with a concentration of 21.5 mg kg”! and an uptake of 0.01 kg ha’'. At panicle
initiation, more Cr still concentrated in the roots (322 mg kg"), resulting to an uptake of

0.25 kg ha’, At maturity, Cr was only detected in the roots and straw and was not
translocated to the grain. A similar trend was observed for Ni. At vegetative stage, roots had

the highest Ni concentration (339.5 mg kg") and uptake (0.04 kg ha!) compared to straw
with a concentration of 15 mg kg! and an uptake of 0.01 kg ha’. During panicle initiation,

more Ni still concentrated in the roots (359.5 mg kg!) resulting

60

to an uptake of 0.28 kg ha’. At harvest, Ni was only detected in the roots and straw and was

not translocated to the grain. Results imply that at the vegetative stage, the rice plant was so
active in absorbing nutrients including these heavy metals. Through time and as the growth
of plant progresses, nutrient uptake also increases, particularly at reproductive stage wherein
uptake is higher for growth stabilization. The grains were below detection limit in both Cr
and Ni because these metals were immobilized by the roots. Some of the Cr and Ni could

have been present in the rice bran and in unfilled grains.

61

WUT UoHOIEg MO}>E=10d

qaq qaqa Jaq qaqa Ovse ueig,
S10 810 6LI S917 6r8 100%
(Lvags-8s) Amen
100 10°0 sz sz 96€€ mens
870 sz‘0 S'6SE we 79°68L 100Y
(LvdO0s) vonentut sjorueg
z0'0 z0'0 $ S COE meng
v0'0 $00 S'6EE S9Sb ce7 1004
(LV pI) eaneieda,
100 10°0 $I SIZ 89'S 1S MENS
IN Fe) IN re) A ey 34) -
‘ Luvd
ALLY FOVLS HLMOUD
AUG INV1d

C4 Sw) aAVLdN

(34 Sw) NOLLVULNSONOD

sadeis YIMOIT SNOLIRA IP SQ BIO SuLNp AdANNDA JOYJe UMOIB DOL JO UTPIS pur MI

JOO1 UL IN pure 1D Jo uoNnqu

Id “11 M1qeL

62

06 |

Straw Root Straw Root Straw Root Grain
Vegetative (14 DAT) Panicle Initiation (SODAT) Maturity (87DAT)
mCr Ni

Figure 9. Heavy metal partitioning in rice grown after vetiver during 2018 DS (vetiver-rice)
at various growth stages

Bioaccumulation and Translocation Factors
of Rice after Vetiver (2018 DS)

The bio-accumulation and translocation factors of rice grown after vetiver are shown
in Table 12. Bio-accumulation factor has been calculated for the transfer of heavy metals
from the soils to the different parts of rice. For Cr, BAF was only 0.14 and 0.18 for Ni
indicating that rice absorbs Cr but does not store it. When BAF is <1 or =1, it indicates that
the plant only absorbs but does not store heavy metals. However, if BAF is >1, it is an
indication that the plant stores metals. The transfer of metals from the soil to plant is one of

the key elements of human exposure to metals via the food chain (Dixit et al; 2001).

63

Translocation factors for both Cr and Ni were below the detection limit (BDL),
indicating that these metals were not translocated to the edible portion of the plant,
particularly the rice grain. The translocation factor reflects the transfer of metals from the
roots to the edible parts, wherein different plants display different properties with regard to
its root activities and exudates. The roots contribute greater impact on the solubility and
phyto-availability of metals in the soil, thus Cr and Ni levels were below the detection limit

in the grain.

Table 12. Bio-accumulation and translocation factors of rice grown after vetiver

during 2018 DS

FACTOR CHROMIUM NICKEL
Bio-accumulation Factor 0.14 0.18
Translocation Factor BDL BDL

BDL=Below Detection Limit

Effect of Vetiver-Rice Rotation on Soil Properties

Table 13 shows the soil parameters as affected by growing rice after vetiver during
2018 DS. Soil pH increased to 6.53 and organic matter content improved significantly (48%

increase) which is due to the unique characteristics of the vetiver roots. Total Cr was reduced

by 353 mg kg! (8.18 %) and available Cr by 282 mg ae (15.04%) while total Ni declined

by 742 mg ke! (28.02) and available Ni by 723 mg kg! (41.91 %). Results implied that

64

vetiver plant grown for a short duration (3 months) has the capability to phytoremediate Cr
and Ni- contaminated soil. This is one of the most cost-effective green technologies and most
useful method for decontaminating the soil, wherein Cr (VI) are converted into non-toxic
Cr(III) according to Chaney et al., 1997, Bolan et al., 2011b. Dalton et al. (1996) reported
that vetiver grass that has high root biomass can accumulate a significant amount of Cr. This
plant tends to reduce metal toxicity by converting highly toxic and readily mobile metals into

less toxic ones.

65

€7L- LLy- 700 09b7- 6Ltl SzLl C4 Bur) IN 9]QeTRAY

787- @I- £61 09I- SILI SL8I (34 Bul) 1D s]qeyeAy

@pL- 18p- 9061 197- L8&Z 8197 (34 Buy) IN TPIOL

€Se- L9I- 196€ 98I- 8ZIP vith CA Bul) 1D [BIOL

+60 10 Lz 8'0 97 9L'| (%) saneur o1ueB10 [10g

er z€0 €5°9 Wl 179 (07H) H4 Tros

Eee Z aorysd $a. 8107
aeapaa! S10e NAL NSALSA beara SH ALLaA ‘IVILINI SUALANVUVd TOS
aaa ARON om /ASVIMONI YaLIV

TVLOL

st ao

(20U-I9ANAA) SQ 8IOZ SuLnp JoANAA Jaye UMOIT dOLI Aq poyoayye se slajatuvied [10g “¢] 9192.1.

66

Economic Analysis

Retum on investment describes the ratio of net income with total expenses. In
economic view, this means that as much as Php0.50 can be gained for every peso
investment when planting rice after vetiver for one (1) cropping season. The vetiver plant
did not receive fertilizer or any soil amendments. However, after harvesting vetiver, rice

was planted and fertilized using rice crop manager (RCM) as shown in Table 14.

Table 14. Economic analysis of rice production as affected by phytoremediation
management in Lomboy Sta. Cruz, Zambales

GRAIN TOTAL FERTILIZER GROSS NET
YIELD EXPENSES APPLIED INCOME* INCOME piv
kgha! = (Pha!) (Pha”) (Pha!) = Pha!)
Vetiverrice 3540 42.4625 ‘11. 762.25 63720 2125750.

+ Computed based on the prevailing price of palay in the area @18.00 kg
**ROI-Return on Investment ha”

67

Use of Soil Amendments to Remediate
Cr and Ni Contamination

Growth and Yield Parameters of Rice (2017 WS)

Plant height. Plant height is an important trait related to plant status and yield
potential. Increase in plant height reflects growth and development and at the same time
increase in cell size and mass. The plant height was significantly affected by each
treatment at three growth stages (Table 15). At vegetative stage (14 DAT), the tallest
plants in the plots applied with vermicast were measured and an average of 38.40 cm was
obtained. The same plot with tallest plant were measured at the panicle initiation and at
harvest stage with 83.56 and 110.86 cm obtained, respectively. Plants under the farmers’
practice had the shortest heights, with a mean average of 33.19 cm. The same trend was
observed at the panicle initiation stage (50 DAT) and at harvest. The data presented
shows that application of vermicast, bagasse ash, carbonized rice hull and zeolite
increases the height of the plant significantly. It can be explained that combining organic
fertilizer/material with inorganic fertilizer which was applied to all treatments can

enhance plant growth.

Tiller count. The production of tillers by the rice plant is an important agronomic trait
that can estimate grain production. The number of tillers at two growth stages are shown
in Table 15. The same trend of results was observed at two different growth stages, the

most number of tillers at 14 DAT were from the plots applied with vermicast with an

68

average of 5.65 tillers/hill and at 50 DAT with 12.75 tillers/hill. Mirza et al. (2010)
reported an increase in the number of tillers in rice plants due to the influence of different
fertilizer combinations. In fact, addition of organic sources offers more balanced nutrition

to the plants, especially micro nutrients, which positively affect number of tillers (Miller,

2007).

Biomass (kg ha ).Results in Table 15 indicate that the amount of biomass is
significantly affected by the different treatments. Plants under the farmer’s practice

produced the lowest biomass at 643.70 kg ha! (vegetative stage), 3 712.80 kg ha?

(panicle initiation), 3, 887.0 kg ha”! (harvest stage). However, all the treatments applied

with organic amendments showed increase in biomass yield at the three growth stages as

presented in Table 15. Vermicast application resulted in the highest amount of biomass
produced among all treatments, at 785.73kg ha? (vegetative stage), 4903.0 kg ha!
(panicle initiation) and 6569.0 kg ha! (harvest stage). Both percent filled spikelets and

shoot biomass were strongly correlated with grain yield and were substantially enhanced

by the addition of organic soil amendments.

69

“AST Aq Jona] %E Ie WaJAJJIp ApUBoIIUBIS JOU ose (s)soy9] OURS 94) Aq poMos]oj SUBD “ULIN]OD B UT

quRayIUds AYSY=44 TULIYIUBIS =,

v'spsp SL'S08
ayzEs qs66
POl6r 9998
2 66Sb S18
B spes ¥ peo!
9 6rsE P 609
+ **

mes 100%

SOAR,

S00fb

9 60bb

2 00>

PLSIb

B 8g8r

Pelle

Eo

uonentyy
ajotued

LeL vil Lyy 9ESOL 9L'08 ESSE ues] pueID
4 6bL 90071 Gees wesoll ees EF ROLE SN]09Z
> POL 20011 asty Gefeol FSLI8 THOSE

PLLO IST I 20S> 27666 Q616L PAZHEE — [[MY 9911 poziuOqued
Bo8L BcLZl «= BSOS VOSOll "OSES FOPRE YSROIWLIDA,
3969 PoOOl = PEBsE PIT96 dLL OEE ee)
Ec * * x * *

aanewdeA ~=LVC 0S Lvd +l womeH Lvdos Lvdrl

ALNAWLVSAL

(2431) SSVNOIE

LNNOD UATTLL (wo) LHOIAH LNW 1d

(SAA L10Z) SluoWpuauLe [TOs jUaIaZJIP Aq poyajje se dd11 Jo siojotURIed OIWIOUOIBY *¢] 9192)

70

Panicle count. Fageria et. al., (2006) reported that the number of panicles was
the most variable parameter for rice although it was related to grain yield. Based on the
results, the average number of panicles per hill at harvest ranged from 9 to 9.65 (Table
16). The application of vermicast produced the highest average number of panicles, at
9.65 panicles/hill. Plots applied with carbonized rice hull, bagasse ash and zeolite had
increased number of panicles compared to those under the farmer’s practice. However,
there were no significant differences between the three treatments. The results were
further explained by Hasanuzzaman, et. al., (2010) in that the increase in panicle count,
particularly those treated with vermicast, was due to enough nutrition. It possibly
increased the nutrient absorption capacity of the plant as a result of better root
development and translocation of carbohydrates from source to growing points (Singh

and Agarwal, 2001).

Spikelets per panicle. The average number of spikelets per panicle was similar
to that of grain yield, where its number substantially increased by with the application of
organic soil amendments (Table 16). Number of spikelets ranged from 99 to 117,
application of vermicast and zeolite produced the highest spikelets with 117 and 116
spikelets per panicle. On the other hand, addition of zeolite and carbonized rice hull
produced higher spikelets compared to those in the control. Naing et. al., (2010) stated
that the potential number of spikelet/panicle was influenced by the plants nutritional

status by combining organic and inorganic sources of nutrients.

71

Percent filled grains. The average percent filled grains per panicle ranged from
69.75- 83.25%. The application of vermicast resulted in 83.25 % filled grains as
compared to the control with 69.75% (Table 16). This implies that, among the
amendments, vermicast is a rich source of nutrients for grain production. Results revealed
that addition of vermicast provided a rich source of nutrients as well as beneficial
microorganisms (Paul, 2000). Vermicast is often used as a soil conditioner or fertilizer
(Elcock and Martnes, 1995; Hattenschwile and Gaser, 2005). Apparently, the addition of
soil amendments significantly improves plant growth and development for grain filling

compared to inorganic fertilizer alone.

1000 seed weight. Weight of 1000 filled seeds is an important parameter to
farmers because it is among the most stable components of yield in rice. As expected, the
highest 1000 seed weight is 27.60g in plots applied with vermicast as shown in Table 16.
Addition of soil amendments significantly increased the weight of 1000 seeds whereas
those plants treated with inorganic fertilizer only (farmer's practice) showed the least
1000 seed weight with 23.57 g. A significant difference in 1000 -grain weight of rice as
affected by variation in fertilizer combination was also observed by Mirza et. al., (2010).
The increase in 1000 grain weight with the application of chemical fertilizer along with

organic soil amendments is supported by Yang et. al., (2004).

72

Grain yield (t ha”). Grain yield is the function of biomass accumulation during
ripening and translocation of biomass accumulated in the grains before flowering (Yang

et. al., 2008). Maximum grain yield of 6.6 t ha? was observed in plots treated with 10 t
-1 : +
ha vermicast as shown in Table 16. The plants treated with inorganic fertilizer alone

(farmer’s practice) had the lowest yield of 3.83 t ha’ The increase in grain yield could

be due to the increase in yield attributes (plant height, number of tillers per hill, panicle
count, spikelet per panicle, percent filled grains, biomass, harvest index and 1000 grain
weight). The increase in grain yield components can be due to the fact that available
water enhanced nutrient availability that improved macro and micro elements absorption
as well as enhanced the production and translocation of the dry matter content from
source to sink Ebaid et. al., (2007). Similar results were reported El-Weheishy and Ebd
El-Hafez (1997), Awad (2001) and El-Reface et al., (2006) providing additional evidence
that organic fertilizers have a significant influence on growth and productivity in lowland

rice. Organic soil amendments can be a good supplement to inorganic fertilizer to
produce better growth and yield. All the treatments applied with 10t ha! organic material
resulted in significant improvement in the growth and productivity of rice. From the
economic point of view farmers, can use the combination of organic fertilizer and

reduced rates of inorganic fertilizers to boost the yield of rice as well as to maintain and

improve soil health.

Harvest index. Harvest index reflects the efficiency of photosynthetic

partitioning between vegetative parts and economic yield or grains in rice. This

73

proportion can be enhanced by increasing the number of reproductive tillers, spikelets per
panicle as well as the amount of assimilate partitioned to grains (number of filled grains
and average grain weight). These were significantly affected by the combined application
of inorganic and organic fertilizers (Table 16). As with other parameters, the response to
vermicast was observed with highest HI of 50.0 percent due to the increased number of
spikelets per panicle, 1000 seed weight, percent filled grains and reduced partitioning of
dry matter to unfilled grains while the lowest HI was observed in the control (farmer’s
practice) with 48.0 percent. Efficient partitioning of photosynthates and assimilates to the
grains particularly during the grain filling stage is an important trait associated with the
remarkable yield increase in rice (Fageria et. al., 2006). Although variations in HI are
highly influenced by inherent crop or varietal characters, there were numerous studies
that showed that agro-climatic conditions, such as water/rainfall, solar radiation, and high

nitrogen fertilization could also affect the partitioning efficiency of the rice crop.

74

“AST Aq Jaaa] %g Ie UaJaJJIP AfuRdYj!UBIs you aue (s)1a}}2] owes ay) Xq pamojjoy SueDW ‘UUIN]OD B u,

queoyrudis <yTiy=_4 WUEDyTUTIS =,

ages rSPer $508 80 “gee sL09 88'L0T zo unayy puns

qooss a vzes ase6 2Lb0 asr9z oss = F0N911 «= 1 OF autj00z

2 00S POl6y 9798 q8r 0 20r'ST 200°9L 4 00°SOI 2€06 ysv assedeg

; . . . . wey

POOIS —-.66Sb as18 2 6r0 PSehe —-9G7'SL_—-200'Z0I 2£06 sou paztuoaies)

0099 BSH8s eycol 8 6r0 BOOLe = ESTER = BODLII & 596 seOIULID A

2008 —-6HSE P 609 asv0 aLseZ —-PSL'69 =~ P0066 2006 jonuoy

+ “ e * a ‘ * *
(2459) mens yooy @) (%) (ou) (qiyjou)
)X4QNI

on (2489) ISHAUVH HOTU = SNIVYD —ATOINYd = ,LNN0Q FNAL

\ivup —- TISIAWALLVN A aaasoo0l dad = /LaTAMIdS  ATOINVd

(SAA L10Z) SWoWIpUdUTE [IOs JUDIAYJIP Aq payoajye Sv dOLI Jo sJUSUOdWO,D PIPIA “9] 9QUL

75

Cr and Ni Concentration and
Uptake in 2017 WS Rice

The concentration and uptake of Cr and Ni during vegetative stage, panicle
initiation and at harvest are presented in Table 17 - 19. Control plants had the highest
metal uptake in almost all plant parts except Ni uptake at vegetative stage. In general,
addition of soil amendments led to lower accumulation of Cr in the different plant parts
compared to the control (farmer’s practice). Application of carbonized rice hull resulted
in the lowest accumulation of Cr in roots, straw and grain, followed by zeolite. For Ni,
the lowest accumulation in roots, straw and grain were obtained from the application of
zeolite followed by carbonized rice hull. Slightly higher levels for Cr than Ni were also

detected in the different plant parts (Figure 10-11).

76

1ST Aq Janay 965 18 taHOYyIp AjruEDLyIUBYs r0U axe (s)soHa} aules ay} Aq pamojjoy SuEDUE “UUIN}OD e UI,
qUROLIUBIS AIYTIY=_~ TULOYTUIS =,

67°96 ZO 78 06091 O9'LET rLe09 = 9ES9 or 08s 00 0&9 upay puv._y
P87sL P90°8S 20081 P0016 POSTE F86EZ POS98T  7F009IT OM[OOZ -SL
20618 207 6L POS9EL 7 00°7E1 27O'SS =IPTBS 10067S 700°095 yse ossedeg -pL

q v7 L6 q97S8 = 1 0S'°99T = 1 00° 9bT P66 Ib PCSLp FOS TSh POOTIS TINY 291 paztuogied -¢ 1

41596 AGES §—-P.00'SPI_-- 009 «= «49869 A ITSL GOS*PBS —_4.00'7E9 ISLOIULIOA -ZL
BovOEl BLSSOl FOSREC FONE! FOO'POI BLEIZI ¥%OSOSOI ¥OD'IEZI Jonuog - LL
* * Eo * “ cs * ee
IN Ee) IN Ee) IN 9 IN EP)
(34 su) (ED) (Py su) ( By aw) SINANLVSUL
wIVLdn NOLLVULNAONOD axyvidn NOLLVULNIONOD
AVULS LOOU

(SM LIOZ) 2914 Jo aFe\s DATLJOTOA Je MENS pue OO! UT ayeIdn pur VONeIUDOUOD IN pur ID “L] 91qQUL

77

is £q Jaa] 465 ve wOHQYsIP ApyuEdyIUBIs tou axe (s)s9n9] sures 941 Aq Pomoyjoj SuEOU“uLINIOD & UT
quvoypludis A[YSIYy=,.4. WUBoUSIs =,

CH8'TITZ ply sel CC6S 66°8E CHVEls = CID LES 06°S0ZI OO LPTI uray PueID
P E9'8hl 2 78°0S1 P Or or 1001 ISv'008 ==FSEES9 = POS9601 P00'S68 ON[OSZ
OE OLT Bcc rs 207 LD Bsris G6E8P8 =AETHI6 §=YOO9TZI =A 00'IZEL ysv assedeg

P6cIST 25568 PSv ey 209°ST PS9PLL = F8TLOR = FOSSLIL =F. OO'SZZT [NY 9911 poztuoques

BSTPOE  —PESOOI  ASTEL 207PZ «=F HG'STH EOO'RIOL FOSISTL O0'L8EI ISLOTULID A,
G1L68Z 106991 00°26 BOOES  ABTOIL PHTSEL FON'OLZI FO0OIPI Jonuoa
* ** * * + ** * **
IN Ee) IN EP) IN Ee) IN Ee)
(TED) ( S1su) SLNSWLVEUL
(24 Bu) ayedy, (, 34 Bur) uonenuaouo) aavLdn NOILVYLNIONOD
MVULS LOOU

(SAM LIOZ) 2914 JO (LV 0S) 28es uoNeNtut ajorued ye Mes pur JOO] Jo ayeId-] puke UONeUDOUOD IN pur ID “g] 91qQRL,

78

1S Aq Janay 96s 18 wa1ayyp AjuedtyuBys you axe (S)soH.a] awies 241 Aq pamo}}oy suz=dus“uUN}OD e Uy,
quroytudis A[ySty—_4 TuEdy TUBS =,

1g cle “er 08 oor ces Lee “i €L£789 LE ILL Tres Ltte ua pubs
POTZ 207 POY 20% P6t PHT PIs Ptr PLSI9 PSBLZ7I PS8S9 AS ILO SUOSTZ -S.L
Teh —AOLT q08 q0s aso 40s 20%1 QZOl 918669 AZZ'LES 40018 910696 Yseassedeg -pL

pny 201

LSE = >P0T 20L 207 2009 «28 tr oer £6 2L709 = 2S060L PFOTHL FO OLE paziuoqie) -¢ 1

QL7 =64OEE qs6 qos q168 4eLs aest 286 ereos ALETES FOLLL PSO ySeIUHIA -7L

BOTSI FOES  FOOP BOT ELIPZ EL88 FISD  FO'ST 40069 REISS FOECIT ¥O'R6E JonuoD -1L
xIN- #40 sIN 64D IN 4D +IN Pee) +IN Fee) xIN eet
(248m) (34 8u) ( 31au) (ey 8u) (avau)
SLNSWLVSUL
AAVIdN __NOWLVYLNSONOD _-TAVIdN NOILV¥LNAONOO avidn NOLLVYLNIINOD
NIVUD AVULS LOOY

(SM L10Z) 9914 JO (LV Lg) IseArey ye urleI3 pue Meds ‘Joos Jo ayejdn pue UONeIUDDUOD IN puk AD “G] 9192.1,

79

(SM L10Z) SwoWpusUUe [los jusJAYJIP Aq paroayse se ILI Jo saBeys yMoId snouea ye ayeydn 1D “Q] amary

MNOOZ “SL YsvosseBeg-pL mI |INt| 9911 pazuogueD ¢~

mM SeOIUOA -ZL mM [ONUOD-[

(LVdZ8) seareH (L¥dos) won; o1ueg (LV-P1) eaneiade
meng aeang y00y Meng J00y
| | | :
002
Q
oor g
e
009 >
3
&
og &

0001

ZI

80

(SM LI0Z) Suewpusue [ros yUaIayyIp Aq Payoayye SB adi Jo sades YIMOIT sNOUwA Je ayeidn IN *[ | andi

PU100Z “SLM YSPasseaeG -p Lm |INY 2011 pazuogieD E-L mM ISLOTWA-ZL mM [ONNUOD-| | mE

(Lvdzg) saareH (Lvqos) vonenuy ajotueg (Lva-b1) eaneiaia,,

MAIS meng, meng yooy

0

oot

00z

wr 2

oor -S
5
g

oos =
3
&

009

002

008

006

001

81

Cr and Ni Uptake in 2017 WS Rice

The uptakes of Cr and Ni during vegetative stage, panicle initiation stage and
during harvest are shown in Figures 12 to 15. Results were significantly affected by
different treatments in all growth stages. The control shows more Cr and Ni uptake
compared to plants added with soil amendments. In fact, the root absorbs more Cr and Ni
at panicle initiation stage and then reduced during harvest. This may be due to nutrients
absorption together with these metals at panicle stage since rice needs more nutrients for
grain filling. However, the uptake and concentration were decreased at maturity due to
the dilution effect of the plant. Among those treatments, plants applied with zeolite had
the lowest metal concentration in all growth stages. Taylor (1997) and Matschei et. al.,
(2007) reported that soil amendments containing high silica and carbon are effective
sorbents for organic compounds and contaminants. When reacted with water, they create
highly alkaline solutions and form complex mixture of hydroxides, mainly Ca(OH)2 and
other amorphous calcium silicate hydrate phases. It was also used to raise the pH of
acidic soils, reducing leaching or phytoavailability of metal cation contaminants that
probably results from simple adsorption to oxide and silicate minerals as pH is increased.

Metal cations tend to form strongly bound, inner-sphere surface complexes with
soil minerals. Such that desorption is suppressed under typical soil conditions as long as
pH remains high. These organic amendments are strongly adsorbed by high-surface-area
amendments. Although adsorption can be an effective in immobilizing mechanism for
metal contaminants, this may undergo changes in speciation but do not degrade. Some of

these amendments react with soil and water and minerals to alter the composition, pH of

82

the soil system causing dissolution of solids and precipitation of new phases that
incorporate contaminants.

Same trend with the previous results on roots that zeolite had the lowest amount
of Cr and Ni on rice straw compared to control (farmers practice). Generally, all plots
received soil amendments show a decreased in the amount of metals during harvest. The
amount of chromium and nickel on the roots decreases as soil amendments applied

compared to control (farmers practice).

300
200
150
100
50
0

T1-control T2-Vermicast T3-Carbonized _T4- Bagasse ash —_—T5- Zeolite
rice hull

Root Cr MRoot Ni mStrawCr Straw Ni

Figure 12. Effect of different soil amendments on Cr and Ni uptake at vegetative stage
(2017 WS)

83

2000

1000
500
0

Tl-control_ -T2-Vermicast_ T3-Carbonized T4- Bagasse ashT5- Zeolite
rice hull

a
a
Z
3

mCrRoot MNiRoot CrStraw mNi Straw

Figure 13. Cr and Ni uptake in rice as affected by different soil amendments at panicle
initiation (2017 WS)

1200

1000
800
> 600
3
& 400
~ 200
e 5
Tl-control] — T2- 73. |T4- Bagasst T5- Zeolite
Vermicast |Carbonized| ash
rice hull

mCrroot m@Crstraw GCrGrain

Figure 14. Cr uptake in rice as affected by different soil amendments at harvest (2017
WS)

84

1200

1000

800
600
400
200

0

T1-control T2-Vermicast T3-
Carbonized T4- Bagasse ash
rice hull

Ni root MNi straw MNi grain

Figure 15. Ni uptake in rice as affected by different soil amendments
at harvest (2017 WS)

Dry Matter Yield, NPK Concentration
and Uptake in 2017 WS Rice

As expected root NPK concentration was lower than straw and grain yield but
grain yield was higher than straw yield in all treatments (Table 20 - 22 and Figure 16).
There was highly significantly difference among treatments in terms of NPK
concentration and uptake in all plant parts. Vermicast had the highest amount of N (0.60)
and P (0.20) concentration and percent K was obtained in zeolite. This is due to the high
composition of N and P in vermicast (Chaudhary, 2006) and high K present in zeolite
mineral (Ippolito et. al., 2011). However, control had the least amount of all nutrients
with 0.51 % N. 0.15 % P and 0.42% K as well as root uptake because it did not receive
soil amendments. It was also observed that highest concentration of K in all treatments
are more on the straw compared to other plant parts. The imbalance distribution of this

nutrient results to low yield (Table 16). On the other hand, N and P were concentrated

85

more on grains. Generally, the presence of these organic amendments in combination
with inorganic fertilizer enhanced the availability of nutrients in the soil, because these

serves as natural fertilizer that can improve soil quality and enhance plant uptake.

Table 20. Dry matter yield, root concentration and uptake in rice as affected by different
soil amendments (2017 WS)

Matveg ROOT CONCENTRATION ROOT UPTAKE

TREATMENTS _ (kg ha’) (%) (kg ha")

Root N P K N P K

5 . 5 rr r a c

TI-control 609e 051d 015d 042e 311d O9le 256d
T2-Vermicast 1034a 0.60a_0.20a-0.76e€ = 6.20a-2.07a_ 7.86 a
Peavonized 815d 0.53c = O.18b Td 4S8C «16D 5.79.
rice hull
T4-Bagasseash  864e = 0.55b_ 0.17 O.81b -4.48e 139d 6.60
T5- Zeolite 935b 0.55bO.16e 84a SSB SOE 7.858
Grand Mean 8514 055 017 0.70 470 «148 «6.13
‘Significant highly significa’ SS SSSOS~—SSSSSSS

‘Ina column, means followed by the same letter(s) are not significantly different at 5% level by LSD

86

Table 21. Dry matter yield, straw concentration and uptake in rice as affected by
different soil amendments (2017 WS)

es

DRY
MATTER ROOT CONCENTRATION ROOT UPTAKE

TREATMENTS _ (kg ha’) (%) (kg ha’)

Straw N P K N P K

- + * * : * *

T1-control 3549e 0.54d 0.12d 1.96d 19.164 4.29d 69.56d
T2-Vermicast 5845 a 0.63a 0O.21a 2.35b 36.82a 12.27a 137.36b
T3- i
ae ee 4599d 0.61b0.16b -2.34b 28.05e 7.36 ~—*107.62e
rice hull

T4- Bagasse ash 4910¢ 0.6b 0.17b 2.08¢ 29.46¢ 8.35b 102.13¢
T5- Zeolite 5324 b 0.58¢ 0.15¢ 2.8a  30.88b 7.99b 149.07
Grand Mean 4845.4 0.59 0.16 2.31 28.88 8.04 113.15

= significant, **=highly significant

‘ina column, means followed by the same letter(s) are not significantly different at 5% level by LSD

87

Table 22. Dry matter yield, grain concentration and uptake in rice as affected by
different soil amendments (2017 WS)

Kx

DRY
MATTER GRAIN CONCENTRATION GRAIN apse
TREATMENTS _ (kg ha) (%) (kg ha")
Grain N
+ * * ¥ * + *
Tl-control 3800e 1.03 d 04d 0.31d = 39,14d15.2e 11.78d
T2-Vermicast 6600a 13b 06a 04a 85.8a 39.6a 26.4a

T3-Carbonized
rice hull

5100d 1.24¢ 049¢ 0.38b 63.24e 24.99d = 19.38¢
T4- Bagasse ash 5400 1.2le 0.55b 0.35e 65.34 = 29.7b 18.9¢
T5- Zeolite 5500b 1.27a — 0.49¢ 04a 69.85b 26.95¢ 22b

Grand Mean 5280 1.21 0.51 0.37 64.67 27.29 19.69

highly significant
'\n a column, means followed by the same letter(s) are not significantly different at 5% level by LSD

200
180
160
140
120
100

60

‘ots
u
Grai
Straw
KOO

Sale £ 2
2 Ged x

Straw
Grain

T2-Vermicast |T3-Carbonnized|T4- Bagasse ash} TS- Zeolite

tice hull

1-Control

mN @P SK

Figure 16. Nutrient uptake in rice as affected by different soil amendments in 2017
WSs

88

Bioaccumulation and Translocation Factor
In Rice 2017 WS

Table 23 shows the bioaccumulation factor (BAF) of Cr and Ni in rice grain at
harvest as influenced by the different soil amendments. For Cr, BAF was lowest with
zeolite (0.401), followed by vermicast (0.473), carbonized rice hull (0.504), bagasse ash
(0.562) and control (0.748). For Ni, BAF was lowest with carbonized rice hull (0.484),
followed by zeolite (0.401), vermicast (0.504), bagasse ash (0.527) and control (0.711).
All BAF values were below 1 indicating that rice absorbs but not stores Cr and Ni. The
amount of Cr and Ni transferred from the soil to the plant is one of the key elements in
the human exposure to metals via the food chain (Zhuang et al., 2009). Translocation
factors are also very low, particularly with the application of soil amendments. For Cr
translocation factor are 0.005 for carbonized rice hull and bagasse ash, 0.006 for zeolite
and vermicast which are significantly lower than TF of the control (0.016). For Ni lowest
TF was for zeolite (0.006) followed by carbonized rice hull (0.009), bagasse ash (0.010),

vermicast (0.012) and control (0.034).

89

Table 23. Bio-accumulation and translocation factor in rice as affected by different soil
amendments in 2017 WS

BIO-ACCUMULATION TRANSLOCATION
TREATMENTS FACTOR FACTOR
Cr Ni Cr Ni
+e ¥** * er
Control 0.748 a 0.71la 0.016a 0.034 a
Vermicast 0.473 d 0.504 ¢ 0.006 b 0.012 b
Carbonized rice hull 0.504 ¢ 0.484 d 0.005 ¢ 0.009 d
Bagasse ash 0.562 b 0.527 b 0.005 ¢ 0.0l¢

Zeolite 0.401 0.488 0.006 b 0.006
*= significant, **=highly significant
Ina column, means followed by the same letter(s) are not significantly different at 5% level by LSD

90

Agronomic Characteristics of 2018 DS Rice

Plant height. Application of soil amendments significantly influenced plant
height at various growth stages of rice (Table 24). At vegetative stage (14 DAT), the
tallest plants from the plots applied with vermicast were measured and obtained an
average of 40.40 cm. Plants under farmers’ practice (control) had the shortest
measurements with a mean average of 30.75 cm. The same trend of results was observed
at panicle initiation stage (50 DAT) and at harvest. Plots applied with vermicast had the
highest average plant height at panicle initiation and at harvest with 82.65 cm and 112.20
cm respectively. Application of vermicast bagasse ash, zeolite and carbonized rice hull in

combination with inorganic fertilizer can enhance plant growth.

Tiller count. The same trend in number of tillers was observed at 14 DAT and 50
DAT (Table 24). The most number of tillers were from the plots applied with vermicast
with an average of 6.00 tillers/hill at 14 DAT and 16.63 tillers/hill at 50 DAT. Higher
number of tillers/hill were recorded in 2018 DS compared with that in 2017 WS due to
higher temperature in 2018 DS that favored tillering. The plants subjected to long-day
conditions received more radiation than those subjected to short-day conditions. Thus,
the difference in the effect of temperature on tillering between a short day and a long day
light condition could result from the difference in the amount of radiation. In fact,
shading impairs tillering according to Hanada (1964) and high tillering rate is related to
high solar radiation (Mizuochi et. al., 1969). It was also found out by Tanaka et. al.,

(1965) that carbohydrate is necessary as an energy source for tiller development whereby

91

higher amount of rainfall leads to less sunlight that could trigger production of

carbohydrates.

Panicle count. Fageria et. al., (2006) reported that the number of panicles was the
most variable for rice although it is related to grain yield. Based on the results, the
average number of panicles per hill at harvest ranged from 10 to 16.25. The application
of vermicast produced the highest average number of panicles at 16.25 panicles/hill
(Table 24). Plots applied with carbonized rice hull, bagasse ash and zeolite had increased
the number of panicles compared to those under farmer’s practice. However, there was
no significant differences between the three treatments. The data also show that between
the two cropping seasons, the higher number of panicle was observed during 2018 DS at
50 DAT due to less amount of rainfall (1.6 mm) (Figure 5) during second cropping due

to enhance production of tillers.

Number of spikelet/panicle. The number of spikelets per panicle were
substantially increased by application of organic soil amendments (Table 24). Spikelets
ranged from 102 to 130, with the application of vermicast, producing the highest number
of spikelets per panicle (130). Addition of zeolite and carbonized rice hull also produced
more panicles compared with the control. It was also observed that 2018 DS had higher
number of spikelets compared to 2017 DS due to the influence of meteorological
conditions during the growing period. This implies that panicle production is most likely
reduced under high rainfall condition. This could be due to the carry over effect of

rainfall on tillering since panicles emerged from the tillers. However, spikelet formation

92

as a yield-determining process occurs during the reproductive stage. In fact, optimum
meteorological condition within 2 to 4 weeks before flowering is critical for the

development of spikelets.

Percent filled grains. Meteorological conditions may have favored the
development of filled grains. The average percent filled grains per panicle ranged from
75.25 to 86.50 (Table 24). The application of vermicast resulted in highest percentage
(86.5%) of filled grains, followed by carbonized rice hull (82.50 %), bagasse ash (81.75)
and zeolite (81.5%) suggesting that among the amendments, vermicast is a rich source of

nutrients for grain production.

Weight of 1000 seeds. Weight of 1000 filled seeds is an important parameter to
farmers because it is among the most stable components of yield in rice. The highest
1000 seed weight of 28.60 g resulted from the application of vermicast (Table 24). The
use of soil amendments significantly increased the weight of 1000 seeds over the control.

Plants under farmer’s practice (control) had the lowest 1000 seed weight at 24.92 g.

93

ST 4q J209] 966 19 uasaffip <puvoyfiuB}s rou 2.40 (s)4oys0] ans ay) Aq pomoppof supa. ‘uwunfos D Uf ‘juvdYiutIs =»
ee SS SSS ee a eee ee eee

8°97 618 TOM Ss'el er 6L'9 €'SO1 08 9€ upay pur.
29°97 ao18 0811 q0sl asst a's eri = Bez ese OM[O9Z -S.L
2697 28°18 40971 4671 291 ars 7801 «= BSI8 =A BOE ~—seasseBeg-p]
. . . : . . . . . Tray e011
qt as‘ PO'SOI aLel 29°rI ass 9686 A EBL PATHE sruogiws-¢1,
29°87 e598 ®O'0EI reo] B99] B09 BTU BLE POF ISLOIULIDA-ZL
P6be PELL PO'ZOI POO! PeOl Pry P 096 TLL «=—- BOE Jonuo5-1L
* * * * * * * * x
(3) (%) (ou) (mou) —Lvaos = LWGrl seme lvdos =LVaPl
HOA SNIVUD |ATOINVd ~~, LNNOO
v ' t wd
daasoo0l ‘aaa /lataalas dtoinva = ENN100 NATL (wo) LHOISH LNW 1d ININLVIaL
(sa 8102)

(Sq 8102) stuoupuowe [Ios sJ9]JIp £q poroayye sv dO Jo SI}OUMINd PIOLA pur oHOVOITY “7 >142L

94

Biomass. Results indicate that biomass is significantly affected by different

soil amendments. Plants under the farmer’s practice (control) produced the lowest

A -1 P . -
biomass of 649 kg ha during vegetative stage, 3990 kg ha i at panicle initiation and

4160 kg ha” at maturity, However, all the treatments added with organic amendments
showed increased biomass yield at three growth stages as presented in Table 25. At
maturity, vermicast-treated plants produced the highest total biomass of 8.27 t ha. .
Higher biomass accumulation was observed during 2018 DS than 2017 WS due to
favorable temperature exposure that would give greater amounts of assimilates that
were diverted for spikelet filling (Peng and Ismail, 2004). Both percent filled spikelets

and shoot biomass were strongly correlated with grain yield and were substantially

enhanced by addition of organic soil amendments.

Grain yield. Grain yield is the function of biomass accumulation during

ripening and translocation of biomass accumulated before flowering to grains (Yang

et. al., 2008). Maximum grain yield of 6.88 t ha! was observed in plots treated with
10t ha? vermicast as shown in Table 25. The plants treated with inorganic fertilizer
alone (control) got the lowest yield of 4.11 tha . Results also revealed that addition

of soil amendments at 10 t ha — significantly increased grain yield. The increase in

grain yield could be due to the increase in yield attributes (plant height, number of
tillers per hill, panicle count, spikelet per panicle, percent filled grains, biomass,
harvest index and 1000 grain weight). Generally, all the treatments added with 10t ha-
' showed significant influence on growth and productivity of rice. Higher grain yield
was obtained during 2018 DS due to high contribution of solar radiation, as it suggests

its significant role in improving crop productivity as the crucial factor in

95

photosynthesis. Thus, available solar radiation within the optimum level will ensure

high crop productivity.

Harvest index. Harvest index reflects the efficiency of photosynthates
partitioning between vegetative parts and economic yield or grains in rice. This
proportion can be enhanced by increasing the number of reproductive tillers, spikelets
per panicle as well as the amount of assimilate partitioned to grains (number of filled
grains and average grain weight). Harvest index in both cropping seasons were
significantly affected by the combination of soil amendments and inorganic fertilizer.
Similar to the other parameters, highest HI (50%) was obtained with vermicast
application due to increased number of spikelets per panicle, 1000 seed weight,
percent filled grains and reduced partitioning of dry matter to unfilled grains, while
the lowest HI was observed at farmer’s practice (control) with 49.7 %. Higher HI was
also observed during 2018 DS due to positive influence of solar radiation to these
important yield-determining parameters and to grain yield. Efficient partitioning of
photosynthates and assimilates to the grains particularly during the grain filling stage
is an important trait associated with the remarkable yield increase in rice (Fageria et.

al., 2006).

96

“1s71 Aq jona] 965 18 wOHRYyIP AuBDy!UAIs YoU axe (s)1ova] ures 9yF Kq paMojTOy SUEOUI “uUINIOD w UT, WOYIUAS KUT y4 WWEDYUAIS »

?

L6r'0 oss opsh 178 6'99Sb £769 ueayy puri
29640 44919 qoszes — G0's€6 4 S'E98P as'teL amjooz -SL
2 S6r'0 20195 20016 —-.0'598 2 sbE9p 2 0°r69 yse asseeg-pL
. . . . . Tiny
4 66¢'0 P ols Poo ——PS'SI8 PeSLeb PETI9 says portuoquea-e4
e0s'0 ® 389 eosess 8 0'SEOI ® e'b96b e 6 ELL SeOTWLIDA -Z]
2 L640 20llb aoosse 0019 2 0'066€ P 16r9 jonuog -1L
. ro Ee a * Pe
MES yoo
uonentyy ajiued == aarjeyaBo,a,
qSOAIeY]
\XaaNI C=) (2039) sswwola SASL ER
LSAYVH |G1aIA NIVUD we
(sd 8102)

(SC 810Z) suswIpUaUTe [Ios JuasaJFIP Aq payoayye SB 9911 Jo s}uauoduuod pjalc pue plaiA “SZ AGEL

97

Dry Matter Yield, NPK Uptake and
Concentration of 2018 DS Rice

Dry matter yield, nutrient concentration and uptake in rice as affected by soil
amendments in 2018 DS are shown in Table 26-28 and Figure 17. Nutrient concentration
and uptake were significantly affected by different treatments although all the nutrients
were found on the upper biomass compared with lower biomass. More N and P were
found in grains and K was more concentrated on the rice straw resulting to a low yield
due to the unbalanced partitioning of assimilates. On the other hand, higher uptake of
nutrients was observed with application of soil amendments particularly vermicast

(Figure 17).

98

Table 26. Dry matter yield, nutrient concentration and uptake in roots as affected by
different soil amendments in 2018 DS

DRY
MA’ z

Ep. CONCENTRATION (%) UPTAKE (kg ha”)
TREATMENTS an

(kgha_)

Root N P K N Pp K
¥ ¥ + ¥ ¥ ¥ ¥

T1-Control 610.0e O.7ld O.15be 031d 433¢ 092d 1.894
T2-Vermicast 1035.0a 0.84b 0.19a 049b 869a 1.97a 5.07b
Para ones 815.54 0.77¢ O17b 0.40¢ 628b 1.39b 3.26¢
rice hull
T4-Bagasseash 865.0¢ —0.74e-0.16e 0.36 640b 1.38b 3.1le
TS- Zeolite 935.0b 0.91a 0.15be 0.64a 851a 4c 5.98a
Grand Mean 852.1 0.79 0.16 0.44 6.84 1.41 3.86

¥= significant, **=highly significant

Ina column, means followed by the same letter(s) are not significantly different at 5% level by LSD

99

Table 27. Dry matter yield, nutrient concentration and uptake in straw as affected by
different soil amendments in 2018 DS

TREATMENTS

T1-Control
T2-Vermicast

T3-Carbonized
rice hull

T4- Bagasse
ash

T5- Zeolite

Grand Mean

MAIER

CONCENTRATION (%) UPTAKE (kg ha’')
YIELD
(kg ha!)
Straw N P K N P K
* * * * * * ¥

3550e 066d 0.16c¢ 1.32d 23.43d S5S.68d 46.86d

5845a 1.13a 0.25a 2.34a 66.05a 146la 136.77a

4600d 0.76c 0.22b 1.71b 34.96¢ 10.12b 78.66¢

4910c O0.7le 0.20b 1.67c¢ 34.86¢ 9.82¢  82.00¢

5325b O81b 0.18¢ 2.10a 43.13b 9.59e¢ 111.83b

4846 0.81 0.20 1.83 40.49 9.96 91.22

*= significant, "highly significant
‘ina column, means followed by the same letter(s) are not significantly different at 5% level by LSD

100

Table 28. Dry matter yield, nutrient concentration and uptake in grain as affected by
different soil amendments in 2018 DS

MBER

TREATMENTS CONCENTRATION (%) UPTAKE (kg ha’)

YIELD

(kg ha)

Grain N P K N ¥ K
T1-Control 4110e 138d 0.38¢ 0.18¢ 56.72d  15.62¢ TAC
T2-Vermicast 6884 a 153 a 0.54a 0.23 a 105.33a 37.17a 15.834
T3-Carbonized rice
hull 5410d 146b 0.44b 0.21b 78.99¢ 23.80b 11.36b
T4- Bagasse ash 5670 ¢ 14le 0.39 ¢ 0.20b 79.95¢ 22.11b 11.34b
TS- Zeolite 6164b 1.56a 0.38 ¢ 0.24a 96.16b 23.42b 14.79a
Grand Mean 5647.60 1.47 0.43 0.21 83.43 24.42 12.14

ignificant, **=highly significant

‘In a column, means followed by the same letter(s) are not significantly different at 5% level by LSD

101

Uptake (kg ha.)

Grain Straw Roots}

T1-Control T2-Vermicast T3-Carbonized | T4-Bagasse ash T5- Zeolite
rice hull

aN mP mk

Figure 17. Nutrient uptake in rice grain, straw and roots as affected by soil amendments
in 2018 DS

102

Cr And Ni Concentration and Uptake
in 2018 DS Rice

Table 29 shows the influence of the different soil amendments on Cr and Ni

concentration and uptake. Cr concentration in roots was lowest with the application of zeolite
(335 mg kg”), followed by carbonized rice hull (354.5 mg kg”), bagasse ash (362 mg ke”),
vermicast (390 mg kg”) and control (409.5 mg kg”). In straw, Cr concentration was below
the detection limit with zeolite and bagasse ash, 5 mg kg” in carbonized rice hull and
vermicast and 10 mg kg’ in control. Cr concentration in grain was significantly reduced
(BDL) with all soil amendments while in the control, 9.5 mg kg! Cr was still detected which
is beyond the allowable limit of 0.02 mg/kg (Codex Standard, 1995).

In general, the concentration of Ni was lower in all plant parts as compared with

Cr. In the roots, lowest Ni concentration was recorded with zeolite (220 mg kg”),
followed by carbonized rice hull (227 mg ke"), vermicast (235.5 mg ke”), bagasse ash
(242 mg kg) and control (286 mg kg”). In straw, 5 mg ke! was detected with all the
soil amendments and 10 mg kg! in the control. Ni concentration in grain was markedly
reduced with the application of zeolite and carbonized rice hull but 5 mg kg" was still

ll.
detected with vermicast and bagasse ash and 7.5 mgkg with the control.

Partitioning of the uptake and concentration of Cr and Ni in rice during harvest of
DS 2018 using different soil amendments are presented in Figure 18 and 19 and
summarized in Table 29 - 32. The presence of these amendments with the inorganic
fertilizer decreases the amount of Cr and Ni in the straw to the grains. This may be due to
the binding capacity of these material in association with the roots. Wingenfelder et. al.,

(2005) reported that addition of organic amendments increases pH that causes

103

precipitation of hydrous ferric oxides and decreased dissolved metal concentrations.
Thus, the amount of Cr content on rice grains were not detected on treatments with
vermicast, carbonized rice hull, bagasse ash and zeolite during dry season or continuous
addition of these soil amendments. On the other hand, Ni concentration was below the
detection limit on treatments applied with zeolite and carbonized rice hull while
treatments with vermicast and bagasse ash had low Ni concentration compared to
farmers practice. Results imply that with the addition of organic amendments to a
contaminated soil, the metals were adsorbed by the roots to minimize or prevent the
transport of the metals to the grains. Plants under farmers practice (control) had the
highest amount of Cr 9.5 ppm and Ni 7.5ppm in grain which are beyond the allowable

limit of 0.02 mg/kg (Codex Standard, 1995).

104

Jiu] uonza1eg Moj9g=7104

SEE 8VbL LL'96 6'807 LE IBLE una PUDAD
9781 S0'8Lz 0'02z see Se6 sj00y

$7997 jaa o's qaqa sze's mens SMO9Z -S.L
qaqa Jaa a4 qaqa v91'9 ures
€€°607 er'ele O'%z 79 S98 s100y

Ssve aa os jaa ole'r meng yse ossefeg py
Se87 Jaq o's qaqa oug9s uel
S8II'S81 60°687 Lt PSE s's18 S100y

x4 & os os 009r MENS Tiny aou paziuogien-¢ 1,
Jaq qaqa qaqa Jaa ols rely
StbL'EbZ S9'E0b S'SEZ 06€ SEO S}00y

Stet €T'6z os 0s sbe's MENS ISeOTULIaA-Z,L
Uh've qaqa 0s qaqa r8s'9 urelp)
Cazal 8'6b7 987 $'60P 019 S}00Y

Sse ssc O01 On oss‘€ MENS Jonuod-1L
S78'‘0e S0°6€ SL s6 Olly ures

IN ER) IN EP)
(rE) Lavd
(, Pq Sun) (, 34 3a) aTaIA LNV1d SLNANGNaNY TOS
avian NOLLVULNAONOD WALLY
Aud

SC 810Z UI SluoUpUoULe [los UOIAJJIP Aq poyoaJe Sv ISOA.ICY 1B DOL UL oyeidn pur uonenuddsuos IN pur 1D “67 9198L.

105

500

450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
T1- Control T2- Vermicast T4- bagasse ash T5- Zeolite
cute rice
hull

MRoot mStraw mGrain

Figure 18. Partitioning of Cr uptake in rice harvest as affected by different soil

amendments (2018 DS)
350
300
250
200
100
50
0
T1-Control —_T2- Vermicast - T4- bagasse ash —_TS- Zeolite
Cc rie rice
hull
MRoot = Straw = mGrain

re 19. Partitioning of Ni uptake in rice at harvest as affected by different
soil amendments (2018 DS)


106

Uptake and Distribution of Cr And Ni
Concentration in Rice at Various Growth Stages

At the vegetative stage (Table 30), Cr concentration and uptake in root were highly

significantly as affected by the different treatments. The control plants had the highest metal
concentrations, at 1268.5 mg Cr kg”! and 1042.5 mg Ni kg”! and uptake of 125.58 mg Cr
ha’ and 103.21 mg Ni ha! while the least concentration of metals was found in plants
treated with zeolite with 154.5 mg Cr kg”! and 222 mg Ni ke”! while uptake was 17.23 mg
Gr ha! and 24.75 mg Ni ha! . On the other hand, the same pattern as in the root was
observed in the amount of Cr and Ni in straw. The control plants had the highest
concentration of metals in straw with 54.5 mg Cr kg! and 91.5 mg Ni kg with an uptake of
29.69 mg Cr hey 49.84 mg Ni hae Plants treated with zeolite had the lowest Cr and Ni
concentrations in both root and straw. The heavy metal concentration root was 154.5 mg Cr
rae and 222 mg Ni ke? while it decreased in straw at 19 mg Cr ha! and 403 mg Ni ha
The lower concentration of Cr and Ni in zeolite resulted to a lower uptake in both root and
straw at an amount of 19.0 mg Cr ke? and 40.3 mg Ni kg! in the root, with12.15 mg Cr ha
| and 25.77 mg Ni ha’‘in the straw.

During panicle initiation as presented in Table 31, roots in all treatments were observed

to have higher levels of Cr and Ni as well as the amount of uptake compared with straw. Same

trend was observed from vegetative stage, where the control plants had the highest concentration

of metals in the roots, at 677 mg Cr kg’! and 627.5 mg Ni kg” resulting to a highest uptake of
381.83 mg Ni ha”! and 353.91 mg Ni ha” . On the other hand, zeolite-treated plants had the

. -1
lowest concentration and uptake, with 319 mg Crkg and 416

107

mg Ni kg” resulting to the lowest uptake at 233.03 mg Cr ha”! and 303.89 mg Ni ha,
However, the concentration and uptake in straw decreased in all treatments although Cr and
Ni levels were more concentrated in the control plants, at both 10.0 mg kg? with an uptake
of 31.49 mg Cr ha’! and 31.49 mg Ni ha, The lowest concentration of both metals in all
treatments added with soil amendments were observed at 5.0 mg kg” Although it shows
different uptake in straw, the lowest uptake was found in plants with carbonized rice hull,
with the same amount of 17.49 mg ha’! for both Cr and Ni.

At harvest (Table 32) generally, the Cr and Ni concentrations decreased in all
treatments compared with the vegetative and panicle initiation stages. More Cr and Ni were
still detected in the control in both roots and straws compared with plants treated with soil
amendments. It was found out that Cr concentration and uptake in straw was below the

detection limit in plants treated with bagasse ash and zeolite. However, Ni concentration in

plants with soil amendment was lower at 5 mg Ni ha’ for all treatments while the control
plants had 10 mg Ni kg! Although the lowest Ni uptake in straw was observed in plants
with carbonized rice hull at 23.0 mg Ni ha”! , the control plants had the highest straw uptake

of 35.5 mg Ni hae

Table 32 also emphasizes the importance of soil amendments in controlling the transport of

Cr and Ni into the grains. Cr levels below detection limit were found in grains treated with soil
. -l .

amendments compared to control plants with 9.5 mg Cr kg. Likewise, Ni concentration below

detection limit was observed in plants treated with carbonized rice hull and zeolite while control

plants had 7.5 mg Ni kg? In addition to this, the Cr uptake in grain was also below the detection

limit in all soil amendment treatments, while the control plants had 39.05 mg Cr ka! . This is

very alarming since this amount is beyond the acceptable limit

108

of 0.02 ppm Cr (Codex, 2001). Ni uptake in carbonized rice hull and zeolite were observed

as below the detection limit while plants treated with bagasse ash (28.35 mg Ni ha”),

vermicast (5.0 mg Ni ha ) and control (30.83 mg Ni ha 1) shows higher uptake in grains

which means it is not safe for food consumption since the levels are beyond the acceptable

limit of 0.02 ppm Ni (Codex, 2001).

Generally, Table 30 and 31 show the significant effects of the different treatments
applied in all rice stages. At the vegetative stage, particularly the root, more metal is
absorbed and then absorption slowly decreased with time from panicle initiation until
maturity due to the dilution effect in the plant. Plants under farmers practice had the highest
amount of Cr and Ni concentration and uptake from root to grain compared with plants that
received soil amendments particularly zeolite. According to Taylor (1997) and Matschei et.
al., (2007), the addition of soil amendments containing high amount of silica and carbon
make them effective sorbents for organic compounds and contaminants. When reacted with
water, they create highly alkaline solutions and form complex mixtures of hydroxides,
mainly Ca(OH)2 and other amorphous calcium silica hydrate phases. They are also used to
raise pH of acidic soils, reducing leaching and phytoavailability of metal cation
contaminants that probably result from simple adsorption to oxide and silicate minerals as
pH is increased. Thus, the metals present in the soil are immobilized/ complexed with the
soil amendments added. They have the binding capacity to associate with the roots resulting
to a decrease in the bioavailability of the contaminants, minimizing the transport of Cr and

Ni into the grains.

109

ST Aq Jara] %g 18 uoLOYJ1p ApueoypIUBIs you ae (s)rond| autes a4] Aq panro|foj SUBDUE ‘UUINJOD v UT “JUEOLLUAIS A[YTIY yy TULOYIUTIS =»

Ip9€ 88L'61 9L09 = OE 94609 vEZPS 9060S LZZS Beh £501 uray pues
DLLST PSTZL PLO F061 APOED PSL HT FETLI PTZ ASPs! ASIII OUH108Z -SL
BIOLy 26861 46L FOE 29709 hh GHEE FS%H FTE >HO] se asseBeg -p]
' 7 ac F “ 2 5 Tay 9011
PSOT PITZI Sy PSOZ PHSOS PSI6E PLESZT FIZ PSOE £6 pozwoqie>-¢ 1
GEEZ GOST PSBP ASLE L999 GORGES A9BGP AEDS A6lh F6II ILOILO A-ZL
Byer B696T FS16 BSPS POLS BITEOL BRSSTl BSZPOL BS8IZ1 P66 [onuoD-1.L
* * * * * ** ** * 1 ok
IN Fe) IN Fie) 23 IN Fie) IN Ea) ua
(, 24 Bw) (34 3u) aTalA (24 Bu) (, 34 Sur) Tala
avLan NOLLVULNEONOD = -YALLVW avidn NOLLVULNGONOD WALLY SUNAWLVARL
Ad
MVULS Loou

(SC 8107 ‘2aneraaa) LV pI] 18 901 UL UOReNUEDUOD IN pue 19 Jo LoNNgmnsiq pur axedn “Og M1981,

110

ST Aq [aaa] %E 3 WasaJIP AjUBdIyIUSIs you oe (s)9y9] auIeS 4} Aq pamoljo} SUBaUI ‘UUIN]OD & LA
quvoyudis A[yFiy=,4 uvdyrUsI

=*

BET IZ 8ET'1Z 09 09 «= SLIDE ZSSELE BOT'ZEE  6LOS oos 1919 uray pues
P81 P81 q0S 40S TOLIE POSEOE PEOEET PIP  F6I1f KS OEL DNJO9Z -SL
20°81 => HOST qos O'S €809E FOLLLE ESB'SIb AS'SHS 45009 95769  — YsvosseBeg -py
[ 7 4 5 7 5 . . Tiny 2011
>6rLI PP 6FLI qos GOS TROVE PUCIE PLII6Z 29Lb PSIhh 5659 peemoqieste
QLL0Z = ALL'02 qos 10'S = SHSIh PRT RHE PITEEE PSPLy > Zh BPEL YSPOTULIOA-ZL.
eevle Forle FOOT FOO sBrle AIGESE AEIBE BSLZI BLL9 PHOS Jonuod-1L
* * * * + * + * ** *

IN ce) IN 19 mall 3y IN ce) IN ce) al By

(, 24 Su) (, 31 3u) aTaIA (24 3u) (, 343w) aTaIA
ayeidg, NOLLVYLNFONOD YSLLVN avian NOLLVYLNAONOD YALLVA SLNGWLVANL

Aud Aud

MVULS LOOU

(Sd 8102 ‘Yonentur aforued) LY 0S 1e SOL Ur UONeNUDDUOD IN pue ID Jo UoINqiNsiq pur oyeidy “T¢ 9192.

111

ST Aq [ana] %g 18 waLayIp AlyUED

is 70u az8 (S)s0n9] ures atp Aq pomoyioy Sueour “uUUN|OD BU,

WILOMIUTIS ATYTIY =e TUCOYIUTIS =

87 67 9 L OP8b 6Ly OLL CHT OLE TSB uvoy puein
aeooz PIdd = =64S += TK zESOL'GOZ AETEIE POT PSEE 4566 aut]o2Z -L
Sch PICA % 21 OLGY GEEGOT AEI'EIE AZZ FZ9E 9598 Yseossefieg -py
20% EZ as 4S P00 PZI'S8I 26068 PLZZ >S>PSE PS'SIB es

£ P poziuoqiea-¢ 1
Gero AEH «=—««AS_— ASR GHRS ERTIZOIROLPROZ FS'SEC 06E BSED] _asvorUOA-zZ]
Bose RSSE = BOT «= BOT OSSE ~POFHLI. PREZ eB 9BZ LS GOP 019 jonuod-[.L
: : . rs : . . rs a
IN Efe) 'N Ee) Py 8y IN Be) IN Ee) aH
(,-ey Bu) (%) aTalA (1-ey Sur) (%) aTalaA
ANVLAN —-NOILVYINSONOD YALLWN = Wd ~—NOLLVYINSONOD WALLVW SINGIWLVSAL
‘AWG
AG
MVULS LOOu

(8107 ‘SC ‘ISOAIeY) LV GLE 8 9911 UT UONR.WUDDUOD IN puk ID JO UONNINsIg pue oyeidy *ZE aIQUL

112

ST Aq [ana] %g ve 1UaLAJIp Aj UEdYLUBIS you axe (s)san9] Oures au Aq paniojjo} SUDUE
qULoYIUBIS AyYTIY=_4 STUROYTUaIS =,

moo e UT

1S =

617
P1daq
qSE87
P 1aq
90S

PES OE

SO'6E
qaqa
q1aa
qaqa
q1aq

BSO6E

aavldn

ees

971d
qos
o1dd
qos

eoL

IN

SNIVUD

0s°6 8'9P9S uray pueln
q1da 9 p919 OMJOIZ -SL
qaqa 2 0L9S yse ossefeg -py
ada POlps Tray 2011 paztuogie)-¢ 1,
q1da 2 0889 YSBOIULIDA-Z,L
eo6 20lIb JonuoD- TL

* ee
9
(%) ey 3)
SINFWLVIUL

NOILLVYLNAONOD YALLVA AUG

ooo

HOD “TE AI


113

Bio-accumulation and Translocation
Factors in rice (2018 DS)

The bioaccumulation factor of Cr is very low (BDL) in all treatments except in the
control at 0.24 (Table 33) indicating that the soil amendments were very efficient in
preventing the bioaccumulation of Cr. The transfer of metals from the soil to the plant is
one of the key elements in the human exposure to metals via the food chain (Zhuang et.
al., 2009). Zeolite and bagasse ash were also very efficient in preventing translocation of
Ni from the soil to rice resulting in very low BAF (BDL). BAF of Ni in bagasse ash and
vermicast were 0.25 since Ni was still detected in straw. Nevertheless, the BAF values
were all less than | indicating that rice only absorbs Cr and Ni but does not store them.

Translocation factors for Cr in all soil amendments were very low (BDL). Some Cr
levels were detected in the grain of control plants, hence a TF value of 0.04. Presence of

Ni in grains with vermicast and bagasse ash was also detected, hence the TF valuesof

0.02 compared to 0.03 with the control.

114

Table 33. Bio-accumulation and translocation factors in rice as affected
by different soil amendments in 2018 DS

BIO-ACCUMULATION TRANSLOCATION

TREATMENTS FACTOR FACTOR

Cr Ni Cr Ni

* * * *
T1-Control 0.24 0.29 0.04 0.03
T2-Vermicast BDL 0.25 BDL 0.02
T3-Carbonized rice hull BDL BDL BDL BDL
T4- Bagasse ash BDL 0.25 BDL 0.02
T5- Zeolite BDL BDL BDL BDL

* significant since, p value 0.0002 < 0.005

Impact of Soil Amendments on Soil Properties, 2018 DS

Table 34 shows the effect of soil amendments on soil pH and organic matter
content after growing rice for two consecutive seasons. Soil pH remained unchanged in
the control (5.4) but increased with the application of organic amendments particularly
vermicast which increased soil pH to 7.0, followed by zeolite and carbonized rice hull
(6.9), and bagasse ash (6.8). This is maybe due to the liming effect of organic materials
(Narambuye & Haynes, 2006).

There was a build-up in the soil organic matter content after applying the
various soil amendments for two cropping seasons. Among the soil amendments, the
application of vermicast resulted in the highest soil organic matter content (3.1%),
followed by carbonized rice hull (2.8%), bagasse ash (2.7%), zeolite (2.6%). Soil organic

matter content in the control also increased to 2.5%. In addition to providing nutrients

115

and habitat to organisms living in the soil, organic matter also binds contaminants in the

soil.

116

AST Aq Jans] %g 18 qUoLayIp AIjuROIsIUTIS OU Oue (s)JoND] dUIeS a4) kg Pom:

suvaul ‘uuinjoo @ Uy
I

Lex VUBOITUSIS,.
moe ET 169 99'9 aMO9Z -S.L
9L7 IST 289 a9 yse osseBeg -p 1
agz alt 469 v9 [iny 2011 paziuogies-¢.1
Ble F6T BTL BLO JSBOIULIOA-ZL
PSZ Pr? prs Prs JonuoD- TL
* * 9L * * Vs
(%) LNALNOD
gor gor
gor sa YALLVNW god SM Hd
8107 YALAV pais oinvowo S94 8197iggyauay Tviint «= SHNAWEVaRL
YaLIV YaLdIV
‘TWILINI
S]USUIPUaUUE [10s JUDJAJJIP Aq paouon|ul se yUDIUOS JoyeUl o1ULT.IO puke HA [IOS “pE 9IGRL


117

Changes in total and available Cr in soil are presented in Table 35. Total Cr was

significantly reduced with the application of soil amendments. Application of zeolite

reduced total Cr by 22.5 % (974 mg kg"), carbonized rice hull by 10% (432 mg kg"),
bagasse ash by 6.9 % (298 mg ke”), vermicast by 6.7 % (289 mg ke"). Total Cr in
control was reduced by only 1.2 %( 54 mg kg). Available Cr was likewise significantly
reduced by soil amendments. Zeolite reduced availabel Cr by 5.8 % (484 mg kg),
carbonized rice hull by 23.6% (442 mg kg"), vermicast by 17% (295 mg kg!) and
bagasse ash by 13.9% (261 mg kg”). Available Cr in control was also reduced by 3.2%
(61 mg ke").

Total and available Ni in soil was also significantly influenced by the

application of soil amendments (Table 36). Application of carbonized rice hull reduced

total Ni by 43.6 % (1155 mg kg"), zeolite by 31.3 % (828 mg kg’), bagasse ash by 27.8
% (735 mg kg’), and vermicast by 27.1 % (718 mg kg”). Total Ni in the control was
reduced by only 0.7% (18 mg kg"). A large reduction in the available Ni in the control
was observed, with a reduction of 38.8% (677 mg ke. Available Ni was reduced by
47.8 % (825 mg kg"), 43.3 % (748 mg kg”) in carbonized rice hull and vermicast, and

42.7% (736 mg ke!) in bagasse ash. The potential use of zeolites for treating acid mine
drainage in Rapu —Rapu has been found by Sanchez and Francisco (2010). These
amendments can remediate because they can bind metals due to their aluminosilicate

content (Martirena, et. al.,1998).

118

ST Aq Jona] 96 ve uLAYIP ApuCoys!

Jou aie (s)1ona] autes ayy £q pon

OUI “UUNJOD B UT
TUMIYUSIS APYBI yy “TUDIYIUT IS,

$8h- 2 16€1 P £691 bLo- 2 OEE 2 698E aq]ooZ
197 qvi91 QSL 86c- 2910b POsOr yse osseseg
tr P cert Q7sLt cer P 788e 2061p TINY 9914 poztuoqie+)
S6z- 2 08ST 9 SELI 68¢- qSz0r 481th JSBOTULID A,
19° eyisl ®Of61 oS 809th & 79th JonuoD
1 * SL81 ** ** bier
(3 Bui) Ca sw) C34 un) C4 3ul) (34 3u) CAA Sul) CA Sur) Ca sw)
gor
1
° ra 8 a mae “ anay AV. 3 .LNI Saale he sat IO TVLOL we
@ONVHO UAaLdV YaLAV TWLLIN] JONVHO YaLAV WL TVILINI

s]UOUIpUdUle [IOs JuarayyIp Aq paouonyul se 1D 91q)

Bury “SE NGL

IRAv pur PIO} [10S

119

a 2006 ~~ PELEI 878- Powel 9 $6zz anyjoaz
oa 4886 0851 Sel- qel6l ——-t0sz yse asseBeg
np 2816 ELSI SslI- 2 e6rl_— SOG [Iny 9011 poztuogre3
8bl- 9846 © 9.6851 B1L- 40661 —-4.60sz seotuns9 9,
re p01 BSHLI gi- Bost —-BSEOT jonuog

, * sz P P 8h92

(34 3u) C3 sw) (3 ul) C3 3) CH 3u) (34 Sut) (4 Bw) (# Bul)

if

NI Se LN) IN Bre gory Sat IN SINFWLV IAL

NI sasioz L102 aIVAV‘1v sasioc OL
AONVHO WaLdV_UALAV WLOLNT  yalay anes
4VILINI JONWHO Walav—WILINI
s]UOUIpUSUe 10s JUSJaJJIP Aq paouoNyu se IN o]QRIIeAe pur eYD “OE O1qRL


120

Economic Analysis of Rice Production

Table 37 shows the ROI for the 2017 WS and the 2018 DS rice production.
Return on investment (ROI) describes the ratio of net income with total expenses. In both
season, the highest ROI was realized from the application of bagasse ash followed by the
application of carbonized rice hull. The application of bagasse ash produced an ROI of
1.24 in the 2017WS, indicating that for every peso spent by the farmer he gains Php 1.24.
This was increased to Php 1.30 during the 2018 DS. A lower ROI was obtained with the
application of carbonized rice hull, only Php 0.29 in 2017 WS and Php 0.34 in 2018 DS.
Application of vermicast appeared to be unprofitable in 2017 WS because of a negative
ROI ( -0.02) and break even (0.01) in 2018 DS. This practice can become profitable if the

farmer produces his own vermicast. Zeolite produced high yields in both seasons but
because of the additional cost (Php 10/kg) of zeolite, applying 10 t hay was not

profitable.

1-24 IUSUNSOAMT TO WIM
84 g1@ ware Apnys ayy wr Avjed jo aod Surjreaaid oy uo paseq payndwios »

£F0 SS9L91 C9101 e918 S798FB oF9'S upay
270 S78SIE- —O880II SZ9LZ11 S79bTh1 091°9 aM[O9Z -SL
rel $LOSLS 090701 SZ9Lb1 S@9bbb 0L9'S yse ossedeg -p 1
260 SLI6PZ —-OBELE $29L@b SU9P7L Olr's Tiny 9011 poziuuogred-¢.L
P100 SLLEI Ov8EzI $'79L%6 S'79b77I 088°9 yeoluLlaA-Z,
4610 SLISIE — O86EL SZ9L71 S79PTy Olly Jonuoo =|,
(Arenageq
~ AWQWIBAON) SC 8107
Z£0 POET oF0S6 OSEOES OSELES 08's upay
PE0- 6SEE%H 00066 6'SE9011 6'SEEIPI o0s‘s SNORT -SL
all T'p98es 0076 6'SE9ZI osEeey o0r's yse ossefeg ~pL
2670 Tp9p0z 00816 6'S€90b 6SEEIL oor's Iny e011 paziuuoqred-¢.1,
270'0- 6SEST- —-0088TT 6'S£906 6'SEEIZI 009°9 SEOUL A-ZL
9590 1'p90<7 0089 6'S€901 OSEEly 008‘¢ Jonuos -1 1,
Pry (49q0390 -9uNL) SA LIOZ
(low) (eu d) Ca d) (4 d) C4 d) C4 3y)
INGNLSAANI AWOONI $gwoont al TddV  SASNAdXA TAA INSWLVaYL

NONUAMITY JIN ‘ggoyg WAZA = ‘WLOL = NIVUD

suoseas Surddoss om) Joy s}uaWpusWe [10s JUaayjIp Aq payoayye se uoONpo.d dou Jo siskjeur s1woUOdg “L¢ 9IQUL

122

CHAPTER V

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

Rice is most widely consumed as staple food for a large part of the world's human.
population, especially in Asia. In the Philippines, rice is considered as the major food and is
the source of income for over 12 million Filipino farmers (FAO, 2007). The major rice
producing parts of the country include Central Luzon, Western Visayas, Cagayan Valley,
Ilocos region, SOCCSKSARGEN and Bicol region (Ricepedia, 2012). In Central Luzon,
Zambales province is considered to be one of the rice producing areas with a total land area
of 371,440 hectares. One of its thirteen (13) municipalities, is Santa Cruz which has a total
land area of 5,082.85 hectares that is devoted to agriculture with 3, 503.85 hectares planted to
rice.

However, mining industry has recently been booming in Santa Cruz where there
is abundant deposit of nickel and chromite minerals. As of 2015, mine permit for nickel and
chromite operations covers about 9, 791.8084 hectares operated by four large-scale mining
companies (Environmental Justice Atlas, 2015). Before the mining operation started, Santa
Cruz river can irrigate up to 2000 rice fields, now it can only accommodate 800 fields losing
8,000 tons of palay (rice paddy) production annually worth Php 200-million (Environmental
Justice Atlas, 2015). In 2016, DA-RFU III reported that the soil in barangay Lomboy, Santa
Cruz, Zambales was already contaminated with Cr and Ni. Thus, there is an urgent need to

develop cost effective techniques in mitigating heavy metals in a contaminated rice field and

123

at the same time increase the yield safely without compromising the environment and human
health.

The study was conducted to evaluate various remediation techniques to reduce the
plant absorption and translocation of Cr and Ni in lowland rice in Barangay Lomboy, Santa
Cruz Zambales and at the same time increase rice productivity in the area. It is the goal of
this study to contribute to the growing knowledge of managing and mitigating heavy metals
in lowland rice fields along with generating information on the best combination of
inorganic, and organic fertilizers for sustainable rice production.

The first part of the study focused on evaluating the potential of vetiver as a
phytoremediator. Vetiver was allowed to grow in the field for 3 months before growing rice
in the succeeding season (2018 DS). In an adjacent field, vetiver was allowed to grow
continuously for 8 months. The second part of the study evaluated the effect of different soil
amendments (vermicast, carbonized rice hull, bagasse ash and zeolite), applied at a rate of 10

t ha’, in mitigating Cr and Ni in soil and reducing their uptake in rice. NSIC Rc160

(Tubigan 14) rice variety was grown for two consecutive seasons, 2017 WS and 2018 DS.
Cultural and fertilizer management were applied based on the recommended rate of the Rice
Crop Manager (RCM). The effect of the various treatments on soil properties were also
evaluated.

Soil samples were collected before the start of the field experiments and at the end
of each growing season of vetiver or rice. Soil parameters such as pH, texture, OM, total N,
Available P, exchangeable K, CEC, total and available Cr and total and available Ni were
determined at the Regional Soils Laboratory, Department of Agriculture, Caraga Region.

Growth and agronomic parameters like plant height, number of tillers per hill, panicle per

124

hill, spikelets per panicle, percent filled grains, weight of 1000 grains, harvest index, grain
yield were also determined. Plant samples were collected for Cr and Ni analysis in rice root
and straw at vegetative stage (14DAT), panicle initiation (SODAT) and in root, straw and
grain at harvest. N, P and K in straw and grain was also determined at maturity.

Vetiver grass significantly reduced the amount of total and available Cr and Ni in
the soil Total Cr and available Cr were reduced by 4.3% to 8.53% while total Ni and
available Ni were reduced by 9.86% and 14.26%, respectively. Results indicate that vetiver
is very efficient in reducing heavy metal content due to the unique characteristics of its root
system and has a potential in the phytoremediation of heavy metals particularly Cr and Ni in
lowland rice paddies. The shoot of this plant can be a good source as forage for animal

consumption since it contains less amount of metal. Based on the result, when this plant was

1 . 1
grown for 3 months, the roots were able to accumulate 3.83 kg Cr ha- and 3.66 kg Ni ha-
while only 0.03 kg Cr ha-' and 0.07 kg Ni ha-! in shoots. After 8 months, the amount of Cr
accumulated in the roots and shoots increased to 6.357 and 0.04 kg Cr ha? respectively. For

Ni, it only increased to 4.12 and 3.66 kg Ni hal, Results implied the importance of vetiver

in extracting these metals from the soil and accumulating them in their roots keeping the
shoots safe for animal consumption. Due to their extensive rooting system, they can take up
considerable amount of heavy metals using ion channels and metal transport proteins on
their roots. Aside from the beneficial effects in mitigating pollutants in the soil, vetiver also
improved soil pH and percent organic matter due to its root interaction in the soil giving
niche for the microbes.

It was found out that vetiver has the capacity to absorb Cr and Ni from the soil and

store them in their system particularly in the roots since it has a BAF of 0.97 for Cr and 1.07

125

for Ni in 3 months growth and 1.48 for Cr and 1.38 for Ni after 8 months indicating higher
concentration in the plant than in the soil. On the other hand, the translocation factors in both
3 and 8 months are very low indicating that vetiver accumulates Cr and Ni in their roots and
very small amount of Cr and Ni were translocated to the shoots making them safe for forage

purposes. Higher TF was obtained for Ni as compared to Cr both 3 and 8 months of growth.
These values are below 0.2 mg kg a which are prescribed limit given by the Codex Standard
and European Union (EU standards).

Distribution of Cr and Ni in rice grown after 3 months growth of vetiver, showed
that during vegetative stage, roots had the highest Cr and Ni concentrations and uptake
compared to straw. At panicle initiation, more Cr and Ni still concentrated in the roots
resulting to higher uptake. At maturity, Cr was only detected in the roots and straw and was
not translocated to the grain. Results implied that at vegetative stage, the rice plant was so
active in absorbing nutrients including metals. Through time as the growth of plant increased
nutrient uptake also increased particularly at reproductive stage wherein uptake was higher
for growth stabilization. The grains were below detection limit in both Cr and Ni because
these metals were immobilized by the roots. Some of the Cr and Ni could have been present
in the rice bran and unfilled grains. The bio-accumulation factor was found 0.14 Cr and 0.18
Ni which are < 1 indicated that rice plant only absorbs but does not store heavy metals,
resulting to a below detection limit of the grains. The roots of vetiver had contributed a
greater impact on the solubility and phytoavailability of metals in the soil thus Cr and Ni
were found below detection limit on the grain.

The soil amendments significantly increased the pH of the soil, percent organic

matter, N, P and K after two (2) cropping seasons resulting in an increase in grain yield ha

126

particularly with the application of vermicast as compared to the farmers practice (control).
More nutrients (N and P) were observed in rice grains while K was found more on the straw
in both wet and dry season. The imbalanced of this nutrient partitioning limits grain yield.
However, temperature also affects the photosynthates, in fact higher yield was observed
during dry season compared to wet season in all treatments including the control. Cr and Ni
were observed more on the roots compared to straw in all treatments in three sampling
period (14 DAT, 50 DAT and at harvest). Highest amount of concentration and uptake of
metals was found in farmers practice (control) whereas plants receiving soil amendment
showed a lower concentration and uptake of metals in the plant system particularly zeolite.
Below detection limits of Cr was found in grains in all treatments with soil amendments
while BDL for Ni in grains receiving carbonized rice hull and zeolite. Vermicast and bagasse
ash showed a small amount of Cr and Ni in grains compared to control (farmers practice).

All soil amendments significantly decreased the amount of total and available Cr
and Ni in the study area, with zeolite showed the highest deceased followed by carbonized
rice hull and bagasse ash. This indicates that addition of soil amendments was very efficient
in preventing the bioaccumulation of Cr and Ni in rice, due to its binding capacity of these
material that helps decreased the dissolved metal concentrations.

Growth and agronomic parameters were significantly affected by treatments in
both wet and dry season. At vegetative stage (I4DAT) and panicle initiation (50 DAT),
highest plant height, biomass, and number of tillers were observed at treatments with
vermicast while the lowest parameters were found in farmers practice (control). Generally,
all treatments with soil amendments were obtained higher growth parameters compared to

farmers practice in both wet and dry season. At harvest, highly significantly difference

127

between treatments were observed from biomass, 1000 seed weight, grain yield and retum
on investment while significant difference was observed on percent filled grains, panicle
count, spikelet/panicle and harvest index. Highest yield and yield parameters were obtained
from treatments with vermicast followed by zeolite, bagasse ash and then carbonized rice
hull. Lowest yield and yield components were found on farmers practice both wet and dry
season. Treatments applied with vermicast had the heaviest weight of 1000 seed with 27.60
(WS, 2017) and 28.60 g (DS, 2018) while the lighest weight were obtained at farmers

practice (control) with 23.57 (WS, 2017) and 24.92g (DS, 2018). Same trend with the grain

yield, plots applied with vermicast had the highest yield with 6.6 t ha’! (WS, 2017) and 6.88
t ha? (DS, 2018) while farmers practice (control) had the lowest yield with 3.8 t ha? (WSs,

2017) and 4.11 t pe (DS, 2018). However, highest return on investment was obtained in
plots added with bagasse ash with 124% (WS) and 130% (DS) due to its cheaper cost while
lowest ROI was obtained in plots added with zeolite with -30% (WS) and -22% (DS)
because the material cost at 10.00 kg”! at 10t ha’! recommendation rate,

For the total uptake and distribution of Cr and Ni concentration in root, straw and
grain at various growth stages of rice, showed significant differences in all treatments in both
wet and dry seasons at vegetative stage (14DAT) and at maturity (87DAT) DS, 2018. All
treatments showed highest metal uptake on the roots than in straw and grain had the least
uptake in two croppings. At panicle initiation it was also observed that more metals were
consumed by rice compared to other growth stages then slowly decreased at maturity. With
continuous application of soil amendments, grain was observed below detection limit (BDL)
on Cr in the plots applied with vermicast, carbonized rice hull, bagasse ash and zeolite while

carbonized rice hull and zeolite only showed below detection limit on Ni. However, control

128

(farmers practice) showed highest metal (Cr and Ni) on the grains in both croppings with
0.088 Cr and 0.149 Ni kg ha’ (WS) and 0.04 and 0.97 kg ha’! (DS). These values indicate
that the grain in control (farmers practice) are contaminated with Cr and Ni which are not
safe for consumption because it is beyond the allowable limit of 0.02 mg/kg.

Nutrient uptake in both wet and dry seasons were significantly affected by
treatments, although N and P were consumed more on the grains while K was observed on
the straw. More nutrients were found to plants added with vermicast while least amount at
farmers practice (control).

It was found out that plants grown in the control plots had the highest amount of
accumulated metals compared to plants in plots with soil amendments. Also, plants with soil
amendments had the lowest translocated amount of Cr and Ni from the roots going to the
grains compared to the control in both cropping season. On the other hand, BAF of vetiver in
both wet and dry seasons are greater or equal to 1 which means that vetiver plants have the
capacity to absorb and store metals on their system particularly the roots. With the

continuous cultivation of vetiver in the field, dry season (DS, 2018) contains higher bio-

S -1 a
accumulated Cr (1.48) and Ni (1.38 mg kg) compared to wet season (WS, 2017) with 0.97
Cr and 1.07 mg kg! Ni respectively due to its increasing biomass. The translocation factor

in both seasons (WS and DS) show that it is below 0.02 mg kg as prescribed limits fixed

by the Codex Standard and European Union (EU Standards). Result indicates that vetiver
plant had a lower translocated Cr and Ni to their shoots to make it safe for forage purposes.
Another mechanism of vetiver in mitigating heavy metals were affected by time duration. It
was observed that the longer the time of vetiver in the field the lower is the translocation

factor because it shows a negative cumulative difference between the two

129

seasons. This may be due to that fact that vetiver has high capacity to store and uptake

metals according to its bio-availability.

Based on the results obtained, the following conclusions are drawn:

The study area was highly contaminated with Cr and Ni due to its naturally
occurring mineral from the parent material and the presence of mining activities.
Remediation techniques including addition of soil amendments and phytoremediation
(vetiver) were ideal and sustainable alternative on the permanent removal or recovery to rice
paddies. These were significantly increased soil pH and percent organic matter with
decreased amount of total and available Cr and Ni.

The use of phytoremediation (vetiver) implied on the bio-accumulation of Cr
and Ni that this plant has the capacity to absorb and store metals on their system particularly
the roots. With the continuous cultivation of vetiver in the field higher bio-accumulated
metals were observed due to its increasing biomass. However, the translocation factor in

both seasons (WS and DS) show that it is below 0.02 mg kg” as prescribed limits fixed by

the Codex Standard and European Union (EU Standards). Vetiver plant had a lower
translocated Cr and Ni to their shoots thus it is safe for forage purposes. It was observed that
the longer the time of vetiver in the field the lower is the translocation factor due to that fact
that vetiver has high capacity to store and uptake metals according to its bio-availability.

The use of rice after one cropping of vetiver (vetiver-rice) in mitigating Cr and Ni
indicate that the plant only absorbs (Cr and Ni) particularly more on the roots. The

translocated amount was reduced to grain because the roots contribute greater impact on the

130

solubility and phyto-availability of metals in the soil thus Cr and Ni were below detection
limit on the grain.

Rice plant applied with different soil amendments has significantly decreased
the amount of accumulated metals with lower translocated amount compared to plants with
inorganic fertilizer only (control).

Plants applied with zeolite had the highest decrease in available Cr and Ni and
total Cr while carbonized rice hull obtained the highest decreased on the amount of total Ni
after the two cumulative cropping’s on the addition of soil amendments. It was followed by
vetiver (phytoremediation), although vetiver was also effective in remediating metals
however large amount of nutrients were also utilized resulted to nutrient competition with
rice. Generally, all the soil amendments and phytoremediation (vetiver) significantly
decreased the amount of available and total Cr and Ni compared to farmers practice

(control).

131

LITERATURE CITED

AHMAD, K. and D. CARBOO. 2000. Speciation of As (III) and As(V) in some Ghanaian
gold tailings by a simple distillation method. Water Air Soil Pollut. 122:317-326.

AGARWAL, SK.1985. Effect of moisture regime and fertility levels on the yield and
nutrient uptake of rice. Indian Agric. Res. 19 (1):35-39.

AGUSALIM, MASULILI. 2010. Rice husk biochar for rice-based cropping system in acid
soil.1. The characteristics of rice husk biochar and its influence on the properties of
acid sulfate soils and rice growth in West Kalimantan, Indonesia. Vol.2 (1).

ALLOWAY, B.J. 1995a. Soil processes and the behavior of heavy metals. In, Heavy Metals
in Soils, Second Edition (B.J. Alloway, ed.) Blackie, New York. Pages 11-37.

ALLOWAY, B.J. 1995b. Heavy Metals in Soils, Blackie Academic and Professional,
London, UK, 2nd edition.

ALMARAZ, B.V., TROCELLIER, P., and R.I. DAVILA. 2003. Nucl Instrum Methods Phys
Res B 210:424-432.

ANDRADE, S.J., CRISTALE, J., SOARES, S.F.S., ZOCOLO, G.J., and M.R.R. MARCHI.
2010. Contribution of sugar-cane harvesting season to atmospheric
contamination by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in Araraquara city,
such showed Southeast Brazil. Atmos. Environ. (44) 2913-2919.

ANGUISSOLA, S., SILVA, S. and G. BOTTESCHI. 1999. Effect of fly ash on the
availability of Zn, Cu, Ni and Cd to chicory. Agri. Ecosystems and Environ.
72: 159-163.

ANTONLADIS, V.; TSADILAS, C.D. 2008. Sorption of cadmium, nickel and zinc in mono
and multimetal systems. Applied Geochemistry, v.22, p.2375-2380.

APREUTESEI, R.E.; CATRINESCU,C., andC. TEODOSIU. 2008.
Surfactant-modified natural zeolites for environmental applications in water
purification. Environ. Eng. Manag. J. (7) 149-161.

AQUINO, L.D..MORGANA, M.CARBONI,M.A.,STAIANO, M.,ANTISARI, M.V. M. LO
RITO, M. RE., VINALE, F., ABADI, K.M., and S.L. WOO. 2009. Effect of

132

some rare earth elements on the growth and lanthanide accumulation in different
Trichoderma strains Soil Biol. Biochem., 41 pp. 2406-2413

BAKER, AJ.M and R. R. BROOKS. 1989.“Terrestrial higher plants which
hyperaccumulate metallic elements: a review of their distribution, ecology and
phytochemistry,” Biorecovery, vol. 1, pp. 81-126.

BAKER, A.J.M. and P.L. WALKER. 1990. Ecophysiology of metal uptake by tolerant
plants, heavy metal tolerance in plants. In: Shaw AJ (ed) Evolutionary aspects,
CRC, Boca Raton, pp 155-177.

BARAKAT, M.A. 2011. New trends in removing heavy metals from industrial wastewater,
Arabian Journal of Chemistry, Volume 4, Issue 4, Pages 361-377.

BARER, R.M. 1987. Zeolites and clay minerals as sorbent and molecular sieves, In: Water
Reuse Conference Proceedings, Academic Press, New York p:187.

BERNARD, A. 1979. Cadmium & its adverse effects on human health. Indian J Med
Res.128(4):557-64.

BIANCHINA, J.N. (2009). Development of a flow system for the determination of Cd in
fuel alcohol using vermicompost as bio absorbent. Talanta, 78: 333-336.

BLACK, CA (Ed). 1965. Methods of soil analysis. Part 2. Chemical and Microbiological
properties. American Society of Agronomy Monograph No. 9. Madison, Wisconsin.
1572 pp.

BRADY, N. C. and R. R. WEIL. 1999. The Nature and Properties of Soils. Twelfth Edition.
Prentice-Hall, Inc.881 pp.

BURROWS, D. 1983. In: Burrows, D. Ed. Chromium: Metabolism and Toxicity. CRC Press,
Inc., Boca Raton, FL. p. 137-163.

CANGADO, J.E., SALDIVA, P.H., PEREIRA, L.A., LARA, L.B., ARTAXO, P.,
MARTINELLI, L.A., ARBEX, M.A., ZANOBETTI, A., and A.L. BRAGA. 2006.
The Impact of Sugar Cane—Burning Emissions on the Respiratory System of
Children and the Elderly. Environ. Health Perspect.(114)725-729.

CCME (Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment) 1999. Canadian soil quality
guidelines for the protection of environmental and human health. Canadian Council
of Ministers of the Environment, Winnipeg.

133

CHERVONA, Y., ARITA, A., and M. COSTA. 2009. Carcinogenic metals and the

epigenome: Understanding the effect of nickel, arsenic, and chromium.
Metallomics. 4:619-627.

FULEKAR, M.H. (2009). Phytoremediation of heavy metals: Recent techniques. Afr. J.
Biotechnol., 8(6): 921-928.

CHIU, K. K., YE, Z. H. and WONG, M. H. 2006. Growth of Vetiveria zizanioides and
Phragmities australis on Pb/Zn and Cu mine tailings amended with manure
compost and sewage sludge: A greenhouse study. BioresourceTechnol.,97: 158—
170.

CHOPRA, R.N., CHOPRA, LC., HANDA, K.L., and L.D. KAPUR. 2009.
Calcutta: Academic Publishe; Chopra's indigenious drugs of India; 2nd en. Vol. 198.
pp. 46-64.

CLEMENTE, R., WALKER, D.J. and M.P. BERNAL. 2005. Uptake of heavy metals and
As by Brassica Juncea grown in a contaminated soil in Amalcollar (Spain):
The effect of soil amendments: Environmental Pollution 136, 46-58.

CODEX STANDARD- CODEX GENERAL STANDARD for CONTAMINANTS and
TOXINS. 1995. In: Food and Feed. Zambales.

DANHL, L., TRUONG, P., MAMMUCARI, R., TRAN, T., and N. FOSTER. 2009. Vetiver
grass, Vetiveria zizanioides: a choice plant for phytoremediation of heavy metals
and organic wastes. International Journal of Phytoremediation. Vol.8.

DAS, P., MUKHERJEE, S., and R. SEN. 2009. Biosurfactant of marine origin exhibiting
heavy metal remediation properties. Bioresour Technol. 100:488—90.

DENKHAUS, E., and K. SALNIKOW. 2002. Nickel essentiality, toxicity, and
carcinogenicity. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 42: 35-56.

MATTIA, G., BRAVI, MC, LAURENTI, O., DE LUCA, O., PALMERI, A.,
SABATUCCI, A., MENDICO, G., and A. GHISELLI.2004. Impairment of cell and
plasma redox state in subjects professionally exposed to chromium. Am J Ind
46(2):120-125.

134

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE REGIONAL FIELD UNIT III. 2016. Soil Analyses
Project for Irrigated Rice Field in Santa Cruz, Zamabales.

DOTANIYA, M.LL., DATTA, S.C., BISWAS, D.R., MEENA, B.L., REGAR, K.L., and M.
LATA. (2016). Use of sugarcane industrial by-products for improving sugarcane
productivity and soil health. International Journal of Recycling of Organic waste in
Agriculture. Vol.5 (3), pp 185-194.

DU, Y., HU, X.F., WU, X.H., SHU, Y., JIANG, Y., and X.J. YAN. 2013. Effects of mining
activities on Cd pollution to the paddy soils and rice grain in Hunan province,
Central South China. Environ. Monit. Assess. 185:9843-9856.

DURSUN, S., AND A.PALA. 2007. Lead pollution removal from water using a natural
zeolite. J. Int. Environ. Appl. Sci. 7, 11-19. 72.

EBAID, R. A. and I.S. EL-REFAEE. 2007. Utilization of rice husk as an organic
fertilizer to improve productivity and water use efficiency in rice fields
Afr Crop Sci Conf Proc, 8, pp. 1923-1928.

EDWARDS, C.A. AND I. BURROWS. 1988. The potential of earthworm composts as plant
growth media. In: C.A. Edwards and E.J. Newhauser (Eds.) Earthworms in Waste
and Environmental Management. (Pp.211-219). SPB Academic Publ. Co. The
Hague, Netherlands.

ELCOCK, G.E. AND J. MARTANS.1995. Composting with red wiggler worms. In: City
farmer Canada. 1-6.

EL-WEHEISHY, M. M., AND A.G. ABD EL-HAFEZ. (1997). Response of flooded rice to
water deficit. J. Agric. Res. Tanta Univ., 23:273-288.

ESKEW, D. L., WELCH, R. M., and E.E. CARY. 1983. Nickel: an essential micronutrient
for legumes and possibly all higher plants. Science 222, 621-623.

ESKEW, D. L., WELCH, R. M., and W.A. NORVELL. 1984. Nickel in higher plants:
further evidence for an essential role. Plant Physiol. 76, 691-693.

FAGERIA, N.K., BALIGAR,V.C., CLARK R.B. 2006.Physiology of Crop Production
Haworth Press, New York

FAO. Guidelines for soil description. 2006. An edition. Rome, Italy.

135

FAO. FAOSTAT, FAO Statistical Databases. http:// apps.fao.org.2007.
FAO Stat: 2009 Crop Production Statistics.FAO Statistics. Retrieved 30 March 2011.

FAOSTAT: Production-Crops, 2012 data. 2014. Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations. Archived from the original on September 6, 2015.

FERRERAS, L., GOMEZ, E., TORESANI, S., FIRPO, I. and R. ROTONDO. 2006. Effect
of organic amendments on some physical, chemical and biological properties in a
horticultural soil. Bioresource Technology 97, 635-640.

FFTC. 2001: Application of Rice Husk Charcoal. FFTC Leaflet for Agriculture No. 4. Food
and Fertilizer Technology Center, Taipei.

FRIBERG, L., PISCATOR, M., NORDBERG, G.F. and T. KIELLSTROM. 1974. Cadmium
in the environment, 2nd edition, Chemical Rubber Company Press, Cleveland,
Ohio, 248 pp.

GAUR, A. and A. ADHOLEYA. 2004. Prospects of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi in
phytoremediation of heavy metal contaminated soils. Current Science., 86(4): 528—
534.

GB15201-1994. 1994. The China National Standards: tolerance limit of cadmium in foods
in China.

GB15618-1995. 1995. The China National Standards: the environmental quality standards
for soils in China.

GIMENO, G.E., ANDREU, V., AND R. BOLUDA. 1996. Heavy metals incidence in the
application of inorganic fertilizers and pesticides to rice farming soils. Environ
Pollu 92:19-25.

GOMEZ, K. A., AND A. A. GOMEZ. 1984. Statistical procedures for agricultural research.
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

GOPINATH, K.A., SUPRADIP, S., MINA, B.L., PANDE, H., KUNDU, S. and H.S.
GUPTA. 2008. Influence of organic amendments on growth, yield and quality
production. Nutrient Cycling in Agroecosystems, 82 (1), 51-60.

GOYER, R.A. AND T.W. CLARKSON. 2001. Toxic effects of metals. In, Casarett and
Doullis Toxicology: The Basic Science of Poisons, Sixth Edition (C.D. Klaassen,
ed.) Mc-Graw-Hill, New York. Pages 811-867.

136

GUERA, RD. 2010. Vermicompost production and its use for crop production in the
Pailippines. International Journal of Global environmental Issues 10(3-4):378-

GUPTA,N., TRIPATHI, S. and C. BALOMAJUMDER. 2011. Characterization of
pressmud: A sugar industry waste. Fuel 90 (2011) 389-394. Retrieved from
https://www.academia.edu on March 17, 2017.

HAEFELE, S.M, KNOBLAUCH, C., GUMMERT, M., KONBOON, Y., and S. KOYAMA.
2009. Black carbon (biochar) in rice-based systems: Characteristics and
opportunities. In: Woods, W.I., Teixeira, W.G., Lehmann, J., Steiner, C., Prins,
A.W. & Rebellatods, L. (Eds.). Amazon dark earths: Wim Soembrok’s vision (pp
445-463). Amsterdam: Springer.

HATTENSCHWILE, S., and P. GASER. 2005. Soil animals after plant litter diversity
effects on decomposition. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.USA.
102.1519-1524.

HASANUZZAMAN, M., AHAMED, K.U.N.,RAHMATULLAH, M., AKHTER, N.,
NAHAR, K., RAHMAN, M.L. 2010.Plant growth characters and productivity of
wetland rice (Oryza sativa L.) as affected GY application of different manures.
Emir J Food Agric, 22 (1), pp. 46-58.

HENGCHAOVANICH, D. 1998. Vetiver grass for slope stabilization and erosion control,
with particular reference to engineering applications. Pacific Rim Vetiver Network
Technical Bulletin, 2.

HENGCHAOVANICH, D. and N.S. NILAWEERA. 1999. An assessment of strength
properties of vetiver grass roots in relation to slope stabilization. February4— 8,
Chiang Rai, Thailand. Proc. First Int. Vetiver Conf. (ICV-1)

HUTTON, M. 1983. Sources of cadmium in the environment. Ecotoxicology and
Environmental Safety, 7: 9-24.

HUAN, YY., CHUANPING, L., JISHU, Z., FANGBAI, L., DONG-MERI, D., and W. QI.
2016. Cadmium availability in rice paddy fields from mining area: Environmental
pollution (209) pp. 38-45.

http://www.bswm.da.gov.ph. 1988. Retrieved 07 January 2017.

http://www. Center for environmental concerns.2015. Retrieved 20 December 2016.

http:/Avww. Cordillera people’s alliance.2007. Retrieved 20 December 2016.

http://www. Environmental justice atlas. 2015. Retrieved 20 December 2016.

137

http://www.granthalayah.com. Retrieved 20 December 2016.

http://www.mines and geosciences bureau of the Philippines. 2015. Retrieved 20 December
2016

http://www.rice production in the Phils., 1959. Retrieved 27 January 2017.
http://www.ricepedia. 2012. Retrieved 27 January 2017.
http://www.saile industries, Inc. Retrieved 04 May 2017.

http://www.social issues and environmental problems; September 2015. Retrieved 04 May
2017.

IDDRISU, A.Y. AND T. AKABZAA. 1996, Environmental and social impact of mining.
Final report for the minerals commission board.
International Soil Reference and Information Center (ISRIC). 1995. Procedures for soil
analysis. (L.P. Van Reuwjk, editor) Wageningen, The Netherlands. 106 pp.

IZOSIMOVA A. 2005. Modelling the interaction between calcium and nickel in the soil-
plant system. FAL Agric Res Special issue 288:99

JACKSON, M. L. 1956. "Soil Chemical Analysis", Prentice-Hall, Inc.

JADIA, C.D. and M. H. FULEKAR. 2008. “Phytotoxicity and remediation of heavy metals
by fibrous root grass (sorghum),” Journal of Applied Biosciences, vol. 10, no. 1, pp.
491-499.

JAI, K., AND J. SINGH. 2004. Modulating of fly ash induced genotoxicity in vica faba by
vermi-composting. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 59: 89-94.

JAMIL, M., QASIM, M., AND M.S. ZIA. 2004. Utilization of press mud as organic
amendment to improve physico-chemical characteristics of calcareous soil under
two legume crops. J Chem Soc Pak 3(1):145-150

JUNG, M.A. 2001. Heavy metal contamination of soils and waters in and around the
Imcheon Au—Ag mine, Ko. Applied Geochemistry 16: 1369-1375.

KABATA-PENDIAS. 2011. Trace elements in soils and plants, fourth ed., CRC Press,
Florida, USA, 106-118.

KALEMBASA, D. 1996. “The effects of vermicompost on the yield and chemical
composition of tomato,” Zeszyty Problemowe Postep6w Nauk Rolniczych, vol. 437,
pp. 249-252.

138

KALEMBASA, S. AND J. DESKA. 1998. “The possibility of utilizing vermicompost in the

cultivation of radish and paprika,” Annals of Agricultural University of Poznan, vol.
27, pp. 131-136.

KAUR, C., VISHNOI, A., ARIYADASA, T. U., BHATTACHARYA, A., SINGLA-
PAREEK, S. L., AND S.K. SOPORY. 2013. Episodes of horizontal gene-transfer
and gene-fusion led to co-existence of different metal-ion specific glyoxalase I. Sci.
Rep. 3:3076.

KAVOOSI, M. 2007. Effects of zeolite application on rice yield, nitrogen recovery and
nitrogen use efficiency. Communications in Soil Science and Plant Analysis
Journal. 69-76.

KHAN, M. S., A. ZAIDI, and P. A. WANI. 2007. Role of phosphate-solubilizing
microorganisms in sustainable agriculture: a review. Agron. Sustain. Dev. 27 29-43,
DOI: 10.1051/agro:2006011

KHAN, M. J. and M. QASIM. 2008. Integrated use of boiler ash as organic fertilizer and soil
conditioner with NPK in calcareous soil. Songklanakarin J. Sci. Technol. 30 (3),
281-289.

KJELLSTROM, T. 1980. Exposure and accumulation of cadmium in populations from
Japan, the United States, and Sweden. Environ. Health Perspect., 25, 169-197.

KRISHNANI, K. K., MENG, X., CHRISTODOULATOS, C. and V.M. BODDU. 2008.
Biosorption mechanism of nine different heavy metals onto biomatrix from rice
husk. J. Hazard. Mater., 153, 1222-1234.

KUMAR, A; ARINDAM D; GIRI A; and G. CHATTOPADHYAY. 2006. Effect of
integrated plant nutrient management on growth, yield, and production economics
of wet season rice (Oryza sativa). Institute of Agriculture, West Bengal.

LASAT, M.M. 2000. “Phytoextraction of metals from contaminated soil: a review of
plant/soil/metal interaction and assessment of pertinent agronomic issues,” Journal
of Hazardous Substances Research, vol. 2, pp. 1-25.

LAUWERYS, R. AND P. DE WALS. 1981. Environmental pollution by cadmium and
mortality from renal diseases. Lancet, 1, 383.

139

MARINARI, S.,G. MASCIANDARO, B. CECCANTI and S. GREGO. 2000. Influence of
organic and mineral fertilizers on soil biological and physical properties.
Bioresource Technology, 72, 9-17.

MARTIRENA-HERNANDEZ, J.F., MIDDENDORF, B., GEHRKE, M., and H.
BUDELMANN. 1998. Use of wastes of the sugar industry as pozzolana in
lime-pozzolana binders: study of the reaction., Cement and Concrete Research,

Vol. 28, N° 11, pp. 1525 - 1536.

MARWA, EM., MEHARG, A.A., AND C.M. RICE. 2012. Risk assessment of potentially
toxic elements in agricultural soils and maize tissues from selected districts in
Tanzania. Sci. Total Environ. 416:180-186.

MCGRATH, S.P. 1995. Chromium and nickel. In, Heavy Metals in Soils, Second Edition
(B.J. Alloway, ed.). Blackie, New York. Pages 152-178.

MCLEAN, J.E., AND B.E. BLEDSOE. 1992. Behavior of metals in soils. Office of solid
waste and emergency Response. USEPA.

MIRZA, N., MAHMOOD, Q., PERVEZ, A., and RASHID, M. 2010. Phytoremediation
potential of Arundo donax in arsenic-contaminated synthetic wastewater.
Bioresource Technology 101(15):5815-9.

MILLER, R. W. and R. L. DONAHUE. 1995. Soils in our Environment. Seventh Edition.
Prentice-Hall Inc. 649 pp.

MILLER, H. B. (2007). Poultry litter induces tillering in rice. J. Sustain. Agric., 31:1-12.

MIRZA HASANUZZAMAN, K. U., AHAMED, N. M., RAHMATULLAH, N., AKHTER,
K.N., AND M. L. RAHMAN.(2010). Plant growth characters and productivity of
wetland rice (Oryza sativa L.) as affected by application of different manures, Emir.
J. Food Agric., 22 (1): 46-58.

MOHANTY, M., PATTNAIK, M.M., MISHRA, A.K., AND H.K. PATRA. 2011.

Chromium bioaccumulation in rice grown in contaminated soil and irrigated mine

wastewater—A case study at South Kaliapani chromite mine area, Orissa,
India. Int. J. Phytoremediation. 13:397-409.

MUSTAFIZ, A., GHOSH, A., TRIPATHI, A. K., KAUR, C., GANGULY, A. K., and N.S.
BHAVESH. 2014. A unique Ni2+-dependent and methylglyoxal-inducible rice
glyoxalase I possesses a single active site and functions in abiotic stress response.
Plant J. 78, 951-963.

140

MUTHAYYA, S; SUGIMOTO, J.D.; MONTGOMERY, S; MABERLY, G.F. 2014. An

overview of global rice production, supply, trade and consumption. Ann. N.Y.
Acad. Sci. 1324,7-14.

NAING, A., BANTERNG, P., POLTHANEE, A. AND TRELO-GES, V. 2010.The effect of
different fertilizers management strategies on growth and yield ofupland black
glutinous rice and soil property. Asian Journal of PlantSciences,9: 414-422 .

NAIYA, T. K., BHATTACHARYA, A. K., MANDAL, S. and S.K. DAS. 2009. The
sorption of lead(II) ions on rice husk ash. J. Hazard. Mater., 163, 1254-1264.

NASIM AHMAD KHAN.2004. Elimination of heavy metals from wastewater using
agricultural wastes as adsorbents. Review paper for Malaysian journal of Science
23:43-51.

NAVARRO, M.C., PEREZ-SIRVENT, C., MARTINEZ-SANCHEZ, MJ., VIDAL, J.,
TOWAR, P.J., and J. BECH. 2008. Abandoned mine sites as a source of
contamination by heavy metals: A case study in a semi-arid zone. J. geochem.
Explor.96, 183-193.

NOGAWA, K., KOBAYASHI, E. AND F. KONISHI. 1981. Comparison of bone lesions in
chronic cadmium intoxication and vitamin D deficiency. Environ. Res., 24, 233-
249.

NUHAA, S; MOHEE, R. AND V.K. GRAG. 2015. Comparative assessment of heavy
metals content during the composting of vermicomposting of municipal solid waste
employing Eudrilus eugeniae.Waste management 39,

OLSEN, S.R. and L.E. SOMMERS.1982. Methods of Soil Analysis, Part 1. American
Society of Agronomy-Soil Science Society of America, 677 South Segoe
Road, Madison, WI 53711, USA>

O'NEILL, P. 1995. Arsenic. In, Heavy Metals in Soils, Second Edition (B.J. Alloway, ed.).
Blackie, New York. Pages 105-121.

OSHIO, H., NII, F., AND H. NAMIOKA. 1981. Characteristics of Kuntan (rice hull
charcoal) as medium of soilless culture. J. Jpn. Soc. Hort. Sci. 50, 231-238.

141

PARMAR P, KUMARIN AND V. SHARMA. 2013. ‘Structural and functional alterations in

photosynthetic apparatus of plants under cadmium stress'. Botanical Studies, 54:45-
Sie

PAUL, FH. 2000. Earthworms. In: Sumner M(Ed). Hand book of Soil Science. CRC. Press,
Boca raton. FL.pp C77-C85.

PAUL, GC., BOKHTIAR, SM., REHMAN, H., KABIRAJ, RC, and A.M. RAHMAN. 2005.
Efficacies of some organic fertilizers on sustainable sugarcane production in old
Himalayan piedmont plain soil of Bangladesh.Pak Sugar J 20(1):2-5.

PCARR, 1980. Standard Methods of Analysis for Soil, Plant Tissue, Water and Fertilizers.
Farm Resource and System Research Division, Los Banos, Laguna, 5-60pp.

PEHLIVAN, E.A., OZKAN, M., DING, S. and S. PARLAYICI. 2009. “Adsorption of Cu*

and pb ion on dolomite powder,” Journal of Hazardous Materials, 167 (1-3), pp.
1044-1049,

PENG, K., LI, X., LUO, C., and Z. SHEN. 2006. Vegetation composition and heavy metal
uptake by wild plants at three contaminated sites in Xiangxi area, China, Journal of
Environmental Science and Health Part A, 40, 65-76.

PHILRICE. 2014. Simplified Keys to Soil Series of Negros Occidental. Soil Series
Guidebook ISBN 978-971-9081-90-6. Philippine Rice Research Institute.65 p.

PINTHONG, J., IMPITHUKSA, S., and A. RAMLEE. 1998. The capability of vetiver
hedgerows on the decontamination of agro-chemical residues. Proc. ICV-1, pp. 91-
98.ORDPB, Bangkok.

POLACCO, J. C. 1977. Nitrogen metabolism in soybean tissue culture: II. Urea utilization
and urease synthesis require Ni. Plant Physiol. 59, 827-830.

PONAMPERUMA, F.N. 1982. Straw as source nutrient for wetland rice. In S. Banta & C.V.
Mendoza (Eds.), Organic matter and rice (pp 117-136). Los Banos, the Philippines:
IRRI.

RABIE, M. H., ABDEL LATIF, E. A., ASY, K. G. and M.E. ELEIWA. 1992. The effect of
nickel on plants (iii) The effect of foliar nickel on yield and elemental content of
some crops. Journal of King Abdulaziz University: Science, (4): 15-21.

142

REDDY, M. VIKRAM. 1988. The effects of casts of Pheretima alexandri (Beddard) on the
growth of Vinca rosea, and Oryza sativa L. In: Edwards, C.A. and Neuhauser,
E.F. “Earthworms in waste and environmental management” SPB Academic
Publishers, The Hague, Netherlands. Pp 241-248.

ROONGTANAKIAT, N., OSOTSAPAR, Y., and C. YINDIRAM. 2010.Vetiver
(Chrysopogon zizanioides) Phytoremediation for Heavy Meatal
Decontamination.Kasetsart J. (Nat.Sci.) 43: 37-49.

ROY, S. 2005. Influence of toxic heavy metals on activity of acid and alkaline phosphatase
enzymes in metal contaminated landfill soils. Aust. J. Soil Res. 42. 335-344.

SALAMAT. 2013.The destructive impacts of corporate mining in the Philippines: The
Tampacan Copper-Gold mining project in Mindanao. Global research.

SANCHEZ, E.,AND P., FRANCISCO. 2010. Potential Use of Philippine Natural Zeolites
for Treatment of Acid Mine Drainage.

SARDAR, S., ILYAS, S.U., MALIK, S.R., and K. JAVAID. 2013. Compost fertilizer
production from sugar press mud (SPM). Intl J Microb Res 1(2):20-27.

SCHMIDT, M.W.L, and A.G. NOACK. 2000. Black carbon in soils and sediments: analysis,
distribution, implications, and current challenges. Global Biogeochemical Cycles
14, 777e793.

SCHWERTMANN, U. and R.M. THYLOR. 1989. Iron oxides in J. B. Dixon and S. B.
Weed, eds. Minerals in soil environments. Book Series 1. Soil Science Society of
America, Madison, WI.Pages 379-438.

SCHMIDT,U. 2003.“Enhancing phytoextraction: the effect of chemical soil manipulation
on mobility, plant accumulation and leaching of heavy metals,” Journal of
Environmental Quality, vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 1939-1954.

SEPASSKHAH, A.R., AND M. BARZEGAR. 2010. Yield, water and nitrogen- use
response of rice to zeolite and nitrogen fertilization in a semi-arid environment.
Agricultural and water management vol. 98 (1) pp. 38-44.

SHANKER, A.K., CERVANTES, C., LOZA-TAVERA,  H., andS.
AVUDAINAYAGAM. 2005. Review Article on Chromium Toxicity in Plants.
Environment International 739-753.

143

SHARMA, D.K., PRASAD, K., and S.S. YADAV. 2008. Effect of integrated nutrient
management on the performance of dwarf scented rice (Oryza sativa L.) growth in
rice wheat sequence. International journal of Agricultural Sciences 4 (2)660-662.

SIEDLECKA, A. and Z. KRUPA. 1999. Cd/Fe interactions in higher plants Its

consequences for the photosynthetic apparatus’. Photosynthesis Research,
36:321-331.

SIMON, F., KELVIN, MM., and K. MARTIN. 2016. Heavy metals contamination in
agricultural soil and rice in Tanzania: A review. International Journal of
Environmental Protection and Policy. ISSN:2330-7528.

SIMMONS, R.W., PONGSAKUL, P., SAITYASITPANICH, D., and S. KLINPHOKLAP.
2005. Elevated levels of cadmium and zinc in paddy soils and elevated levels of
cadmium in rice grain downstream of a zinc mineralize area in Thailand:
implications for public health. Environ Geochem Health. 27:501-511.

SINGH, R.,AND AGARWAL, S.K. 2001.Analysis of growth and productivity of wheat
in relation to levels of FYM and nitrogen.Ind J Plant Physiol, 6, pp. 279-283

SINGH, J., UPADHYAY, SK., PATHAK, RK., and V. GUPTA. 2010. Accumulation of
heavy metals in soil and paddy crop (Oryza sativa), irrigated with water of
Ramgarth Lake, Gorakpur, UP India. Toxicol. Environ. Chem. 93 (3):462-472.

SINGH, V., and A.N. GARG. 1995. Availability of essential trace elements in Indian cereals,
vegetables and spices using INAA and the contribution of spices to daily dietary
intake. Food Chemistry 94: 81-89.

SINGH, D. P. et al., 2015. Microbial inoculants in sustainable agricultural productivity:
functional application (vol, II). Springer New Delhi Heidelberg New York Dordrecht
London, Springer India, DOI 10.1007/978-81-322-2644-4.

SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT PROGRAM (SDMP) 2013. Santa
Cruz nickel mining project.

SRA-OPSI. 2004. Sugarcane Production Manual. Sugar Regulatory Administration, La
Granja Agricultural Research and Extension Center, La Carlota City, Negros
Occidental. 205 pp.

SRIPEN, S.; KOMKRIS, T.; TECHAPINYAWAT, S.; CHANTAWAT, S.; MASUTHON,
S.; and M. RUNGSUK. 1996. Growth potential of vetiver grass in relation to

144

nutrients in wastewater of Changwat Phetchaburi. Paper presented at ICV-1. In:
Abstracts of papers presented at ICV-1, p. 44. RDPB, Bangkok.

SRIVASTAVA, V. C., MALL, I. D. and ILM. MISHRA. 2006. Characterization of
mesoporous rice husk ash (RHA) and adsorption kinetics of metal ions from
aqueous solution onto RHA. J. Hazard. Mater., 134, 257-267.

SUZUKI, N., and H.K.N. SANO. 2001. “Screening of cadmium-responsive genes in
Arabidopsis thaliana”, Plant Cell Environment, 24, pp 1177-1188.

TANG, P., LEE, C.K., LOW, K.S., and Z. ZAINAL. 2003. Sorption of Cr (VI) and Cu (II)
in aqueous solution by ethylenediamine modified rice hull.

TEJADA, M., and J.L. GONZALES. 2009. Agricultural use of leachates obtained from two
different vermicomposting processes. Bioresource Technology, 99,6228-6232.

THORNTON, I and J.S WEBB. 1980. Trace elements in soils and plants. In: Food chains
and Human Nutrition (K.L. Blaxter (ed). Applied Science Publishers Ltd. London,
pp 273-312.

TRAN, T.A., and L.P. POPOVA. 2013. Functions and toxicity of cadmium in plants: recent
advances and future prospects’. Turkish Journal of Botany, 3.

TAYLOR MP, WINDER C, LANPHEAR BP. 2010. Eliminating childhood lead toxicity in
Australia: a call to lower the intervention level. MJA. 197(9):493.

TRUONG, P. 1999. Vetiver grass technology for mine rehabilitation. PRVN Technical
Bulletin No. 2. Office of the Royal Development Projects Board, Bangkok,
Thailand.

TRUONG, P.N. 1999a. Vetiver Grass Technology for mine tailings rehabilitation. Proc.
First Asia Pacific Conference on Ground and Water Bio-engineering for Erosion
Control and Slope Stabilization. Manila.

TRUONG, P.N. 1999b. The Impact of Vetiver Grass Technology at the Ground and Water
Bioengineering Conference, Manila. A report to The Vetiver Network, Leesburgh,
Virginia, USA.

TRUONG, P.N. and D. BAKER. 1996. Vetiver grass for the stabilization and rehabilitation
of acid sulphate soils. Proc. 2nd Nat. Conf. Acid Sulphate Soils, pp. 196-198. Coffs
Harbour, Australia.

TRUONG, P.N. and D. BAKER. 1998. Vetiver Grass System for Environmental Protection.
PRVN Tech. Bull. No.1. ORDPB, Bangkok.

145

URAGUCHI, S., MORI, S., KURAMATA, M., KAWASAKI, A., ARAO, T., and S.
ISHIKAWA. 2012. Root to shoot Cd translocation via the xylem is the major
process determining shoot and grain cadmium accumulation in rice. J Exp Bot
60:2677-2688.

USEPA. 1997. “Recent developments for in situ treatment of metal contaminated soils,”
Tech. Rep. EPA-542-R-97-004, USEPA, Washington, DC, USA.

VIEIRA, M.G.A., DE ALMEIDA NETO, A.F., CARLOS DA SILVA, M.G., NOBREGA,
C.C., and A.A. MELO FILHO. 2012. “Characterization and Use of In Natura and
Calcined Rice Husks for Biosorption of Heavy Metals Ions from Aqueous
Effluents”, Brazilian Journal of Chemical Engineering, Vol. 29 (3), pp. 619 — 633.

WALKLEY, A and I. A. BLACK. 1934. An examination of Degtsaruf method for
determining soil organic matter and a proposed modification. pp. 29-38.

WILLIAMS, N.A., MORSE, N.D., and J.F. BUCKMAN. 1972. Buming vs. incorporation of
rice crop residues. Agronomy J. 64, 467- 468.

WINGERFELDER, U., HANSEN, C., FURRER, G., and R. SCHULLIN. 2005. Removal of
heavy metals from mine waters by natural zeolites. Environmental Science and
Technology. 39 (12) pp.4606-4613.

XIA, H. LIU, S. and H. AO. 1997. Study on purification and uptake of garbage leachate by
vetiver grass, pp. 394-406. In Proc. ICV-2. Cha-am, Phetchaburi, Thailand.

XIONG, Z.T. 1998. Lead uptake and effects on seed germination and plant growth in a Pb
hyperaccumulator Brasssica pekinensis Rumpr.Bulletin of Environmental
Contamination and Toxicology. 60 (2): 285-291.

YANG, XUE-MING, LENTZ, D.R. & CHI, GUOXIANG (2004): Petrochemistry of Lake
George granodiorite stock and related Au mineralization, York County, New
Brunswick. Geol. Surv. Can., Current Res. 2002-D7, 1-10.

ZHAO, K., FU, W., YE, Z., and C. ZHANG. 2015. Contamination and spatial variation of
heavy metals in the soil-rice system in Nanxun County, Southeastern China. Int. J.
Environ. Res. Public Health. 12:1577-1594.

ZHELJAZKOV, V., and D. JEKOV. 1994. Heavy metal content in some essential oils and
plant extracts. In: ISHS Acta Horticulturae 426: International Symposium on
Medicinal and Aromatic Plants. Acta Horticulture 426: 427-434.
